
Albemarle, NC Code of Ordinances


CITY OF ALBEMARLE, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-33 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE 83-30



AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF
ALBEMARLE, NORTH CAROLINA; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF
CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED;
PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES; AND PROVIDING
WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.



   Be It ORDAINED by the Council of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina:



   Section l.  That this ordinance, consisting of Titles I, II, III, IV,
V, VI, VII, VIII, and IX (Chapters l0 to 92), each inclusive is hereby
adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Albemarle, North
Carolina," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original
comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent
ordinances passed by the City Council, prior to April 2l, l98l, except such
as by reference thereto are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force
and effect for any purpose.



   Section 2.  That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force
and effect on and after October l, l983 and all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature of the City of Albemarle enacted prior to April 2l, l98l,
and not in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. That no resolution of the City,
not specifically mentioned, is hereby repealed.



   Section 3.  That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not
affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of this ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance
or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the
City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of
the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City;
nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of
the City Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such
Code; nor shall such repeal affect ordinances establishing positions,
classifying employees and setting salaries, not inconsistent with such Code;
nor shall such repeal affect any right of franchise granted by any ordinance
or resolution of the City Council to any person, firm or corporation; nor
shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street
or public way in the City; nor shall such repeal affect the annual
appropriation ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect the annual privilege or
license tax ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance levying or
imposing taxes; nor shall such repeal affect ordinances prescribing through
streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way traffic,
limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with such
Code; nor shall such repeal affect any amendment to the zoning map; nor shall
such repeal affect any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street
grades of any street in the City; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance
providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; nor shall such
repeal affect any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision
in the City; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance extending the
boundaries of the City; nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any
ordinance or part thereof which has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance
which is repealed by this ordinance.



   Section 4.  Any and all additions or amendments to such Code, when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make
the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so
that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Albemarle, North Carolina"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.



   Section 5.  A copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of
the City Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the
City Clerk may consider most expedient.  It shall be the express duty of the
City Clerk or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places
all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the City Council
to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or
reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which
may be from time to time repealed by the City Council.  This copy of such
Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and
shall be considered the official Code of Ordinances of Albemarle.



   Section 6.  In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for
which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section
l0.99 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such
amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the
aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same
chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to
relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically
repealed therein.



   Section 7.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
in the City to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion
of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter
or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of
the City of Albemarle to be misrepresented thereby.  Any person, firm or
corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section
l0.99 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Albemarle.



   Section 8.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith
are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.



   Section 9.  This ordinance shall become effective on October l, l983.



   This ordinance was introduced and signed by Councilmember Helms, a
member of the Council of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina.



                      Pauline T. Helms   
                      Member of Council



   This ordinance was introduced and passed its first reading at the
meeting of the Council held on the 6 day of Sept., l983, and was continued
for further hearing on the l9 day of Sept., l983.  At the meeting of the
Council held on the l9 day of Sept., l983, this ordinance passed its second
reading, was adopted and ordered published as by law provided.



   This the l9 day of Sept., l983.



                      Carlton B. Holt   
                            Mayor



Attest:



    Raymond Allen     
       Clerk



CHARTER



Section



   SECTION 1.



   ARTICLE I.  INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS AND BOUNDARIES



   1.1   Incorporation



   1.2   Powers



   1.3   Corporate Limits



   ARTICLE II.  MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL



   2.1   Governing Body



   2.2   Council; Composition; Terms of Office



   2.3   Mayor; Term of Office; Duties



   2.4   Mayor Pro Tempore



   ARTICLE III.  ELECTIONS



   3.1   Regular Municipal Elections; Conduct and Method of Election



   3.2   Election of Mayor and Council Members



   3.3   Electoral District Boundaries



   ARTICLE IV.  ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION



   4.1   Form of Government



   4.2   City Manager



   4.3   City Attorney



   4.4   City Clerk



   4.5   Finance Director



   4.6   City Tax Collector



   4.7   Consolidation of Functions



   4.8   Other Administrative Officers and Employees



   ARTICLE V.  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS



   5.1   Power of Eminent Domain



   5.2   Alternative Methods of Assessing the Cost of Extending Water
and Sewer Lines



   5.3   Alternative Method of Assessing the Cost of Installation of
Street Improvements; Authority to Waive Street Assessments



   ARTICLE VI.  SPECIAL PROVISIONS



   6.1   Authority to Hold ABC Election



   6.2   Industrial Development



   6.3   Single Prime Contractor Public Contracts



   6.4   Authorization for City to Levy a Room Occupancy Tax



   SECTION  2.



   SECTION  3.



   SECTION  4.



   SECTION  5.



   SECTION  6.



   SECTION  7.



   SECTION  8.



   SECTION  9.



   SECTION 10.



   SECTION 11.



   SECTION 1.



   The Charter of the City of Albemarle is hereby revised and consolidated
to read as follows:  THE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF ALBEMARLE.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 1)



   ARTICLE I.  INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS AND BOUNDARIES



SECTION 1.1.  INCORPORATION.



   The City of Albemarle, North Carolina, in the County of Stanly, and the
inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name and style of the 'City of Albemarle', hereinafter
at times referred to as the 'City'.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 1.1)



SECTION 1.2.  POWERS.



   The City of Albemarle shall have and may exercise all of the powers,
duties, rights, privileges and immunities, which are now, or hereafter may
be, conferred, either expressly or by implication, upon the City of Albemarle
specifically, or upon municipal corporations generally, by this Charter, by
the State Constitution, or by general or local law.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 1.2)



SECTION 1.3.  CORPORATE LIMITS.



   The corporate limits of the City of Albemarle shall be those existing
at the time of ratification of this Charter, as the same are set forth on an
official map of the City, and as the same may be altered from time to time in
accordance with law.  An official map showing the current boundaries of the
City, entitled 'Map of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina, and a current
metes and bounds description of the corporate limits shall be maintained in
the office of the City Clerk, and shall be available for public inspection. 
Immediately upon alteration of the corporate limits made pursuant to law, the
appropriate changes to the official map of the City shall be made.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 1.3)



   ARTICLE II.  MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL



SECTION 2.1.  GOVERNING BODY.



   The City Council, elected and constituted as herein set forth, shall be
the governing body of the City.  On behalf of the City, and in conformity
with applicable laws, the City Council may provide for the exercise of all
municipal powers, and shall be charged with the general government of the
City.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 2.1)



SECTION 2.2.  COUNCIL; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The City Council shall be composed of seven members, chosen as follows:



      (1)   Three shall be nominated and elected by and from the
qualified voters of the City for terms of four years; and



      (2)   Four shall be nominated and elected by and from the
qualified voters of the districts, one each from the four electoral districts
established under Section 3.3 of this Charter, in the manner provided by
Article III of this Charter.



   In the event of vacancies in the council from a district seat, the
person appointed as a successor under G.S. 160A-63 must be a resident of the
district.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 2.2; Amended by Session Laws of 1988,
Chapter 881)



SECTION 2.3.  MAYOR; TERM OF OFFICE; DUTIES.



   The Mayor shall be elected by and from the qualified voters of the City
in the manner provided by Article III of this Charter to serve for a term of
two years, or until his successor is elected and qualified.  The Mayor shall
be the official head of the City government and shall preside at all meetings
of the Council.  The Mayor shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties as presently are or hereafter may be conferred upon him by the General
Statutes of North Carolina, by this Charter, and by the ordinances of the
City.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 2.3)



SECTION 2.4.  MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.



   In accordance with applicable State law, the City Council shall elect
one of its members to act as Mayor pro tempore to perform the duties of the
Mayor in the Mayor's absence or disability.  In the event of a vacancy in
the office of the Mayor, the Mayor pro tempore shall perform the duties of
the Mayor until the vacancy is filled. The Mayor pro  tempore shall serve in
such capacity for a term of four years.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 2.4)



   ARTICLE III.  ELECTIONS



SECTION 3.1.  REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS; CONDUCT AND METHOD OF ELECTION.



   Regular municipal elections shall be held in the City in 1995 and every
two years thereafter and shall be conducted in accordance with the uniform
municipal election laws of North Carolina.  The Mayor and members of the
City Council shall be elected according to the partisan primary and elections
method as provided in G.S. 163-291.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 3.1; Am. Ord. 95-18, passed 5-1-95)



SECTION 3.2.  ELECTION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   At the regular municipal election in 1995 and every two years
thereafter, the  Mayor shall be nominated and elected by and from the
qualified voters of the city to serve for a two year term.  At a regular
municipal election to be held in 1995, members of the City Council shall be
nominated and elected as follows:



   The member of Council from District 1 and the member of Council from
District 3 shall be nominated and elected by and from the qualified voters of
the electorial district to serve for a four year term.



   The member of Council from District 2 and the member of Council from
District 4 shall be nominated and elected by and from the qualified voters of
the electorial district to serve for a two year term.



   Three members of Council shall be nominated and elected at large by and
from the qualified voters of the city.  The two at large members of Council
receiving the highest number of votes in the regular municipal election shall
be elected to serve for a four year term.  The at large member of Council
receiving the next highest number of votes in the regular municipal election
shall be elected to serve for a two year term.



   At the regular municipal election held in 1997, and every four years
thereafter, the member of Council from District 2 and the member of Council
from District 4 and the member of Council elected at large in the 1995
regular municipal election to serve a two year term shall be nominated and
elected to serve for a four year term.



   At the regular municipal election held in 1999 and every four years
thereafter, the member of Council from District 1 and the member of Council
from District 3 and the two members of Council elected at large in the 1995
regular municipal election to serve a four year term shall be nominated and
elected to serve for a four year term.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 3.2; Amended by Session Laws of 1988,
Chapter 881; Am. Ord. 95-18, passed 5-1-95)



SECTION 3.3.  ELECTORAL DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   The City of Albemarle is divided into four electoral districts for the
election of members of the City Council. For the purpose of elections
beginning in 2001, the districts are as follows:




   DISTRICT 1




   BEGINNING at the intersection of the Winston-Salem South Bound Railroad
Company's main line and West Main Street in the City of Albemarle, and runs
thence eastwardly with Main Street to the NC Highway 740 East By-pass; thence
northeast along said road to the intersection with Anderson Grove Church
Road; thence southwardly along said street to Greenview Drive; thence
northeast along Greenview Drive to the corporate limit line of the City of
Albemarle; thence following the corporate limit line as it meanders clockwise
in a general southwardly and westwardly direction to its intersection with
the Winston-Salem Southbound Railroad Company's main line and runs thence
northwardly along the Winston-Salem Southbound Railroad Company's main line
to its intersection with West Main Street, the point of beginning.



Notwithstanding, the following areas shall be excluded from the boundaries of
District 1:



BEGINNING at a point approximately 522 feet south of NC Highway 24/27 East
Bypass, head south for approximately 561 feet; then head west for
approximately 1,071 feet; then head north for approximately 122 feet; then
head northeast for approximately 1,160 feet to the point of beginning. Said
described area may also be referenced as Stanly County Tax Parcel
654819701698. Said area is approximately 10.24 acres in size; and,



BEGINNING at a point approximately 232 feet south of Anderson Road, head
south for approximately 282 feet; then head east for approximately 463 feet;
then head north for approximately 130 feet; then head west for approximately
460 feet to the point of beginning. Said described area may also be
referenced as Stanly County Tax Parcel 655818305236. Said area is
approximately 1.20 acres in size.




   DISTRICT 2




   BEGINNING at the intersection of the Winston-Salem South Bound Railroad
Company's main line and West Main Street in the City of Albemarle, and runs
thence northwardly with the Winston-Salem South Bound Railroad Company's main
line to Salisbury Avenue; thence northwest along Salisbury Avenue to the
intersection with the corporate limit line of the City of Albemarle; thence
following the corporate limit line as it meanders counterclockwise in a
general westwardly, southwardly and eastwardly direction to its intersection
with the Winston-Salem Southbound Railroad Company's main line and runs
thence northwardly along the Winston-Salem Southbound Railroad Company's main
line to its intersection with West Main Street, the point of beginning.



In addition, the following satellite annexation areas that do not abut the
primary corporate limits of the City of Albemarle shall be included as being
part of District 2:



BEGINNING at a point on the east side of Aquadale Road approximately 2,100
feet south of the corporate limits then heading east for approximately 194
feet; then heading south for approximately 121 feet; then heading west for
approximately 190 feet; then heading north for approximately 128 feet to the
point of beginning. Said described area may also be referenced as Stanly
County Tax Parcel 654700241433. Said area is approximately 0.54 acres in
size; and,



BEGINNING at a point on the north side of Canton Road approximately 1,400
feet from the intersection of Canton Road with NC Highway 24/27, then heading
north for approximately 1,620 feet; then heading east for approximately 157
feet; then heading south for approximately 249 feet; then heading southeast
for approximately 125 feet; then heading east for approximately 767 feet;
then heading northwest for approximately 1,680 feet; then heading west for
approximately 894 feet; then heading south for approximately 830 feet; then
heading west for approximately 704 feet; then heading south for approximately
1,045 feet; then heading east for approximately 998 feet; then heading south
for approximately 1,237 feet; then heading east along NC Highway 24/27 for
approximately 763 feet to the point of beginning; and,



BEGINNING at a point on the north side of Concord Road at the intersection of
Concord Road and Nelson Mountain Road go north along Nelson Mountain Road for
approximately 490 feet; then heading east for approximately 340 feet; then
heading south for approximately 985 feet; then heading west along Concord
Road for approximately 405 feet to the point of beginning.




   DISTRICT 3




   BEGINNING at the intersection of the Winston-Salem South Bound Railroad
Company's main line and West Main Street in the City of Albemarle, and runs
thence eastwardly with West Main Street to the intersection of Pee Dee
Avenue; then northeast along said avenue to North Fifth Street; thence north
along North Fifth Street to the intersection of Hawthorne Avenue and
eastwardly along said avenue to Melchor Road; thence north along Melchor Road
to Park Ridge Road and east along said road to Ridge Street; thence go
northeastwardly along Ridge Street to the intersection with the corporate
limit line of the City of Albemarle; thence following the corporate limit
line as it meanders counterclockwise: in a general westwardly, northwardly,
westwardly, southwardly and westwardly direction to its intersection with
Salisbury Avenue; thence along said avenue to the Winston-Salem Southbound
Railroad Company's main line and runs thence southwardly along the Winston-
Salem Southbound Railroad Company's main line to its intersection with West
Main Street, the point of beginning.



In addition, the following satellite annexation area that does not abut the
primary corporate limits of the City of Albemarle shall be included as being
part of District 3:



BEGINNING at a point on the east side of US Highway 52 approximately 1,600
feet north of the corporate limit line head north for approximately 2,500
feet along US Highway 52; then heading east for approximately 2,845 feet;
then heading south approximately 1,060 feet; then heading east approximately
880 feet, then heading south approximately 620 feet along Carter Road; then
heading west approximately 510 feet; then heading south approximately 150
feet; then heading west approximately 550 feet; then heading southeast for
approximately 460 feet along Little Long Creek; then heading west for
approximately 1,300 feet to the point of beginning.



Notwithstanding, the following areas shall be excluded from the boundaries of
District 3:



BEGINNING at a point approximately 300 feet south of Mountain Creek Road go
southwest approximately 760 feet; then heading south approximately 414 feet;
then heading east approximately 511 feet; then heading northeast
approximately 623 feet; then heading northwest for approximately 630 feet to
the point of beginning.




   DISTRICT 4




   BEGINNING at the intersection of West Main Street and Pee Dee Avenue in
the City of Albemarle, and runs thence northeast with Pee Dee Avenue to the
intersection of said avenue and North Fifth Street; thence north along North
Fifth Street to the intersection of Hawthorne Avenue and eastwardly along
said avenue to Melchor Road; thence north along Melchor Road to Park Ridge
Road and east along said road to Ridge Street; thence go northeastwardly
along Ridge Street to its intersection with the corporate limit line of the
City of Albemarle; thence following the corporate limit line as it meanders
clockwise generally in a southeast direction to its intersection with
Greenview Drive; thence southwestwardly along said road to its intersection
with Anderson Grove Church Road; thence north with Anderson Grove Church Road
to the intersection with the NC Highway 740 East By-pass and following the NC
Highway 740 East By-pass southwestwardly to its intersection with East Main
Street and runs thence westwardly with West Main Street to its intersection
with Pee Dee Avenue, the point of beginning.



   All as depicted on map of the “City of Albemarle Proposed Voting
Districts,” dated May 7, 2001, and on file with the Clerk of the City of
Albemarle, reference to all of which (i.e., all “District” descriptions)
being hereby made.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259; amended by Session Laws of 1988, Chapter
881; Ord. 01-29, passed 6-18-01)



Statutory reference:



Authority to amend by ordinance, G.S. §§ 160A-102



   ARTICLE IV.
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION



SECTION 4.1.  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The City shall operate under the Council-Manager form of government, in
accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4.l)



SECTION 4.2.  CITY MANAGER.



   The City Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the head of
the administrative branch of City government, and who shall be responsible to
the Council for the proper administration of the affairs of the City.  The
Manager shall be appointed on the basis of merit only, and he shall serve at
the pleasure of the Council.  In exercising his duties as chief
administrator, the Manager shall have the following powers and duties:



   (a)   He shall appoint and suspend or remove all City employees
whose appointment or removal is not otherwise provided for by law, in
accordance with such general personnel rules, regulations, policies, or
ordinances as the Council may adopt.



   (b)   He shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments, offices, and agencies of the City, subject to the general
direction and control of the Council, except as otherwise provided by law.



   (c)   He shall attend all meetings of the Council, unless otherwise
directed by the Council, and recommend any measures that he deems expedient.



   (d)   He shall see that all laws of the State, the City Charter and
the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Council are faithfully
executed within the City.



   (e)   He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital
program to the City.



   (f)   He shall annually submit to the Council and make available to
the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the City as of the end of the fiscal year.



   (g)   He shall make any other reports that the Council may require
concerning the operations of the City departments, offices, and agencies
subject to his direction and control.



   (h)   He shall perform any other duties that may be required and
authorized by the Council.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4.2)



SECTION 4.3.  CITY ATTORNEY.



   The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney who shall be a resident
of Stanly County and licensed to engage in the practice of law in the State
of North Carolina.  It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prosecute
and defend suits against the City; to advise the Mayor, Council and other
City officials with respect to the affairs of the City; to draft all legal
documents relating  to the affairs of the City; to inspect and pass upon all
agreements, contracts, franchises and other instruments with which the City
may be concerned; to attend meetings of the Council; and to perform other
duties required by law or as the Council may direct.  The Council may employ
other legal counsel from time to time, in addition to the City Attorney, as
may be necessary to handle adequately the legal affairs of the City.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4.3)



SECTION 4.4.  CITY CLERK.



   The Council shall provide for the appointment of a City Clerk to keep a
journal of the proceedings of the Council, to maintain in a safe place all
records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the City, and to perform
such other duties as may be required by law or as the Council may direct.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4.4)



SECTION 4.5.  FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   The Council shall provide for the appointment of a Finance Director to
perform the duties of the finance officer as required by the Local Government
Budget and Fiscal Control Act.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4.5)



SECTION 4.6.  CITY TAX COLLECTOR.



   The Council shall provide for the appointment of a City Tax Collector
to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other revenues accruing to the City,
subject to the General Statutes, the provisions of this Charter and the
ordinances of the City.  The Tax Collector shall diligently comply with and
enforce all the laws of North Carolina relating to the collection of taxes
and other revenues by municipalities.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4.6)



SECTION 4.7.  CONSOLIDATION OF FUNCTIONS.



   The City Council may consolidate any two or more positions of City
Clerk, Tax Collector and Finance  Director or may assign the functions of
any one or more of these positions to the holder of any other of these
positions, subject to the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4.7)



SECTION 4.8.  OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Consistent with applicable State laws, the City Council may establish
other positions, provide for the appointment of other administrative officers
and employees, and generally organize the City government in order to promote
the orderly and efficient administration of the affairs of the City.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4.8)



   ARTICLE V.  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS



SECTION 5.l.  POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN.



   The procedures provided in Article 9 of Chapter 136 of the General
Statutes, as specifically authorized by G.S. 136-66.3(c), shall be applicable
to the City in the case of acquisition of lands, easements, privileges,
rights- of-way and other interests in real property for streets, sewer lines,
water lines, electric power lines, and other utility lines in the exercise of
the power of eminent domain.  The City, when seeking to acquire such
property or rights or easements therein or thereto, shall have the right and
authority, at its option and election, to use the provisions and procedures
as authorized and provided in G.S. 136-66(c) and Article 9 of Chapter 136 of
the General Statutes for any of such purposes without being limited to
streets constituting a part of the State Highway System; provided, however,
that the provisions of this Section shall not apply with regard to properties
owned by public service corporations as defined in G.S. 160A-243(c), unless
(1) the exercise of such power of eminent domain is either consented to by
the owner of the property to be acquired by the City or (2) it is first
adjudicated after notice and a hearing that such acquisition will not prevent
or unreasonably impair the continued devotion to the public  use of such
properties and the operation by such public service corporation.



(Session Laws 1979, Chapter 259 § 5.l)



SECTION 5.2.  ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF ASSESSING THE COST OF EXTENDING WATER
AND SEWER LINES.



   A.   In addition and as alternatives to the method provided in G.S.
160A-218 for assessing the costs of water and sewer lines and laterals, the
City Council, if in its opinion it would be more equitable to do so, hereby
is authorized in its discretion to levy any such assessments according to
either of the following methods: (1) equally against each of the lots capable
of being served by such line or lines, or (2) on the basis of the footage of
land upon a public street by an equal rate per foot of such frontage.



   In lieu of assessing the total cost of a particular project as herein
provided, the governing body annually between the first days of January and
July of each year, may determine the average cost of installing water and
sewer mains or lines and on the basis of such determination may make
assessments of such average cost during the following fiscal year beginning
July l.  The average cost of such installation shall include the cost of the
particular size and material of lines completed during the preceding calendar
year.  It also may include the anticipated increase in labor and materials
costs based upon the average of such increases during the preceding five
calendar years.  The assessment of the average cost of such line shall not
be made until after the particular assessment project has been completed. The
purpose of this act is to distribute more equitably the cost of the
installation of water and sewer lines throughout the City; to permit a
property owner to know in advance what the cost of installation of water and
sewer lines benefiting his property will be; and to permit the most
expeditious assessment of cost against property after completion of the
installation of such lines.  The actual cost of acquisition of rights-of-way
also may be assessed as a part of the cost of an individual  project.  If
the right-of-way costs have not been determined and assessed with the
assessment of the average installation costs at the time of the completion of
the project, such costs may be assessed separately when they are determined.



   If a lot or parcel of land used for a single-family residential purpose
is assessed under this section and the lot or parcel of land is subdivided
into additional lots for single-family occupancy, the City Council may assess
the additional lots or parcels of land into which the original parcel of land
is from time to time divided on the basis of the average cost as determined
under the provisions of this section at the time the owner of the additional
lot requests the utility service.  Such assessment shall be made only after
the owner of the newly created lot or lots has requested water or sewer
service and an assessment against his property or has paid the amount of the
assessment in cash.  In the absence of such request or payment, the service
shall be withheld from the property.



   If a lot or parcel of land is used for any purpose other than for
single- family occupancy, the City Council may assess the lot or parcel of
land used for such other purpose in an amount equal to the multiple of the
assessment for a single-family lot by the nearest number of times that the
area so used is divisible by 20,000 feet but in no case shall the assessment
be less than the assessment which would be made against a single-family
dwelling lot.



   B.   The City Council shall have the authority to exempt from
assessment for water and sewer extensions for corner lots 150 feet of the
frontage of any side of a corner lot when water and sewer extensions are
installed along both sides of such lot.



   C.   The City Council shall have authority to waive the assessment
for water and sewer extensions against lands owned by Stanly County, the
Stanly County Board of Education, and the Albemarle City School
Administrative Unit.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 5.2)



SECTION 5.3.  ALTERNATIVE METHOD OF ASSESSING THE COST OF INSTALLATION OF
STREET IMPROVEMENTS; AUTHORITY TO WAIVE STREET ASSESSMENTS.



   A.   In addition and as an alternative to the method provided in
G.S. 160A-218 for assessing the costs of installing street improvements
described in G.S. 160A-216(1) and (2), the City Council, in lieu of assessing
the total cost of a particular project as provided in G.S. 160A-218, may
annually between the first days of January and July of each year, determine
the average cost of installing street improvements and, on the basis of such
determination, may make assessments of such average cost during the following
fiscal year beginning July 1.  The average cost of such installation shall
exclude labor cost but shall include the cost of materials of street
improvements completed during the preceding calendar year. The City Council
also may include the anticipated increase in materials costs based upon the
average of such increases during the preceding five calendar years.  The
assessment of the average cost of such improvements shall not be made until
after the particular assessment project has been completed.  The purpose of
this act is to distribute more equitably the cost of the installation of
street improvements throughout the City; to permit a property owner to know
in advance what the cost of installation of street assessments benefiting his
property will be; and to permit the most expeditious assessments of cost
against property after completion of the installation of such street
improvements.  The actual cost of acquisition of rights-of-way also may be
assessed as a part of the cost of an individual project. If the right-of- way
costs have not been determined and assessed with the assessment of the
average installation costs at the time of the completion of the project, such
costs may be assessed separately when they are determined.



   B.   The City Council may waive the collection of street assessments
owed to the City by Stanly County, the Stanly County Board of Education, and
the Albemarle City School Administrative Unit.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 5.3; Amended by Session Laws of 1995,
Chapter 655 § 1)



   ARTICLE VI.  SPECIAL PROVISIONS



SECTION 6.l.  AUTHORITY TO HOLD ABC ELECTION.



   A.   The City Council may, upon petition filed by fifteen percent
(15%) of the voters who voted in the last municipal election of the said city
for mayor, call an election for the purpose of submitting the question as to
whether city alcoholic beverage control stores may be operated in the said
city.  If the City Council calls an election, said election shall be called
within ninety days after such petition is filed on a date to be fixed by the
City Council as herein prescribed, and at least thirty days' public notice
shall be given prior to the date of the election, notwithstanding the
nearness of date within which any other type election may be held.  At such
election, if a majority of the votes cast at said election shall be against
the operation of such stores, no such stores shall be set up and operated in
the city under the provisions of this Section.  If a majority of the votes
cast shall be for the operation of such stores, it shall be legal for
alcoholic beverage control stores to be set up and operated in said city.



   B.   A new registration of voters for such election shall not be
necessary.  In said election a ballot shall be used upon which shall be
printed on separate lines for each proposition 'For alcoholic beverage
control stores', and 'Against alcoholic beverage control stores'.  Those
favoring setting up and operating alcoholic beverage control stores in the
City of Albemarle shall mark in the voting square to the left of the words
'For alcoholic beverage control stores' printed on the  ballot, and those
opposed to municipal alcoholic beverage control stores shall mark on the
voting square to the left of the words 'Against alcoholic beverage control
stores'.  Excepting as otherwise herein provided, if a special election is
called, the election authorized shall be conducted under the same statutory
laws and regulations applicable to regular municipal election for the City
Council in the City of Albemarle, and the costs thereof shall be paid from
the general fund of the City of Albemarle.



   C.   If the operation of municipal alcoholic beverage control stores
is authorized under the provisions of this act, the City Council shall create
immediately a municipal board of alcohol control to be composed of three
members who shall be well known for their character, ability, and business
acumen.  The City Council shall appoint a chairman and two other members.



   Said board shall be known and designated as the 'City of Albemarle
Board of Alcohol Control'.  The member designated as chairman shall serve
for his first term a period of three years.



As to other members, one member shall serve for his first term a period of
two years, and the other member shall serve for his first term a period of
one year, and all terms shall begin with the date of their appointment.
Thereafter, as the terms of the chairman and the members expire, their
successors in the office shall serve for terms of three years each and until
their successors are appointed and qualified.  Any vacancy on said board
will be filled by the City Council. Compensation of the members of said City
of Albemarle Board of Alcohol Control shall be fixed by the City Council.



   D.   The City of Albemarle Board of Alcohol Control shall have all
the powers and duties imposed by Section 18A-17 of the General Statutes on
county boards of alcohol control and shall be subject to the powers and
authority of the State Board of Alcohol Control the same as county boards of
alcohol control, as provided in Section 18A-15 of the General Statutes.  The
City of  Albemarle Board of Alcohol Control and the operation of any city
alcoholic beverage control stores authorized under the provisions of this
Section shall be subject to and in pursuance with the provisions of Chapter
18A of the General Statutes of North Carolina except to the extent which the
same may be in conflict with the provisions of this Section.  Wherever the
'county' board of alcohol appears in this Chapter, it shall include the City
of Albemarle Board of Alcohol Control. The City of Albemarle Board of Alcohol
Control shall have authority to employ legal counsel and such other employees
as it may deem wise and fix their compensation.



   E.   No election as hereinbefore called for under this Section may
be held more often than once every three years.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 6.l; Amended by Session Laws of 1993,
Chapter 379 § 6.1; Amended by Session Laws of 2003, H.B. 187 § 2)



SECTION 6.2.  INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.



   The City Council is authorized and empowered, annually, in its
discretion, to set apart and appropriate from funds of the City not raised by
taxation, an amount determined by the Council for the purpose of aiding and
encouraging the location of manufacturing, industrial and commercial
development, for advertising the advantages and resources of the City, and
for such other purposes as will in the opinion of the Council, increase the
taxable wealth within the City and promote  the general welfare of the City
and its people.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 6.2)



SECTION 6.3.  SINGLE PRIME CONTRACTOR PUBLIC CONTRACTS.



   (a)   Every officer, board, department, commission or commissions
charged with responsibility of preparation of specifications or awarding or
entering into contracts for the erection, construction, alteration or repair
of any buildings for the State, or for any county or municipality, when the
entire cost of such work shall exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)
must have prepared separate specifications for each of the following
subdivisions or branches of work to be performed:



      (1)   Heating, ventilating, air conditioning and accessories
(separately or combined into one conductive system) and/or refrigeration for
cold storage (where the cooling load is 15 tons or more of refrigeration),
and all work kindred thereto.



         (2)   Plumbing and gas fittings and accessories, and all
work kindred thereto.



      (3)   Electrical wiring and installations, and all work
kindred thereto.



      (4)   General work relating to the erection, construction,
alteration, or repair of any building above referred to, which work is not
included in the above-listed three subdivisions or branches.



   All such specifications must be so drawn as to permit separate and
independent bidding upon each of the subdivisions or branches of work
enumerated above.  The above enumeration of subdivisions or branches of work
shall not be construed to prevent any officer, board, department, commission
or commissions from preparing additional separate specifications and awarding
additional separate contracts for any other category of work when it is
deemed in the best interest of such officer, board, department, commission or
commissions to do so.



   All contracts hereafter awarded by the State or by a county or
municipality, or a department, board, commissioner, or officer thereof, for
the erection, construction, alteration or repair of buildings, or any parts
thereof, shall award the respective work specified separately to responsible
and reliable persons, firms or corporations regularly engaged in their
respective lines of work.  When the estimated cost of work to be performed
in any single subdivision or branch is less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000), the same may be included in the contract for one of the other
subdivisions or branches of the work, irrespective of total project cost.



   Each separate contractor shall be directly liable to the State of North
Carolina, or to the county or municipality, and to the other separate 
contractors for the full performance of all duties and obligations due
respectively under the terms of the separate contracts and in accordance with
the plans and specifications, which shall specifically set forth the duties
and obligations of each separate contractor.  For the purpose of this
section, the working "separate contractor" is hereby deemed and held to mean
any person, firm or corporation who shall enter into a contract with the
State, or with any county or municipality, for the erection, construction,
alteration or repair of any building or buildings, or parts thereof.



   All public authorities coming within the requirements of this section
shall have the authority to purchase and erect prefabricated or relocatable 
buildings or portions thereof without complying with the provisions hereof,
except that portion of the work which must be performed at the construction
site.



   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this
section a county, municipality, department, board, commissioner, officer, or
public hospital board of trustees may use all single prime contract system,
and may prequalify bidders, for all construction contracts.  Provided,
however, that all bidders must identify on their bid the electrical,
plumbing, and mechanical contractors they have selected.  If the contract is
to be let under this subsection, each bidder shall have a verifiable ten
percent (10%) goal for participation by minority businesses.



(Session Laws of 1989, Chapter 409)



SECTION 6.4.  AUTHORIZATION FOR CITY TO LEVY A ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX.



   (a)   Authorization and scope. The Albemarle City Council may by
resolution, after not less than 10 days' public notice and after a public
hearing held pursuant thereto, levy a room occupancy tax of up to five
percent (5%) of the gross receipts derived from the rental of any room,
lodging, or accommodation furnished by a hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp, or
similar place within the city that is subject to sales tax imposed by the
State under G.S. 105-164.4(a)(3). This tax is in addition to any State or
local sales tax. This tax does not apply to accommodations furnished by
nonprofit charitable, educational, or religious organizations.



   (b)   Collection. Every operator of a business subject to the tax
levied under this section shall, on and after the effective date of the levy
of the tax, collect the tax.  This tax shall be collected as part of the
charge for furnishing a taxable accommodation. The tax shall be stated and
charged separately from the sales records, and shall be paid by the purchaser
to the operator of the business as trustee for and on account of the city.
The tax shall be added to the sales price and shall be passed on to the
purchaser instead of being borne by the operator of the business.  The city
shall design, print, and furnish to all appropriate businesses and persons in
the city the necessary forms for filing returns and instructions to ensure
the full collection of the tax.



   (c)   Administration. The city shall administer a tax levied under
this section. A tax levied under this section is due and payable to the city
finance officer in monthly installments on or before the fifteenth day of the
month following the month in which the tax accrues. Every person, firm,
corporation, or association liable for the tax shall, on or before the
fifteenth day of each month, prepare and render a return on a form prescribed
by the city. The return shall state the total gross receipts derived in the
preceding month from rentals upon which the tax is levied.



   A return filed with the city finance officer under this section is not
a public record as defined by G.S. 132-1 and may not be disclosed except as
required by law.



   (d)   Penalties. A person, firm, corporation, or association who
fails or refuses to file the return required by this section shall pay a
penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day's omission. In case of failure
or refusal to file the return or pay the tax for a period of 30 days after
the time required for filing the return or for paying the tax, there shall be
an additional tax, as a penalty, of five percent (5%) of the tax due in
addition to any other penalty, with an additional tax of five percent (5%)
for each additional month or fraction thereof until the tax is paid.  The
city council may, for good cause shown, compromise or forgive the additional
tax penalties imposed by this subsection.



   Any person who willfully attempts in any manner to evade a tax imposed
under this section or who willfully fails to pay the tax or make and file a
return shall, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, be guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000), imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.



   (e)   Use of tax proceeds.  The Albemarle City Council shall decide
on the allocation of the revenue collected from this tax annually during its
budgeting process, with particular consideration given to providing funds for
purposes of economic development, public safety, and parks and recreation.



   (f)   Effective date of levy.  A tax levied under this section
shall become effective on the date specified in the resolution levying the
tax. That date must be the first day of a calendar month, however, and may
not be earlier than the first day of the month after the date the resolution
is adopted.



   (g)   Repeal. A tax levied under this section may be repealed by a
resolution adopted by the Albemarle City Council.  Repeal of a tax levied
under this section shall become effective on the first day of a month and may
not become effective until the end of the fiscal year in which the repeal
resolution was adopted. Repeal of a tax levied under this section does not
affect a liability for a tax that was attached before the effective date of
the repeal, nor does it affect a right to a refund of a tax that accrued
before the effective date of the repeal.



(Session Laws of 1991, Chapter 915)



   SECTION 2.



   The purpose of this act is to revise the Charter of the City of
Albemarle and to consolidate herein certain acts concerning the property,
affairs, and government of the City. It is intended to continue without
interruption those provisions of prior acts which are consolidated into this
act, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued are preserved and
may be enforced.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 §2)



   SECTION 3.



   This act shall not be deemed to repeal, modify, or in any manner affect
any of the following acts, portions of acts, or amendments thereto, whether
or not such acts, portions of acts, or amendments are expressly set forth
herein.



   (a)   Any acts concerning the property, affairs, or government of
public schools in the City of Albemarle.



   (b)   Any act validating, confirming, approving, or legalizing
official proceedings, actions, contracts, or obligations of any kind.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259, § 3)



   SECTION 4.



   The following acts or portions of acts, having served the purposes for
which they were enacted, or having been consolidated into this act are hereby
repealed:



   Chapter 14, Public Laws of 1840-41, 1842-43



   Chapter 119, Private Laws of 1856-57



   Chapter 113, Private Laws of 1874-75



   Chapter 145, Private Laws of 1891



   Chapter 344, Private Laws of 1901



   Chapter 71, Private Laws of 1907



   Chapter 516, Public-local Laws of 191l



   Chapter 234, Private Laws of 191l



   Chapter 337, Private Laws of 191l



   Chapter 384, Private Laws of 191l



   Chapter 33, Public-local Laws of 1913



   Chapter 13, Private Laws of 1913



   Chapter 232, Public-local Laws of 1913



   Chapter 362, Private Laws of 1913



   Chapter 379, Private Laws of 1913



   Chapter 100, Private Laws of 1915



   Chapter 54, Private Laws of 1919



   Chapter 27, Private Laws, Extra Session 1924



   Chapter 17, Public-local Laws, Extra Session 1924



   Chapter 242, Public-local Laws of 1925



   Chapter 111, Private Laws of 1929



   Chapter 20, Private Laws of 1935



   Chapter 338, Private Laws of 1935



   Chapter 294, Public-local Laws of 1941



   Chapter 664, Session Laws of 1947



   Chapter 901, Session Laws of 1947



   Chapter 287, Session Laws of 1949



   Chapter 288, Session Laws of 1949



   Chapter 838, Session Laws of 1949



   Chapter 146, Session Laws of 1951



   Chapter 716, Session Laws of 1951



   Chapter 186, Session Laws of 1955



   Chapter 956, Session Laws of 1955



   Chapter 209, Session Laws of 1957



   Chapter 3, Session Laws of 1959



   Chapter 872, Session Laws of 1961



   Chapter 986, Session Laws of 1961



   Chapter 2, Session Laws of 1963



   Chapter 848, Session Laws of 1963



   Chapter 721, Session Laws of 1965



   Chapter 175, Session Laws of 1967



   Chapter 338, Session Laws of 1967



   Chapter 592, Session Laws of 1969



   Chapter 666, Session Laws of 1969



   Chapter 122, Session Laws of 1971



   Chapter 451, Session Laws of 1977



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 4)



   SECTION 5.



   No provision of this act is intended, nor shall be construed, to affect
in any way any rights or interest (whether public or private):



   (a)   now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of
which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of law
repealed by this act;



   (b)   derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in
reliance upon, action heretofore taken pursuant to or within the scope of any
provisions of law repealed by this act.



(Section Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 5)



   SECTION 6.



   No law heretofore repealed expressly or by implication, and no law
granting authority which has been exhausted, shall be revived by:



   (a)   the repeal herein of any act repealing such law, or



   (b)   any provision of this act that disclaims an intention to
repeal or affect enumerated or designated laws.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 6)



   SECTION 7.



   (a)   All existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of
Albemarle and all existing rules or regulations of departments or agencies of
the City of Albemarle, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act,
shall continue in full force and effect until repealed, modified or amended.



   (b)   No action or proceeding of any nature, whether civil or
criminal, judicial or administrative, or otherwise, pending at the effective
date of this act by or against the City of Albemarle or any of its
departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption
of this act.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 7)



   SECTION 8.



   If any of this act or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the
invalid provisions or application, and to this end the provisions of this act
are declared to be severable.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 8)



   SECTION 9.



   Whenever a reference is made in this act to a particular provision of
the General Statutes, and such provision is later amended, repealed or
superseded, the reference shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended
General Statute, or to the General Statute which most clearly corresponds to
the statutory provision which is repealed or superseded.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 9)



   SECTION 10.



   All laws and clauses of laws in conflict with the provisions of this
act are hereby repealed.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 10)



   SECTION 11.



   This act is effective upon its ratification. 



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this the 2nd day
of April, 1979.



(Session Laws of 1979, Chapter 259 § 11)



TITLE I:  USE OF THE CODE AND PENALTIES



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   10.01   Short title



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Section headings



   10.05   Severability



   10.06   Repeal, expiration, and revival of ordinances



   10.07   Altering code



Use of the Code and Penalties



   10.80   Penalties for violations



   10.81   Uncorrected violations



   10.82   Failure to pay



   10.83   Appeals of determination of violation



   10.84   Applicable chapters and appendices



   10.99   General penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLE.



   The provisions of the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albemarle," and may
be so cited.  The code may also be cited as "Albemarle City Code."



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BOND."  When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing with
approved surety shall be sufficient.



   "CITY."  The City of Albemarle, in the County of Stanly, and the State
of North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.



   "CITY COUNCIL" or "COUNCIL."  The City Council of Albemarle.



   "CITY LIMITS."  The legal boundary of the City of Albemarle, North
Carolina.



   "COUNTY."  Stanly County, State of North Carolina.



   "KEEPER" or "PROPRIETOR." Includes any person, firm, association,
corporation, club, and partnership, whether acting by themselves or as a
servant, agent, or employee.



   "MONTH."  A calendar month.



   "OATH."  Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
affirm and affirmed shall be equivalent to the words swear and sworn.



   "OFFICIALS," "BOARDS," and "COMMISSIONS."  Whenever reference is made
to "OFFICIALS," "BOARDS", and "COMMISSIONS" by title only, they shall be
deemed to refer to the officials, boards, and commissions of the City of
Albemarle.



   "OR" and "AND."  "OR" may be read "AND," and "AND" may be read "OR" if
the sense requires it.



   "OWNER."  When applied to buildings or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of
the whole or part of the building or land.



   "PERSON."  Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.



   "PERSONAL PROPERTY."  Includes every species of property except real
property as defined below.



   "PRECEDING" or "FOLLOWING."  Next before and next after respectively.



   "PROPERTY."  Includes real and personal property.



   "REAL PROPERTY."  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   "RESIDENCE."  The place adopted by a person as his place of habitation
and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. 
When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where the
person sleeps shall be deemed his residence.



   "RIGHT-OF-WAY."  The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway,
and includes the use of the entire width of the land between the property
lines so dedicated to public use.



   "ROADWAY."  That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.



   "SIDEWALK.  Any portion of a street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



   "SIGNATURE" or "SUBSCRIPTION." Includes a mark when a person cannot
write.



   "STATE."  The State of North Carolina.



   "STREET."  Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, path, viaduct, bridge, or other public place
and the approaches thereto within the city when any part thereof is open to
the use of the public and established for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   "TENANT" or "OCCUPANT."  When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or part of the building or land,
whether alone or with others.



   "VEHICLES."  Every wagon, hack, coach, carriage, omnibus, pushcart,
bicycle, tricycle, motorcycle, automobile, streetcar, sleigh or sled, or
other conveyance, except baby carriages or invalid chairs, in whatever manner
or by whatever force they may be driven, ridden, or propelled, which is or
may be used or adapted for pleasure riding, for the transportation of
passengers, baggage, merchandise, or freight on any street, and every draft
or riding animal, whether driven, ridden, or led.  An animal attached to any
vehicle with the vehicle constitute one vehicle.



   "WRITING" or "WRITTEN."  Includes printing and any other mode of
representing words and letters.



   "YEAR."  A calendar year.



('58 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed
by excluding the first and including the last day.  If the last day is a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, that shall be excluded.



   (B)   Gender.  Words importing the masculine gender shall include
the feminine and neuter.



   (C)   Nontechnical and technical words.  Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and any others as may have acquired a peculiar
and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
that meaning.



   (D)   Number.  Words used in the singular include the plural and
the plural includes the singular number.



   (E)   Plural, singular.  Words importing the singular shall include
the plural, and words importing the plural shall include the singular.



   (F)   Statute references.  The reference "G.S." shall be construed
to refer to the General Statutes of North Carolina.



   (G)   Time.  Words used in the past or present tense include the
future as well as the past and the present.



   (H)   Title of office.  The title of any office shall be construed
to include the words, "of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina."



('58 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.04  SECTION HEADINGS.



   The headings of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.



('58 Code, § 1-3)



§ 10.05  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code are
severable.  If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
any court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of
this code, since it would have been enacted by the City Council without the
incorporation in this code of the unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.



('58 Code, § 1-4)



§ 10.06  REPEAL, EXPIRATION, AND REVIVAL OF ORDINANCES.



   The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any
provisions contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.  When an ordinance
which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall
not be revived without express words to that effect.



('58 Code, § 1-5)



§ 10.07  ALTERING CODE.



   It shally be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this code in
any manner whatsoever except pursuant to ordinance or resolution or other
official act of the City Council which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.



('58 Code, § 1-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



   USE OF THE CODE AND PENALTIES



§ 10.80  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   Any person determined to be in violation of any of the provisions of
the chapters and/or appendices identified in § 10.84 shall receive a civil
citation for a penalty of $100 for such violation.  No penalty shall be
assessed until the person alleged to be in violation has been notified of the
violation by a City Department employee having jurisdiction over the
violation provided however, that notification as a prerequisite to issuance
of civil citations shall not apply to alleged violations of § 82.39.  Such
notification shall be either through a personal visit or by certified mail. 
If uncorrected after the notification, the city employee who observed the
violation shall issue a citation requiring the violator to pay the
above-stated penalty to the City Finance Department.  The owner, tenant or
occupant of any building or land or part thereof or any person who
participates in or acts in concert, assists, directs, creates or maintains
any condition found to be a violation shall be subject to the penalties and
remedies herein provided.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 8-21-00; Am. Ord. 07-28, passed 9-4-07)



§ 10.81  UNCORRECTED VIOLATIONS.



   When the city employee finds that a previous violation has not been
corrected, he shall issue another citation requiring payment of an additional
civil penalty in the amount of $200.  After a second citation has been
issued, no further civil citation shall be issued to the same person for the
same continuing violation at the same location unless and until an additional
written notice is delivered to the offender by personal service, registered
mail or posting of the notice at the location of the violation if reasonable
attempts to serve the notice are unsuccessful.  The notice shall set forth
the nature of the violation and order that corrective action be taken.  The
notice shall state that failure to correct the violation within the time
specified in the notice will result in the assessment of additional civil
penalties and other enforcement action.  If after the specified time period
has expired and corrective action has not been completed, the civil penalty
shall automatically activate in the amount of $200 per day and shall continue
to be accrued at the rate of $200 per day until the violation is corrected. 
The city employee shall notify the violator by personal service or certified
mail of the day that the civil penalty began to accrue and shall state that
the penalty will continue to accrue for each day the violation remains
uncorrected.  Any enforcement action for injunctive relief by the city shall
not stay or abate the accruing of the civil penalty, and the penalty shall
continue to accrue daily until the violation is finally corrected either
voluntarily or by the city as a result of a court order.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 8-21-00)



§ 10.82  FAILURE TO PAY.



   (A)   If the civil penalty is not paid within ten days after demand
for payment by the city employee, the city may initiate a civil action in the
nature of a debt collection to recover civil penalties which may have
previously accrued.  Such action shall stop further civil penalties from
accruing if the violation has been corrected.



   (B)   Civil penalties are an additional remedy for code
enforcement.  In addition thereto, all remedies allowed in North Carolina
General Statutes and this Code may also be pursued by the city at the same
time without waiving the civil penalties authorized in this chapter.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 8-21-00)



§ 10.83  APPEALS OF DETERMINATION OF VIOLATION.



   A person notified of a violation may appeal such determination to the
appro- priate Department Head charged with the enforcement of the particular
offense.  Such appeal must be filed with the city not later than ten days
after the receipt of the first notice issued.  Failure to timely file an
appeal shall constitute acceptance of the determination that a violation
exists. The fact that an appeal is filed or pending under this chapter shall
not prevent the city from pursuing other enforcement remedies allowed by law.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 8-21-00)



§ 10.84  APPLICABLE CHAPTERS AND APPENDICES.



   (A)   The following chapters and appendices of this Code shall be
applicable for this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   Chapter 80. Abandoned/ Nuisance/Junked Motor Vehicles.



      (2)   Chapter 81.  Animals and Fowl.



      (3)   Chapter 90.  Building Regulations.



      (4)   Chapter 31.  Fire Protection and Prevention.



      (5)   Chapter 93.  Flood Damage Prevention.



      (6)   Chapter 41.  Garbage and Refuse Collection and Disposal.



      (7)   Chapter 82.  Miscellaneous Offenses.



      (8)   Chapter 68.  Sexually Oriented Business.



      (9)   Chapter 40.  Streets and Sidewalks, § 40.30(A)(4).



      (10)   Chapter 91.  Subdivision Regulations.



      (11)   Chapter 72.  Traffic Rules.



      (12)   Chapter 94.  Watershed Regulations.



      (13)   Chapter 92.  Zoning Regulations.



      (14)   Chapter 70.  General Provisions.



      (15)   Chapter 71.  Traffic Control Devices.



      (16)   Chapter 73.  Stopping, Standing, and Parking.



      (17)   Chapter 74.  Trucks; Railroads.



      (18)   Chapter 75.  Pedestrians.



      (19)   Chapter 76.  Bicycles.



      (20)   Chapter 77.  Schedules.



(Ord. 00-26, passed 8-21-00; Am. Ord. 01-45, passed 12-3-01; Am. Ord. 02-05,
passed 2-4-02)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   In accordance with G.S. 160A-175, and unless this code provides a
different criminal penalty, violation of any provision hereof shall be a
misdemeanor as provided in G.S. 14-4, punishable upon conviction by a fine
not exceeding $50 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.  By express
statement, any section may be enforced by the ordering of appropriate
equitable remedy, including injunction, by the general court of justice. 
Each day that any breach or violation of, or any failure to comply with, any
provision or requirement of any section or subsection of this code or any
ordinance of the city, continues or is allowed to continue, shall constitute,
and is hereby declared to be, a separate and distinct offense.



(Am. Ord. 06-20, passed 8-7-06)



Editor's note:



G.S. 160A-175, authorizing municipalities to employ alternate remedies in the
enforcement of local ordinances, is set out in the Related State Laws portion
of this code.



TITLE II:  GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      20.   ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION



      21.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      22.   CITY COUNCIL



      23.   [RESERVED]



      24.   [RESERVED]



      25.   MUNICIPAL TAXES



CHAPTER 20:  ADMINISTRATIVE



Section



   20.01   Departments enumerated



§ 20.01  DEPARTMENTS ENUMERATED.



   The City Manager shall administer the functions and activities of the
town through the following departments.



   (A)   Finance Department.



   (B)   Police Department.



   (C)   Fire Department.



   (D)   Public Works Department.



   (E)   Recreation Department.



   (F)   Community Development Department.



   (G)   Water and Sewer Department.



   (H)   Administration Department.



   (I)   Department of Public Housing.



(Ord. 90-2, passed 2-5-90)



CHAPTER 21:  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



Planning and Zoning Appeals Board



   21.001   Establishment; designation



   21.002   Membership and vacancies



   21.003   Organization, rules, meetings, records



   21.004   Powers and duties as an advisory board



   21.005   Background information



   21.006   Comprehensive plan; contents, purposes



   21.007   Map and text amendments to city ordinance; review and
recommendations by Board



   21.008   Subdivision regulations; review and recommendations by Board



   21.009   Public properties and facilities; review and
recommendations by Board



   21.010   Powers and duties as a quasi-judicial review board



   21.011   Quasi-judicial proceedings



   21.012   Appeals from the Board



   21.013   Appeals of decisions from Building Inspector



   21.014   Appeals of decisions from Watershed Administrator



   21.015   Public hearings; publicity; attendance at conferences



   21.016   Annual report; budget



   21.017   Special committees




Tree Commission




   21.030   Purpose



   21.031   Definitions



   21.032   Creation and establishment of City Tree Commission



   21.033   Term of office



   21.034   Compensation



   21.035   Duties and responsibilities



   21.036   City jurisdiction and authority



   21.037   Operation



   21.038   Interference with Tree Commission



   21.039   Street tree species/landscaping shrub species



   21.040   Tree spacing and planting requirements



   21.041   Public tree care



   21.042   City property and rights-of-way



   21.043   Private property



   21.044   Protection of trees



   21.045   Protection during construction



   21.046   Tree topping



   21.047   Removal of stumps



   21.048   Review by City Council



   21.049   Penalty




Public Housing Advisory Board




   21.060   Establishment; designation



   21.061   Membership and vacancies



   21.062   Organization; rules; records; meetings



   21.063   General Powers and duties




Community Appearance Commission




   21.075   Creation and purpose



   21.076   Powers and duties of Commission



   21.077   Annual report



   21.078   Advisory council and committees



   21.079   Staff and technical services



   21.080   Receipts and expenditures of funds



   21.081   Agency funds




Greenway Commission




   21.095   Establishment; designation



   21.096   Duties



   21.097   Annual report



   21.098   Special committees




Parks and Recreation Advisory Board




   21.110   Creation and purpose



   21.111   Membership and qualifications



   21.112   Term of office



   21.113   Meetings




Historic Resources Commission




   21.125   Establishment and jurisdiction



   21.126   Membership and qualifications



   21.127   Rules of procedure; design guidelines and meetings



   21.128   Powers and duties



PLANNING AND ZONING APPEALS BOARD



§ 21.001  ESTABLISHMENT; DESIGNATION.



   A Planning and Zoning Appeals Board is hereby established. Said board
will henceforth serve all duties of and assume the authority previously
assigned to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment. This shall include
the additional roles of hearing appeals from the decision of the building
inspector and watershed administrator as needed. Henceforth any reference to
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment made in city ordinance shall be
considered synonymous with Planning and Zoning Appeals Board or Board as used
herein.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.002  MEMBERSHIP AND VACANCIES.



   (A)   Membership. The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall
consist of nine regular members and three alternate members. Alternate
members shall serve on the Board in the absence or temporary disqualification
of any regular member or to fill a vacancy pending appointment of a member.
Alternate members shall be appointed for the same term, at the same time, and
in the same manner as regular members. Each alternate member serving on
behalf of any regular member has all the powers and duties of a regular
member.



   (B)   Terms. Regular members and the first, second and third
alternate members shall be appointed by the City Council to the Planning and
Zoning Appeals Board for three year terms. Council shall maintain the
starting and end date for all terms on the same day and month as decided by
Council at the time of initial appointment. When the City Council is making
initial appointments, appointments due to term expiration or appointments due
to mid-term vacancies they may appoint certain members for less than three
years so that the terms of all members shall remain evenly staggered so as
not expire in the same year. Any term for which a member has been appointed
to and served for at least 50% of the days of said term shall be considered a
full term. Members may be re-appointed by Council at the end of each term,
however at the end of a second, consecutive, full term as a regular member,
board members shall not be eligible for reappointment until the expiration of
one year from the end date of the member's last term. However, in order to
maintain a full and functional board, a member may continue to serve
indefinitely until a replacement is appointed by Council.



   (C)   Compensation. All regular and alternate members who attend
meetings are entitled to compensation and may be reimbursed for any expenses
incurred while representing the Board, and for any mandatory training deemed
to be a requirement.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.003  ORGANIZATION, RULES, MEETINGS, RECORDS.



   (A)   Officers. The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall elect a
chairperson, a vice-chairperson and create and fill any offices as it may
determine from its members. Such elections shall be done during regular, open
meetings and shall take place as soon as possible following each new term for
appointment. The term of the chairman and other officers shall be one year or
approximated to be as close to one year as allowed by term expiration,
appointment and scheduling of meetings. Each elected officer shall be
eligible for re-election.



   (B)   Administration. The Board shall be administered by an employee
of the city as determined by the Planning Director. Unless otherwise
determined by the board, said Administrator shall be responsible for
preparing agendas, advertising for meetings and agenda items, maintaining a
roster of members, recording and drafting of minutes and assisting the chair
in conducting the meeting and general administration of the Board.



   (C)   Rules. The Board shall adopt rules and bylaws for in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the general statutes.



   (D)   Meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at regularly
scheduled dates and times as agreed upon by its members and at other times as
the Board may determine and in accordance with general statutes. Meetings
shall be conducted in accordance with city ordinance, general statutes and
Board. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Vice-Chairperson, shall
preside over the meeting. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the
public. There shall be a quorum of five members for the purpose of taking any
official action, however some decisions of the board shall require a greater
number as required by general statute or city ordinance.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.004  POWERS AND DUTIES AS AN ADVISORY BOARD.



   It shall be the duty of the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board to serve
in an advisory capacity to City Council, in general, and to do the following.



   (A)   Acquire and maintain in current form basic information and
materials as are necessary to an understanding of past trends, present
conditions, and forces at work to cause changes in these conditions.



   (B)   Prepare and, from time to time, amend and revise a
comprehensive and coordinated plan for the physical development of the city.



   (C)   Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the
development of the city.



   (D)   Prepare and recommend to the City Council ordinances promoting
orderly development along the lines indicated in the comprehensive plan.



   (E)   Determine whether specific proposed developments conform to
the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the growth and
improvement of the city.



   (F)   Review proposed major subdivisions and map and text amendments
and make recommendations to City Council.



   (G)   Keep the Council and the general public informed and advised
as to these matters.



   (H)   Perform any other duties which may lawfully be assigned to it.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.005  BACKGROUND INFORMATION.



   (A)   As background for its comprehensive plan and any ordinances it
may prepare, the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board may gather maps and aerial
photographs for man-made and natural physical features of the city,
statistics on past trends and present conditions with respect to population,
property values, the economic base of the community, land use, and other
information as is important or likely to be important in determining the
amount, direction, and kind of development to be expected in the city and its
various parts.



   (B)   In addition, the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board may make,
cause to be made, or obtain special studies on the location, condition, and
adequacy of specific facilities, which may include, but are not limited to,
studies of housing; commercial and industrial facilities; parks, playgrounds,
and recreational facilities; public and private utilities; and traffic,
transportation, and parking facilities.



   (C)   All city officials shall, upon request, furnish to the
Planning and Zoning Appeals Board, available records or information as it may
require in its work.  The Board or its agents may, in the performance of its
official duties, enter upon lands and make examinations or surveys and
maintain necessary monuments thereon.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.006 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN; CONTENTS, PURPOSES.



   (A)   The comprehensive plan, with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts, and descriptive matter, shall be and show the Planning and Zoning
Appeals Board's recommendations to the City Council for the development of
the territory, including, among other things, the general location,
character, and extent of streets, bridges, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds,
squares, parks, aviation fields, and other public ways, grounds, and open
spaces; the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals,
whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light,
sanitation, transportation, communication, power, and other purposes; also,
the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change
of use, or extension of any of the foregoing ways, buildings, grounds, open
spaces, property, utilities, or terminals.



   (B)   The plan and any ordinances or other measures to effectuate it
shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a
coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the city and its
environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best
promote health, safety, morals, and the general welfare, as well as
efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other
things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and
other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the
healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good
civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds,
and the adequate provision of public utilities, services, and other public
requirements.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.007  MAP AND TEXT AMENDMENTS TO CITY ORDINANCE: REVIEW AND
RECOMMENDATIONS BY BOARD.



   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board may initiate, from time to time,
proposals for amendment of the zoning ordinance, based upon its studies and
comprehensive plan.  In addition, it shall review and make recommendations
to the City Council concerning all third party applications and proposals for
text and map amendments to the zoning and other related ordinances. The Board
shall follow its adopted rules for conducting meetings and shall ensure all
decisions are consist with general statutes and all officially adopted plans



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.008  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS; REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATIONS BY BOARD.



   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall review, from time to time,
the existing regulations for the control of land subdivision in the city and
submit to the City Council its recommendations, if any, for the revision of
the regulations.  Additionally, the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall
review all applications for proposed major subdivisions for consistency with
city ordinance, general statute and make recommendations to the City Council.
In any instance where Planning and Zoning Appeals Board is granted by
ordinance the sole discretion in approval or denial of any aspect of
subdivision or development within the city said decisions shall be
quasi-judicial in nature and conducted by formal hearing. Any appeal of said
decisions shall be taken to Superior Court unless otherwise stated herein.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.009  PUBLIC PROPERTIES AND FACILITIES; REVIEW AND RECOMMENDATIONS BY
BOARD.



   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall review with the City
Manager and other city officials when requested and report as recommendations
to the City Council upon the extent, location, and design of all public
structures and facilities, on the acquisition and disposal of public
properties, on the establishment of building lines, mapped street lines, and
proposals to change existing street lines.  However, in the absence of a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board, the City Council
may, if it deems wise, after the expiration of 30 days from the date on which
the question has been submitted in writing to the Planning and Zoning Appeals
Board for review and recommendation, take final action.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.010  POWERS AND DUTIES AS A QUASI JUDICIAL REVIEW BOARD.



   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall have the following powers
and duties in conducting quasi-judicial hearings and making decisions on
applications for various items.



   (A)   Powers and duties. The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall
hear and decide requests for variances and appeals of decisions of
administrative officials charged with enforcement of the ordinance. As used
in this section, the term “decision” includes any final and binding
order, requirement, or determination. The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board
shall follow quasi-judicial procedures when deciding appeals and requests for
variances. The Board shall hear and decide all matters upon which it is
required to pass under any statute or ordinance that regulates land use or
development.



   (B)   Notice of hearing. Notice of hearings conducted pursuant to
this section shall be mailed to the person or entity whose appeal,
application, or request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the
property that is the subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the
hearing; to the owners of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land
that is the subject of the hearing; and to any other persons entitled to
receive notice as provided by the zoning or unified development ordinance. In
the absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may rely on the county tax
listing to determine owners of property entitled to mailed notice. The notice
must be deposited in the mail at least ten days, but not more than 25 days,
prior to the date of the hearing. Within that same time period, the city
shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the site that is the
subject of the hearing, or on an adjacent street or highway right-of-way.



   (C)   Variances.



      (1)   When unnecessary hardships would result from carrying
out the strict letter of a zoning ordinance, the Planning and Zoning Appeals
Board shall vary any of the provisions of the ordinance, upon a showing of
all of the following:



         (a)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict
application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that,
in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.



         (b)   The hardship results from conditions that are
peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships
resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from
conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not
be the basis for granting a variance.



         (c)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by
the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with
knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a
variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship.



         (d)   The requested variance is consistent with the
spirit, purpose, and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is
secured, and substantial justice is achieved.



      (2)   No change in permitted uses may be authorized by
variance. Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided
that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance. Any other
ordinance that regulates land use or development may provide for variances
consistent with the provisions of this division.



   (D)   Appeals. The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall hear and
decide appeals from decisions of administrative officials charged with
enforcement of the zoning or unified development ordinance, and may hear
appeals arising out of any other ordinance that regulates land use or
development, pursuant to all of the following:



      (1)   Any person who has standing under G.S. 160A-393(d) or
the city may appeal a decision to the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board. An
appeal is taken by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The notice
of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal.



      (2)   The official who made the decision shall give written
notice to the owner of the property that is the subject of the decision and
to the party who sought the decision, if different from the owner. The
written notice shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or
by first-class mail.



      (3)   The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt
of the written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person with
standing to appeal shall have 30 days from receipt from any source of actual
or constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.



      (4)   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with
standing to appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a
sign containing the words “Zoning Decision” or “Subdivision
Decision,” in letters at least six inches high, and identifying the means
to contact an official for information about the decision, is prominently
posted on the property that is the subject of the decision, provided the sign
remains on the property for at least ten days. Posting of signs is not the
only form of constructive notice. Any such posting shall be the
responsibility of the landowner or applicant. Verification of the posting
shall be provided to the official who made the decision. Absent an ordinance
provision to the contrary, posting of signs shall not be required.



      (5)   The official who made the decision shall transmit to the
Board all documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from is taken. The official shall also provide a copy of the
record to the appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject
of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner.



      (6)   An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement
order stays enforcement of the action appealed from, unless the official who
made the decision certifies to the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board, after
notice of appeal has been filed, that because of the facts stated in an
affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, or because
the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with
enforcement of the ordinance. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not
be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court. If
enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the
official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Planning
and Zoning Appeals Board shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after
the request is filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of decisions
granting a permit or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is
consistent with the ordinance shall not stay the further review of an
application for permits or permission to use such property; in these
situations the appellant may request and the Board may grant a stay of a
final decision on permit applications or building permits affected by the
issue being appealed.



      (7)   Subject to the provisions of division (D)(6), the
Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall hear and decide the appeal within a
reasonable time.



      (8)   The official who made the decision shall be present at
the hearing as a witness. The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing
to matters stated in the notice of appeal. If any party or the city would be
unduly prejudiced by the presentation of matters not presented in the notice
of appeal, the Board shall continue the hearing. The Planning and Zoning
Appeals Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
decision appealed from, and shall make any order, requirement, decision, or
determination that ought to be made. The Board shall have all the powers of
the official who made the decision.



      (9)   When hearing an appeal pursuant to G.S. 160A-400.9(e) or
any other appeal in the nature of certiorari, the hearing shall be based on
the record below and the scope of review shall be as provided in G.S.
160A-393(k).



      (10)   The parties to an appeal that has been made under this
division may agree to mediation or other forms of alternative dispute
resolution. The ordinance may set standards and procedures to facilitate and
manage such voluntary alternative dispute resolution.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.011  QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Oaths. The chair of the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board, his
or her designee, or any member acting as chair is authorized to administer
oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the Board. Any person who,
while under oath during a proceeding before the Board of Adjustment,
willfully swears falsely is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



   (B)   Quasi-judicial decisions and judicial review. The Board shall
determine contested facts and make its decision within a reasonable time.
Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent, material, and
substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision shall be
reduced to writing and reflect the Board's determination of contested facts
and their application to the applicable standards. The written decision shall
be signed by the chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. A
quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with
the Planning and Development Services Department assigned administrator of
the board. The decision of the Board shall be delivered by personal delivery,
electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property owner, and
to any person who has submitted a written request for a copy, prior to the
date the decision becomes effective. The person required to provide notice
shall certify that proper notice has been made.



   (C)   Voting.



      (1)   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board shall be
necessary to grant a variance. A majority of the members shall be required to
decide any other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an appeal made in the
nature of certiorari. For the purposes of this division, vacant positions on
the Board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial
matter shall not be considered members of the Board for calculation of the
requisite majority, if there are no qualified alternates available to take
the place of such members.



      (2)   A member of any Board exercising quasi-judicial
functions pursuant to this section shall not participate in or vote on any
quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons'
constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible
violations of due process include, but are not limited to, a member having a
fixed opinion that is not susceptible to change prior to hearing the matter,
undisclosed ex parte communications, a close familial, business, or other
associational relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest
in the outcome of the matter. If an objection is raised to a member's
participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the
remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.



   (D)   Subpoenas. The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board, through the
chair, or in the chair's absence anyone acting as chair, may subpoena
witnesses and compel the production of evidence. To request issuance of a
subpoena, persons with standing under G.S. 160A-393(d) may make a written
request to the chair, explaining why it is necessary for certain witnesses or
evidence to be compelled. The chair shall issue requested subpoenas he or she
determines to be relevant, reasonable in nature and scope, and not
oppressive. The chair shall rule on any motion to quash or modify a subpoena.
Decisions regarding subpoenas made by the chair may be appealed to the full
Planning and Zoning Appeals Board. If a person fails or refuses to obey a
subpoena issued pursuant to this division, the Planning and Zoning Appeals
Board or the party seeking the subpoena may apply to the General Court of
Justice for an order requiring that its subpoena be obeyed, and the Court
shall have jurisdiction to issue these orders after notice to all proper
parties.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.012  APPEALS FROM BOARD.



   Every quasi-judicial decision of the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board
shall be subject to review by the Superior Court by proceedings in the nature
of certiorari pursuant to G.S. 160A-393. A petition for review shall be filed
with the Clerk of Superior Court by the later of 30 days after the decision
is effective, or after a written copy thereof is given in accordance with
G.S. 160A-393(c)(1). When first-class mail is used to deliver notice, three
days shall be added to the time to file the petition.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.013 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   When considering appeals from the decision of the Building Inspector,
or other authorized agent, in the enforcement of §§ 90.45 through 90.66,
the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall follow all procedures contained
therein.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.014 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF WATERSHED ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall serve as the Watershed
Review Board and shall hear all appeals of the decisions of the Watershed
Administrator, or other authorized agents, in the enforcement of Chapter 94:
Watershed Areas. The Board shall follow all procedures contained therein
Chapter 94.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.015  PUBLIC HEARINGS; PUBLICITY; ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCES.



   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board may conduct public
hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the drafting,
establishment, and maintenance of the comprehensive plan. Before adopting any
plan, it shall hold at least one public hearing thereon.



   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall have power to
promote public interest in and an understanding of its recommendations, and
to that end it may publish and distribute copies of its recommendations and
may employ other means of publicity and education as it may determine.



   (C)   Individual members of the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board,
when duly authorized by the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board or its
Administrator, may attend planning conferences or meetings of planning
institutes or hearings upon pending planning legislation, and as allowed
within the Planning and Zoning Appeals Board's budget, may be compensated for
reasonable traveling expenses incident to attendance.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.016  ANNUAL REPORT; BUDGET.



   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board shall, on an annual or
semi-annual basis, submit in writing to the City Council a written report of
its activities, an analysis of the expenditures to date for the current
fiscal year, and for review and approval, its requested budget of funds
needed for operation during the ensuing fiscal year.



   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board is authorized to appoint
committees and employees, and to authorize expenditures, as it may see fit,
subject to limitations of funds provided for the Planning and Zoning Appeals
Board by the City Council in the city's annual budget.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.017 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.



   The Planning and Zoning Appeals Board may set up special committees to
assist it in the study of specific questions and problems.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



TREE COMMISSION



§ 21.030 PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the planting,
maintenance, and removal of trees (diseased and healthy) on municipally owned
public property and rights-of-way within the city and on municipally owned
property wherever located.  In order to protect and conserve trees on public
property and rights-of-way, this subchapter provides for the pruning,
treatment, and removal of trees and shrubs as is deemed necessary by the City
Council or a person acting under the authority of the City Council. This
subchapter is also intended to provide for the trimming or removal of trees
on public land when they obscure street lights, interfere with utility lines,
or constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or otherwise
endanger the public health, safety, or welfare.



   (B)   Another purpose of this subchapter is to encourage the
protection of trees and express the city's intent to use trees to create a
more natural and amenable human environment.  This would include the
protection of regulated (historic and heritage) trees.  This subchapter is
not intended to be punitive nor to cause hardship to any person who uses the
utmost care and diligence to protect trees within the city or on city
property.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



Cross-reference:



   Damaging trees and plants, see § 82.13



§ 21.031  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “CRITICAL ROOT PROTECTION ZONE.” Circular area surrounding tree.
The distance shall extend to the drip line and to a depth of five feet below
the ground.



   “DISEASED TREE.” A process in which fungi, bacteria, mycoplasmas,
and viruses are able to invade and infect trees, causing poor growth and weak
appearance, disruption of plant processes, distortion of certain tree parts,
and strain or death of a tree.



   “DRIP LINE.” A vertical line running through the outermost portions
of the tree crown extending to the ground.



   “EXISTING TREE CANOPY.” A tree canopy that has existed for at least
two years prior to development as evidenced by city or county aerial
photographs or a tree survey.



   “HERITAGE TREE.”  Any tree that is listed on the Champion Big
Trees of North Carolina List as compiled by the NC Division of Forestry
Resources, the American Forest Association's Champion Tree List, or any tree
that would measure 80% of the points of a tree on the North Carolina Big
Trees List.



   “HISTORIC TREE.” A tree that has been specifically designated by
the City Council to be historic.



   “IMPERVIOUS MATTER.” Building and structure footprints, areas of
pavement, compacted gravel, or other compacted areas that by their dense
nature do not allow the passage of sufficient oxygen and moisture to support
and sustain healthy root growth.



   “LARGE TREE.” Any tree over 50 feet at maturity.



   “MEDIUM TREE.” Any tree between 30 and 50 feet at maturity.



   “PARK TREES.” Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all woody vegetation in
public parks and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free
access as a park.



   “REGULATED TREE.” A tree that is located on private property and is
considered a “HERITAGE TREE” and/or a “HISTORIC TREE” under the
definitions stated above.



   “SMALL TREE.” Any tree under 30 feet at maturity.



   “SPECIMEN TREE(S).” A tree or group of trees considered to be
important community assets due to their unique or noteworthy characteristics
or values. A tree may be considered a “SPECIMEN TREE” based on its size,
age, rarity, or special historical or ecological significance as determined
by the Tree Commission. Examples include large hardwoods (e.g., oaks,
poplars, maples, etc.), and softwoods (e.g., pine species), in good or better
condition, with a diameter of 24 inches or greater, and smaller understory
trees (e.g., dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, persimmons, etc.), in good or
better condition, with a diameter of ten inches or greater.



   “STREET TREES.” Trees, landscaping shrubs, bushes, and all other
woody vegetation on land lying within right-of-way on either side of all
streets, avenues, or ways within the city.



   “UNSAFE TREE.” For a tree to be considered unsafe, one of the
following criteria must apply:



      (1)   A combination of a structural defect and a target.



         (a)   A structural defect that predisposes the tree to
failure (i.e., dead tree, trunk decay, dead branches, V-crotches; etc.); and



         (b)   A target such as a structure, road, walkway,
campsite, or other area where property exists or people reside. In urban
areas, target areas are almost always in close proximity to trees; or



      (2)   A tree that is otherwise structurally sound but which
interferes with the routine activities of people. Interferences include
obstructions, sight distance problems for motorists, buckling of sidewalks,
attracting lighting, or interference with utilities.



   “VEGETATION.” Any living plant or group of plants such as a tree,
shrub, or ground cover.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.032  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF CITY TREE COMMISSION.



   There is hereby created and established a City Tree Commission for the
city, which shall consist of nine members, citizens and residents of this
city, five of whom shall be appointed by the City Council.  The City
Manager, the Parks and Recreation Director, the Public Works Director, and
the Public Utilities Director shall also be ex-officio members of the
Commission.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.033  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the five persons to be appointed by the Council shall be
three years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the
first Tree Commission shall be for only one year, and the term of two members
of the first Commission shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy
shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed
for the unexpired portion of the term.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.034  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Tree Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.035  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Commission to
study, investigate, advise, formulate,  update annually, and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting,
removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in
other public areas. The master street plan shall specify the priorities,
standards, and species for tree planting within street rights-of-way and
other city property. All tree planting, maintenance and removal is to be in
accordance with the master street tree plan. Such plan will be presented
annually to the City Council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall
constitute the official comprehensive master street tree plan for the city. 
In formulating the master street tree plan, the Tree Commission will conduct
a tree survey of existing trees along streets and on city property within the
city.  Consideration shall be given to the existing and future utility and
environmental factors in recommending a specific species for each of the
streets and other city property.



   (B)   The Tree Commission shall be responsible for formulating an
official street tree species list and landscaping shrub species list.



   (C)   When requested by the City Council, the Tree Commission shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report, and recommend upon any special
matter of question coming within the scope of its work.



   (D)   The Tree Commission shall foster communication among the
citizens of the city that would provide the needed protection of trees within
the city.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.036  CITY JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The city shall review all applications for permits for any
planting, grading, removal, trimming, cutting, and/or replacement of trees
subject to this subchapter, and shall have the authority to grant or deny
permits and to attach reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit.
Permits are also required for all removal and replacement of regulated trees,
heritage trees, and historic trees. Permits should be obtained from the
Public Works Director.



   (B)   The Public Works Director shall have responsibility and
control over all trees and shrubbery planted or growing in or upon city
property except for city parks. The Public Works Director shall also have
responsibility and control over all regulated trees, unsafe trees, and
diseased trees located upon private property. The Parks and Recreation
Director shall have equivalent responsibility of all trees in city parks.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.037  OPERATION.



   The Tree Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations and keep a journal of its proceedings.  A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.038  INTERFERENCE WITH TREE COMMISSION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Tree Commission, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about
the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any
street trees, park trees, or trees on public grounds, as authorized in this
subchapter.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.039  STREET TREE SPECIES/LANDSCAPING SHRUB SPECIES.



   (A)   Trees. No trees other than those included in the following
street tree species list may be planted as street trees without permission of
the City Manager or his duly appointed agent(s). The street tree species list
is comprised of three size classes based on mature height: small, medium, and
large trees. The list of recommended trees shall be updated periodically to
reflect new developments or species that affect the population of the
community forest. The purpose, size and shape of the species at maturity
should be considered before planting. Efforts should be made to ensure a
sufficient diversity of tree species. The following is a list of recommended
trees by common name:



      (1)   Canopy - Large.



         (a)   Red Maple;



         (b)   Sugar Maple;



         (c)   White Pine;



         (d)   Willow Oak;



         (e)   Water Oak;



         (f)   Red Oak;



         (g)   White Oak;



         (h)   Hickory;



         (i)   Yellow Poplar (Tulip Tree);



         (j)   American Elm; and



         (k)   Sycamore.



      (2)   Medium.



         (a)   American Holly;



         (b)   Post Oak;



         (c)   Black Locust (medium to large);



         (d)   River Birch;



         (e)   European White Birch; and



         (f)   Carolina Silverbell.



      (3)   Small.



         (a)   Red Mulberry; and



         (b)   Japanese Maple.



      (4)   For Spring Color-Small.



         (a)   Flowering Dogwood;



         (b)   Redbud;



         (c)   Flowering Crabapple;



         (d)   Purple-Leaf Plum; and



         (e)   Japanese Cherry.



      (5)   For Summer Color-Small. Crepe Myrtle.



      (6)   For Fall Color-Large. Ginkgo (male variety).



      (7)   For Fall Color-Small. Purple Leaf Plum (Spring to
Fall-Purple Foliage).



   (B)   Shrubs. The following is a sample list of recommended
landscaping shrubs by common name:



      (1)   Maple leaf Viburnum;



      (2)   Purple Beautyberry;



      (3)   Flowering Quince;



      (4)   Hedge Cotoneaster;



      (5)   Fragrant Sumac;



      (6)   Azalea;



      (7)   Japanese Barberry;



      (8)   Carolina Allspice;



      (9)   Sargents Chinese Juniper;



      (10)   Rug Juniper;



      (11)   Nandina;



      (12)   Japanese Holly;



      (13)   Laurel cherry;



      (14)   Rhododendron; and



      (15)   Camellia.



   (C)   Recommended species. The list of recommended street tree
species/landscaping shrub species shall be available to residents of the city
upon request to aid in the selection of trees for private properties.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.040  TREE SPACING AND PLANTING REQUIREMENTS.



   The Tree Commission shall be responsible for establishing guidelines
for the planting of trees, including street trees (i.e., trees, landscaping,
shrubs, bushes, and other woody vegetation), in accordance with the three
species size classes.  These guidelines will cover spacing between trees,
the distance street trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and
sidewalks, the distance street trees may be planted from any street corner,
the location of trees relative to overhead and underground water line, sewer
line, transmission lines, or other utility, and any other areas involving the
spacing of street trees, park trees, or city-owned trees.



   (A)   Tree spacing.



      (1)   The spacing of trees will be in accordance with the
three species size classes, and no trees may be planted closer together than
the following:



         (a)   Small trees, 15 feet;



         (b)   Medium trees, 25 feet; and



         (c)   Large trees, 35 feet.



      (2)   Exceptions are in special plantings designed and
approved by the Tree Commission.



   (B)   Distances and clearance for tree planting.



      (1)   Street trees may be planted in the tree lawn only if
enough space is allowed for mature growth. Street trees shall be planted no
closer to any curb or sidewalk than two feet for small trees, and three feet
for medium trees or large trees.



      (2)   No street tree shall be planted within 35 feet of any
street corner, measured from the point of interest intersecting curbs or curb
lines.



      (3)   No street tree shall be planted within ten feet of any
fireplug.



      (4)   No street trees other than those species accepted as
small trees by the Tree Commission may be planted under, or within ten feet
of, any utility wire, or within five lateral feet of any underground water
line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.041 PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and
remove any tree, plant, or shrub whose trunk is located wholly or partially
within the lines of any street, alley, avenue, lane, square, or public
grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or
enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.



   (B)   The Tree Commission, Public Works Department, Parks and
Recreation Department, and Public Utilities Department may remove or cause or
order to be removed, any publicly owned tree or part thereof which is in an
unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers,
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements,
or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section
does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners,
providing that the selection and location of said trees is approved by the
Tree Commission.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.042  CITY PROPERTY AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   Trimming, pruning, planting, and removal of trees on city
property or rights-of-way; permit required.



      (1)   No person shall remove, destroy, cut, prune (including
the root system) or otherwise treat any tree or shrub having its trunk, or a
portion thereof, in or upon any city property or street right-of-way, or
contract with another person to perform such acts, without first obtaining a
written permit from the Public Works Director or his/her duly appointed
agents.



      (2)   No person shall plant or contract with another to plant
any tree or shrubbery on any city property, without first obtaining a permit
from the Public Works Director. In addition to obtaining a permit, a planting
plan must be submitted. All planting plans on city property must show the
following:



         (a)   The proposed street width, with its subdivision of
pavement, curb, gutter, parking strip and sidewalk areas to scale.



         (b)   The location of underground and overhead
utilities, all poles and posts, to scale.



         (c)   The proposed location of each and every proposed
tree and shrubbery, together with existing trees, shrubberies, and vegetation
within the street right-of-way in scaled relation to the other features of
the plan.



         (d)   The variety and size of each and every tree and
shrubbery proposed to be planted and of those already existing.



         (e)   The distance in feet between the tree and
shrubbery in any one row.



         (f)   The nature of the soil in the planting space to a
depth of three feet and all existing and proposed surface and subsurface
drainage system.



      (3)   All written statements filed in lieu of a planting plan
shall contain the same information required on the planting plan, except in
the case of persons not involved in planned development and who desire to
perform small-scale landscaping plantings on city property. In such a case, a
simple letter of intent, outlining the location, method, and materials, may
be substituted.



      (4)   Public and private utilities shall submit written
specifications for pruning and trenching operations to the city for approval.
Upon approval of its specifications, a utility shall not be required to
obtain a permit for routine trenching and pruning operations affecting trees
or shrubs having their trunks on public streets or city property so long as
such work is done in strict accordance with approved specifications by the
Public Works Director. A utility is required to obtain a permit to remove any
tree or shrubbery on city property.



   (B)   Injuring trees or shrubbery.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except with written
permit, to place or maintain upon the ground in any public street or city
property any compacted stone, cement, or other impervious matter or substance
in such a manner as may obstruct the free access of air and water to the
roots of any tree or shrub in any such street or place. This provision shall
not apply to the paving, repairing or altering of the public streets,
sidewalks and other public places by the city.



      (2)   No person shall perform or contract with another to
perform construction work (including the operation or storage of equipment or
materials) within the critical root protection zone of any tree having its
trunk or any portion thereof on any public street or city property without
first obtaining a permit from the city and complying with requirements, which
may include erection of protective barricades or enclosures at designated
locations.



      (3)   No person shall attach any object, including but not
limited to, rope, wire, chain, sign, nail, to any tree or shrubbery in or
upon city property or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of
such tree or shrubbery, except for the purpose of protecting it or the public.



      (4)   No person shall damage, cut, or carve any tree or shrub
having all or any portion of its trunk in or upon public property.



   (C)   Authority to treat or remove trees or shrubbery.



      (1)   Removal of trees shall be selectively carried out and no
permit shall be issued unless one of the following conditions exists:



         (a)   The tree or shrub is located where structures,
utilities, lawn areas or other improvements are to be placed, and removing
such tree(s) is essential for the proper development of the tract and the
relocation of the tree is not feasible.



         (b)   The tree or shrub is dead, diseased, injured, is
causing disruption of public utility service, is causing drainage or passage
problems upon rights-of-way, poses a threat to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or conflicts with ordinances, or regulations not otherwise suspended
herein.



         (c)   The removal of the tree or shrub is necessary and
desirable in order to enhance or benefit the health or condition of other
trees.



      (2)   If any tree or shrub on city property right-of-way is to
be removed during construction, including new construction, repair, or
rehabilitation, an application for a tree removal permit shall be submitted
with the application for site plan approval or the application for a zoning
permit.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.043  PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   (1)   Upon request, the Tree Commission may act as an
advisory board in advising private property owners concerning planting and
maintenance on private property. However, the Tree Commission shall have no
authority to regulate on private property, with the exception of regulated
(historic and/or heritage) trees, and/or dead, diseased or damaged trees. The
following factor(s) may be a basis upon which the Public Works Director may
deny a permit to remove a regulated tree:



         (a)   Where there exists no current plan to develop the
property;



         (b)   The planned development can be constructed without
removing the regulated tree;



         (c)   The purpose for removal can be accomplished with
less drastic results;



         (d)   The health of the tree;



         (e)   The proposal for replacement of the regulated tree;



         (f)   Any other factors reasonably related to the tree.



      (2)   The Public Works Director may attach reasonable
conditions to the removal.



   (B)   The city shall have no responsibility to trim or maintain
trees located on private property, with the exception that the Public
Utilities Department may trim or remove trees that interfere with
primary-voltage electric power lines.



   (C)   Trees, shrubbery flowers, bushes, or vegetation standing in or
upon any lot or land abutting city property, and having branches, limbs,
trunks, or other parts projecting onto city property, shall be maintained by
the owner of the property on which such are growing, so as not to interfere
with the free and safe passage along the city right-of-way by pedestrians and
vehicular traffic. If the owner of such property does not keep this growth
from projecting onto city property, the Public Works Director may order its
removal at the expense of the property owner.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.044  PROTECTION OF TREES.



   In order to maintain the overall forest/canopy, reasonable efforts
shall be made to replace trees that are removed and to protect the quality of
trees that are endangered. Trees removed by decision of the city or by
natural causes shall be replaced somewhere in the forest/canopy on a
one-for-one basis within one year. The Tree Commission shall determine the
location and species of any replacement tree.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.045  PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION.



   Any person who is erecting, repairing, altering or removing any
building or structure shall place a guard or protector around any tree on
public property so as to prevent injury to such tree. If these activities
require the trimming, pruning, or removal of any tree located on public
property, a written permit shall be obtained.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.046  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful as normal practice, except as described below, for
any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or
other tree on public property.  “TOPPING” is defined as the severe
cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within
the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or
certain trees that interfere with or are an imminent threat to utility wires
or other obstructions, where other pruning practices are impractical, may be
exempted from this subchapter at the determination of the Tree Commission.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.047 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.048  REVIEW BY CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and
decisions of the Tree Commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or
order of the Tree Commission to the City Council who may hear the matter and
make a final decision.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.049  PENALTY.



   Violations of this subchapter shall be subject to the civil penalties
set forth in §§ 10.80 and 10.84.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



PUBLIC HOUSING ADVISORY BOARD



§ 21.060  ESTABLISHMENT; DESIGNATION.



   There is hereby established a Public Housing Advisory Board for the
city, which is hereafter referred to as the “Housing Advisory Board.”



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.061  MEMBERSHIP AND VACANCIES.



   The Housing Advisory Board shall consist of nine members, three of whom
shall be Public Housing residents, two of whom shall be Section 8 Housing
Assistance Payment participants, and four of whom shall be at-large residents
of the city. Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Council for
overlapping terms of three years. The Council shall in August 1990 organize
the Board and designate by motion the members and their respective terms so
that three members shall be appointed for a three-year term, three members
shall be appointed for a two-year term, and three members shall be appointed
to serve until July 31, 1991. Thereafter each year in July, the proper number
of Board members shall be appointed or reappointed for three years. Housing
Advisory Board members may be reappointed for successive terms, but in no
case shall a member be reappointed to serve more than a total of nine years,
including any partial terms served for a previous member. Any vacancy in the
membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
initial appointment. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed
for any expenses incurred while representing the Board.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.062  ORGANIZATION; RULES; RECORDS; MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Housing Advisory Board shall elect a Chairperson, who
shall have full voting privileges, and create and fill any offices as it may
determine.  The term of the Chairperson and other officers shall be one
year, with eligibility for re-election.



   (B)   The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of its business
and shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions,
discussions, findings, and recommendations, which record shall be a public
record.



   (C)   Meetings shall be open to the public. There shall be a quorum
of five members for the purpose of taking any official action required by
this subchapter.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.063  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Housing Advisory Board in general to do the
following:



   (A)   Review and recommend to City Council public housing in
accordance with HUD regulation and within the budgetary and service levels
authorized by the Council, regarding terms of lease, occupancy, late rent
fees, pet policy, resident transfers, and other applicable regulations.



   (B)   Assess and update the public housing needs of the community
and alert the Council, to changes in these needs.



   (C)   Serve as liaison with the public housing residents'
organization.  Provide time at each meeting for a report from the residents'
organization and remarks by any resident.  Hold an annual meeting with
residents to hear needs, concerns, complaints, and ideas.



   (D)   Recommend a tenant grievance policy, in accordance with HUD
regulations, for the Council's consideration and adoption. Serve as grievance
panel for those tenant grievances not settled at the staff level. Tenants
shall retain the right to appeal Housing Board decisions directly to the City
Council.



   (E)   Advise the Council with respect to public housing funding
needs at the beginning of the budget cycle, and make recommendations to the
Council regarding the recommended budget and fiscal policies.



   (F)   Work with other human service organizations in the community,
coordinate services to residents of public housing, and help assure that
residents are provided with social services to which they are entitled.



   (G)   Advise the Council regarding affordable housing initiatives,
programs, and services.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



COMMUNITY APPEARANCE COMMISSION



§ 21.075  CREATION AND PURPOSE.



   There is hereby created and established pursuant to the provisions of
G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 7, a commission for the purpose of initiating,
promoting and assisting in the implementation of general community
beautification in the city. The City of Albemarle Historic Resources
Commission, its members and officers, shall hereafter serve the role of such
commission, incorporating all actions and duties assigned to that commission
into its operations. The Commission shall be advisory in its role of
appearance commission and shall not make any rulings of a quasi-judicial
nature outside of the separate duties assigned to it as a historic
preservation body.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.076  POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.



   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To make studies of the visual characteristics and problems of
the city, including surveys and inventories of an appropriate nature, and to
recommend standards and policies of design for the entire area, any portion
or neighborhood thereof, or any project to be undertaken;



   (B)   To initiate, promote and assist in the implementation of
programs of general community beautification in the city;



   (C)   To seek to coordinate the activities of individuals, agencies,
and organizations, public and private, whose plans, activities and programs
bear upon the appearance of the city;



   (D)   To provide leadership and guidance in matters of area or
community design and appearance to individuals, and to public and private
organizations and agencies;



   (E)   To prepare both general and specific plans for the improved
appearance of the city. These plans may include the entire area or any part
thereof, and may include private as well as public property. The plans shall
set forth desirable standards and goals for the aesthetic enhancement of the
city or any part thereof within its area of planning and zoning jurisdiction,
including public ways and areas, open spaces, and public and private
buildings and projects;



   (F)   To request from the proper officials of any public agency or
body, including agencies of the state and its political subdivisions, its
plans for public buildings, facilities, or projects to be located within the
city or its area of planning and zoning jurisdiction;



   (G)   To review these plans and to make recommendations regarding
their aesthetic suitability to the appropriate agency, or to the Planning
Board or City Council. All plans shall be reviewed by the Commission in a
prompt and expeditious manner, and all recommendations of the Commission with
regard to any public projects shall be made in writing. Copies of the
recommendations shall be transmitted promptly to the Planning Board or City
Council and to the appropriate agency;



   (H)   To formulate and recommend to the City Council the adoption or
amendment of ordinances (including the zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, and other local ordinances regulating the use of property) that
will, in the opinion of the Commission, serve to enhance the appearance of
the city and its surrounding areas;



   (I)   To direct the attention of city officials to needed
enforcement of any ordinance that may in any way affect the appearance of the
city;



   (J)   To seek voluntary adherence to the standards and policies of
its plans;



   (K)   To enter, in the performance of its official duties and at
reasonable times, upon private lands with the property owner's permission,
and make examinations or surveys;



   (L)   To promote public interest in and an understanding of its
recommendations, studies and plans, and to that end, to prepare, publish and
distribute to the public such studies and reports as will, in the opinion of
the Commission, advance the cause of improved municipal appearance;



   (M)   To conduct public meetings and hearings, giving reasonable
notice to the public thereof.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.077  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Commission shall, no later than April 15 of each year, submit to
the City Council a written report of its activities, a statement of its
expenditures to date for the current fiscal year, and its requested budget
for the next fiscal year.  All accounts and funds of the Commission shall be
administered substantially in accordance with the requirements of the Local
Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.078  ADVISORY COUNCIL AND COMMITTEES.



   The Commission may establish an advisory council or temporary or
permanent committees needed to assist in the study of specific questions and
problems, when, in the judgment of the Commission, it shall not delegate to
such advisory council or committees any of its official powers.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.079  STAFF AND TECHNICAL SERVICES.



   The Commission may recommend to the City Council suitable arrangements
for the procurement or provision of staff or technical services for the
Commission.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.080  RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES OF FUNDS.



   The Commission may receive contributions from private agencies,
foundations, and organizations, for its use by the City Council. It may
accept and disburse these funds for any purpose within the scope of its
authority and as herein specified.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.081  AGENCY FUNDS.



   (A)   The City Finance Director is hereby directed to establish a
Community Appearance Commission Fund.



   (B)   All monies raised through fund drives by the Commission and
the disbursements of those monies shall be accounted for in this fund.



   (C)   All receipts of funds by the Commission during fiscal year
1996 and subsequent fiscal years shall be accounted for in this fund.



   (D)   Copies shall be made of this section and provided to the
Finance Director for direction in carrying out this section.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



GREENWAY COMMISSION



§ 21.095  ESTABLISHMENT; DESIGNATION.



   There is hereby established a commission, which shall serve as an
advisory body to the City Council and city staff through the Parks and
Recreation Department, for the purpose of assisting in the promotion and
development of a greenway system for the city.  The City of Albemarle Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board, its members and officers, shall hereafter
serve the role of the Albemarle Greenway Commission, incorporating all
actions and duties assigned to that Board into its operations.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.096  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the appointed board or commission, in general,
to do the following:



   (A)   Study and make recommendations to the City Council for
possible implementation locations.



   (B)   Educate the general public about the city's greenway program.



   (C)   Provide assistance necessary to help promote the development
of the greenway in accordance with the master plan approved by the City
Council.



   (D)   Review and make recommendations to the City Council for
approval of development tracts which involve the dedication of a component of
the city's greenway system.



   (E)   Seek sponsors and grants to help develop the greenway system
in accordance with said master plan of development.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.097  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The appointed board or commission shall, in March of each year, submit
in writing to the City Council, a written report of its activities for the
preceding year and its plans for the subsequent year.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.098  SPECIAL COMMITTEES.



   The appointed board or commission may set up special committees to
assist it in the study of specific questions and problems, and to carry out
activities authorized by the Commission to promote the education of the
public and to enhance their participation and enjoyment of the greenway
system.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD



§ 21.110  CREATION AND PURPOSE.



   There is hereby created and established pursuant to the provisions of
G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 18, Sec. 354, the City of Albemarle Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board, hereinafter referred to as the “Advisory Board,” for the
purpose of providing guidance to the governing authorities of the City of
Albemarle and its and parks and recreation staff  in the development of
programs, special events,  activities,  and departmental facilities; to
provide means for communities and neighborhoods in the city to be represented
in the administrative,  managerial,  programming  and planning processes
of the Parks and Recreation Department; to facilitate the inclusion of public
opinion in the process of planning, development, and implementing
departmental policies, procedures, and practices; and to serve as an
advocate  for parks and recreation in the processes of public planning,
funding and administration. The Advisory Board shall also serve the role of
the former Albemarle Greenway Commission, incorporating all actions and
duties assigned to that commission into its operations.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.111  MEMBERSHIP AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Advisory Board shall consist of members residing in the
corporate limits of the City of Albemarle, and up to two members residing
from outside Albemarle corporate limits in Stanly County. Members shall
exemplify and take an active interest in Albemarle parks and recreation
through involvement in programs and use of parks and other departmental
facilities. Additionally, where possible, appointments shall be made in such
a manner as to maintain on the Board at all times a majority of members who
have experience with and knowledge of greenways, greenway planning, land
acquisition and development.



   (B)   The Advisory Board shall be composed of nine to eleven members
appointed as follows:



      (1)   One member from each of the four Council (Electoral)
Districts in the city appointed by the City Council;



      (2)   Five to seven members appointed by the City Council at
large.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.112  TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Members shall be appointed to three-year, staggered terms.



   (B)   Initially, appointments to the Advisory Board for Council
(Electoral) Districts 1 and 3 shall be for the term expiring June 30, 2018;
appointments for Council (Electoral) Districts 2 and 4 shall be for the term
expiring June 30, 2019.



   (C)   Initially, Council shall appoint at-large members to the
Advisory Board, with one member to a term expiring June 30, 2019; one member
to a term expiring June 30, 2018; and three members to a term expiring June
30, 2017.



   (D)   As each term expires, the position shall be filled for an
additional three-year period ending on June 30, regardless of date of
appointment. Members may succeed themselves.



   (E)   No member shall serve more than two subsequent whole terms in
their entirety without at least a one-year hiatus between appointments.
However, a member may continue to serve indefinitely at the end of a term
until a replacement is appointed by Council.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.113  MEETINGS.



   An annual calendar of regularly scheduled meetings shall be created and
approved in advance of future meetings and kept current by the Advisory Board
and its staff. Special meetings may be called by the chairman of the Board as
needed, upon two days prior notice.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



HISTORIC RESOURCES COMMISSION



§ 21.125  ESTABLISHMENT AND JURISDICTION.



   There is hereby established a Commission which shall be known as the
Albemarle Historic Resources Commission. Its jurisdiction shall include the
City of Albemarle and the extraterritorial jurisdiction area of the city as
shown on the official zoning map of the city. The Commission shall also serve
the role of the former Albemarle Community Appearance Commission,
incorporating all actions and duties assigned to that commission.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.126  MEMBERSHIP AND QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of at least seven members but no
more than 12 members.



      (1)   All members of the Commission shall reside within the
territorial jurisdiction of the City of Albemarle.



      (2)   In addition, the members of the Historic Resources
Commission shall have demonstrated special interest, experience or education
in history, architecture, archaeology, landscape design, horticulture, city
planning or a closely related field. The members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the City Council.



      (3)   Commissioners may be reappointed for additional terms at
the discretion of the City Council.



   (B)   (1)   The Historic Resources Commission shall annually
elect from among its members a chairman, vice-chairman and treasurer.



      (2)   A staff member of the Planning Department may be
appointed to serve as a secretary or an administrative advisor for the
Commission.



      (3)   The Commission may appoint advisory bodies and
committees as appropriate.



   (C)   The Commission shall serve without compensation except that
they may be reimbursed for actual expenses incident to the performance of
their duties within the limits of any funds available to the Commission.



   (D)   Beginning July 1, 2012, or as soon thereafter as it deems
appropriate, the City Council shall appoint the Historic Resources
Commissioners as follows:



      (1)   From one to four Commissioners shall be appointed for an
initial term of three years;



      (2)   From one to four Commissioners shall be appointed for an
initial term of two years; and



      (3)   From one to four Commissioners shall be appointed for an
initial term of one year.



   (E)   Thereafter, following the initial term of the Commissioners so
appointed, the City Council shall appoint or re-appoint the Commissioners
upon the expiration of their initial term for a term of three years.



   (F)   If new seats are added, the term of those seats shall be
scheduled so as meet the above requirements.



   (G)   (1)   There shall be no more than four seats with terms
expiring in the same year.



      (2)   No member shall serve more than two subsequent whole
terms in their entirety without at least a one year hiatus from the
Commission.



      (3)   However, a member may continue to serve indefinitely
until a replacement is appointed by Council.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.127 RULES OF PROCEDURE, DESIGN GUIDELINES AND MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Historic Resources Commission shall develop and adopt
rules of procedure which shall govern the conduct of its business in
accordance with the provisions of this section.



      (1)   Such rules of procedure shall also include as an
appendix “The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and
Illustrated Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings” and the
“Historic District Design Guidelines,” including photographs,
illustrations, descriptions and other similar material interpreting the
criteria for determining appropriateness.



      (2)   The design guidelines shall be placed on file in the
city offices and made available to the general public during the regular city
office business hours.



   (B)   Specific provisions shall be made in the Commission's rules of
procedure for Commission meetings following the filing of a proposal on which
the Commission is required to pass. Such specific provisions shall be made in
order that a proposal be brought before the Commission:



      (1)   Within a reasonable time;



      (2)   In a manner conducive to Commission consideration; and



      (3)   In a manner which will facilitate commission action.



   (C)   The Commission shall meet at regularly scheduled times and at
such other times as the Commission may determine, or at the call of its
chairman, as provided for in its rules of procedure.



   (D)   The Commission shall follow the requirements of § 92.085(B)
when making recommendations and rulings on historic properties and
alterations thereto.



   (E)   The Commission may hold discussions at meetings related to
both historic preservation and community appearance capacities, provided that
there is adjournment of the discussion of official business between the two.



   (F)   Any official action of the Commission shall require shall
require a quorum to be present.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



§ 21.128  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers of the Historic Resources Commission shall be to:



   (A)   Undertake an inventory of properties of historical,
architectural, archaeological, and/or cultural significance.



   (B)   Recommend to the City Council districts or areas to be
designated in the ordinance as historic districts within the city and its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction.



   (C)   Recommend to the City Council that designation of any district
or area as a historic district or part thereof be revoked or removed for just
cause.



   (D)   Recommend to the City Council individual structures,
buildings, sites, areas or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic
landmarks.



   (E)   Recommend to City Council that designation of any building,
structure, site, area or object as a historic property be revoked or removed.



   (F)   Conduct an educational program with respect to historic
properties and districts within its jurisdiction.



   (G)   Publish information about, or otherwise inform the owners of
property within the historic district or of designated historic landmarks, of
any matters pertinent to its duties, organization, procedures,
responsibilities, functions or requirements.



   (H)   Cooperate with the state, Federal and local governments in
pursuance of the purposes of this section. The City Council, or the
Commission when authorized by the City Council, may contract with the State
of North Carolina or the United States of America, or any agency of either,
or with any other organization, provided the terms are not inconsistent with
state or Federal law, for services or funds.



   (I)   Recommend to the City Council and the State of North Carolina
structures, sites, objects or districts worthy of national, state or local
recognition.



   (J)   Communicate with other boards or commissions or agencies of
the city or other governmental units to offer or request assistance, aid,
guidance, or advice concerning matters under its purview or of mutual
interest.



   (K)   Consider and act upon applications for certificates of
appropriateness in accordance with division (F) of § 92.085(B).



   (L)   Act as, establish or designate a group, body or committee to
give advice to property owners concerning the treatment of the historical and
visual characteristics of their properties, such as fenestration,
architectural and landscape features. The group shall act in a strictly
advisory capacity to property owners, and shall abstain from offering
recommendations outside of advertised meetings of the Commission prior to the
Commission's decision on any application(s) for a certificate of
appropriateness for proposed work on the property.



   (M)   Conduct public hearings on applications for certificates of
appropriateness where the Commission deems that such a hearing is necessary.



   (N)   Establish guidelines under which the city staff may approve
applications for certificates of appropriateness for minor modifications of
historic properties or building structures or sites in a historic district on
behalf of the Commission, provided no application shall be denied by the
staff without first being considered by the Commission.



   (O)   Undertake programs of information, research, or analysis
relating to any matters under its purview.



   (P)   Report violations of this section or of related ordinances,
such as the zoning ordinance and the building code, to the Building Inspector
or other authorized city staff for their investigation and enforcement as
needed.



   (Q)   Take steps during the period of postponement of demolition of
any historic property to ascertain what the City Council can or may do to
preserve such properties, including consultation with private civic groups,
interested private citizens and other public boards or agencies, including
investigation of potential acquisition by the city when the preservation of a
given historic property is clearly in the interest of the general welfare of
the community, and such property is of certain historic, architectural and
archaeological significance.



   (R)   Assist city staff in obtaining the services of private
consultants to aid in carrying out programs of research or analysis.



   (S)   Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as
are required elsewhere by this section, the General Statutes of North
Carolina or by the City of Albemarle.



(Ord. 18-30, passed 9-4-18)



CHAPTER 22:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



Meetings and Procedures



   22.01   Regular meetings



   22.02   Special meetings



   22.03   Adjourned meetings



   22.04   Order of business



   22.05   Robert's Rules of Order



   22.06   Special business takes precedence



   22.07   Committees



   22.08   Voting by ballot at elections



Ordinances



   22.15   Procedure; form; publication



   22.16   Official copy



   22.17   Amending or replacing current ordinances; title of new
ordinance



   22.18   Repeal or ordainment of parts of code



   22.19   Ordinance book



MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES



§ 22.01  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   City Council shall hold its regular meetings on the first and third
Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. of the standard of time that is then in
effect, or at that same standard of time at such other day as to which the
City Council shall hold its regular meeting(s) in the event that a first or
third Monday shall be a city holiday.



('58 Code, §2-16) (Am. Ord. 87-41, passed 12-21-87; Am. Ord. 09-10, passed
4-20-09; Am. Ord. 12-28, passed 8-20-12; Am. Ord. 13-50, passed 12-16-13)



§ 22.02  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Mayor or by any
two council members, and notice thereof shall be given as provided by law.



('58 Code, § 2-17)



§ 22.03  ADJOURNED MEETINGS.



   Any regular or special meeting of the Council and any adjourned meeting
thereof may adjourn to such time prior to the next regular meeting date as
may be fixed by the Council, and no special notice shall be required for the
adjourned meeting.



§ 22.04  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The order of business at all regular meetings of the Council shall be
adopted at its official organizational meeting.  The procedure may be
amended by Council at any regular meeting.



§ 22.05  ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.



   Except where otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the procedure of
business of the Council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order.



('58 Code, § 2-23)



§ 22.06  SPECIAL BUSINESS TAKES PRECEDENCE.



   If the Council directs any matter to be the special business of a
future meeting, the matter shall have precedence over all other business at
the meeting.



('58 Code, § 2-24)



§ 22.07  COMMITTEES.



   Council may appoint committees of its own members, and others as the
circumstances indicate, for special purpose study and recommendation.  Such
committees shall not have authority to take official action unless
specifically designated by Council in the appointing or subsequent motion.



§ 22.08  VOTING BY BALLOT AT ELECTIONS.



   All elections by the Council shall be by ballot and a majority of the
votes of all members present shall be necessary for an election; provided,
this requirement of voting by ballot may be suspended by a majority vote of
the council members.



('58 Code, § 2-26)



ORDINANCES



§ 22.15  PROCEDURE; FORM; PUBLICATION.



   Every ordinance amending or repealing any ordinance, and every new
ordinance shall be proposed in writing, shall be approved as to form by the
city attorney, and shall be signed by the council member introducing it.



('58 Code, § 2-28)



§ 22.16  OFFICIAL COPY.



   A true copy of an ordinance, which has been duly enacted by the
Council, signed by the Mayor, and attested to by the Clerk, shall be known as
an official copy of any ordinance of the city.  All ordinances or a true
copy thereof shall be reprinted and inserted in this code.



('58 Code, § 2-33)



§ 22.17  AMENDING OR REPLACING CURRENT ORDINANCE; TITLE OF NEW ORDINANCE.



   (A)   An ordinance proposed to add to or replace provisions of a
current ordinance of the city shall set out: the words, section, or sections
proposed to be stricken out and those to be inserted in; and the paragraph as
it would stand if so amended, if necessary to a clear understanding of the
amendment.



   (B)    The title of the new ordinance shall contain the entire title
of the ordinance amended thereby.



§ 22.18  REPEAL OR ORDAINMENT OF PARTS OF CODE.



   Whenever a chapter, article, or section of this code is repealed, the
Clerk shall make a notation of the repeal.  Whenever a new chapter, article,
or section of this code is ordained, the Clerk shall make a notation of the
new ordinance.  After the enactment of all ordinances, the ordinances shall
be printed in the format of this code and inserted in the appropriate places
herein.



§ 22.19  ORDINANCE BOOK.



   In accordance with state law, the Clerk shall maintain a file or book
entitled an "ordinance book," separate and apart from the minute book, in
which ordinances shall be kept until that time as they are printed and
inserted in this code.



Statutory reference:



   Code of ordinances, GS 160A-77; ordinance book requirements, GS
160A-78; pleading and proving of town ordinances, GS 160A-79



CHAPTER 23:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 24:  PERSONNEL



   Chapter 24 is repealed as of July 5, 2015, pursuant to the personnel
resolution of the council adopted that date.  Said personnel resolution is
on file and available in the office of the City Clerk.



CHAPTER 25:  MUNICIPAL TAXES



Section



   25.01   Motor vehicle taxes



§ 25.01 MOTOR VEHICLE TAXES.



   (A)   The city desires to establish a general motor vehicle use tax
of $5 for vehicles registered within the corporate limits.



   (B)   The municipal vehicle taxes assessed and levied annually under
this section shall be collected, credited, used and be in such maximum
amount(s) as authorized by G.S. 20-97, (a) through (e) inclusive, as of July
1, 2015, and as thereafter amended by the North Carolina General Assembly and
as enacted into law from time to time.



(Ord. 15-21, passed 6-15-15)



TITLE III:  PUBLIC SAFETY



   Chapter



      30.   LAW ENFORCEMENT



      31.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



      32.   EMERGENCIES



      33.   CURFEW FOR MINORS



CHAPTER 30: LAW ENFORCEMENT



Section



   30.01   Composition of Police Department



   30.02   Police officer's duties



   30.03   Supervision of Department



   30.04   Summoning aid



   30.05   Entering without warrant



   30.06   Wearing uniform required



   30.07   Interfering with police



   30.08   Auxiliary police



   30.09   ABC permits



   30.10   Homeland Security Director



§ 30.01  COMPOSITION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   The Police Department of the city shall consist of a Chief of Police
and officers of designated grades as the City Council deems necessary.



('58 Code,  § 11-3)



§ 30.02  POLICE OFFICER'S DUTIES.



   The police officers of the city shall do the following.



   (A)   Preserve the public peace, prevent crimes, detect offenders,
and suppress riots and unlawful gatherings which obstruct free passage on the
public streets, sidewalks, parks, and public places.



   (B)   Protect the rights of persons and property.



   (C)   Guard the public health.



   (D)   Preserve order at elections and all public meetings and
assemblages.



   (E)   Regulate the movement of vehicles in the streets, bridges,
parks, public squares, and highways.



   (F)   Provide proper traffic and crowd control at fires.



   (G)   Carefully observe and inspect all places of public amusement
and all places of business having license to carry on the business, and
suppress and restrain all unlawful and disorderly conduct or practices
therein.



   (H)   Enforce penalties for the violation of state and federal laws,
the provisions of this code and ordinances of the city.



   (I)   Arrest all persons guilty of violating any law or any
provision of this code or any ordinance.



   (J)   Prevent as far as possible any injury to property and
buildings, streets, and sidewalks.



   (K)   Report to the Chief of Police any repairs needed to any public
property.



   (L)   Summon as many persons as may be necessary to assist them in
the duties herein outlined.



   (M)   Survey all parts of the city at reasonable intervals.



   (N)   Be civil and pleasant to all with whom they have official
business.



   (O)   Perform any other duties that may be assigned to them either
by the City Manager or the Chief of Police.



('58 Code, § 11-6)



§ 30.03  SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Chief of Police shall have immediate direction and control of the
members of the Police Department, subject to the supervision of the City
Manager and to rules, regulations, and orders that the City Council may
prescribe.



('58 Code, § 11-4)



§ 30.04  SUMMONING AID.



   The Chief of Police or any policeman of the city shall have authority,
if resisted in the execution of their lawful duties, to summon a sufficient
number of men to aid them in enforcing the law, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to refuse to assist.



('58 Code, § 11-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 30.05  ENTERING WITHOUT WARRANT.



   The Chief of Police and other policemen shall have the power, without a
warrant, to enter the enclosure and house of any person when they have good
reason to believe that any felony or infamous crime has been or is about to
be committed therein.  If necessary, the Chief of Police and other policemen
may summon a posse to aid them, and all persons so summoned shall have like
authority to enter.



('58 Code, § 11-8)



§ 30.06  WEARING UNIFORM REQUIRED.



   The Chief of Police and other policemen shall wear those uniforms as
shall be prescribed by the City Council and the metallic badge now in use,
which shall be worn on the breast of the coat.  The uniforms shall always be
worn whenever the officers shall be on duty, unless otherwise ordered by the
City Council.



('58 Code, § 11-10)



§ 30.07  INTERFERING WITH POLICE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hamper, molest,
resist, or hinder a policeman in the lawful discharge of his duty.



('58 Code, § 11-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 30.08  AUXILIARY POLICE.



   (A)   Auxiliary police officers shall be under the direct control of
the Chief of Police, acting under general supervision of the City Manager. 
All appointments and removals of an auxiliary police officer shall be made in
the same manner and under the same policies and procedures as established for
appointment and removal of regular police officers.



   (B)   The duties of an auxiliary police officer shall be to assist
the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of the law
and the maintenance of peace and order when called to duty by the Chief of
Police.  The rules and regulations to govern an auxiliary police officer
shall be established by the Chief of Police in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the city and the police department.



   (C)   The auxiliary law enforcement personnel shall be entitled to
benefits under the North Carolina Workers' Compensation Act and to any fringe
benefits for which such volunteer personnel qualify.



(Ord. 04-13, passed 5-3-04)



§ 30.09  ABC PERMITS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police of the city Police Department, or his or
her designee is designated the official of the city authorized to make
recommendations on behalf of the City Council concerning the suitability of a
person or of the location of a facility for an ABC permit within the Police
Department’s jurisdiction pursuant to G.S. § 18B-904(f).



   (B)   In making the recommendations the Police Department may (1)
access the SBI/DCI Criminal History Record Information to obtain criminal
information on all persons applying for proposed locations within the city;
(2) will obtain the criminal history information on each applicant based on
identification information regarding the applicant based on identification
information regarding the applicant contained in the notice of permit
pursuant to G.S. § 18B-901(c).



(Ord. 09-06, passed 2-2-09)



§ 30.10  HOMELAND SECURITY DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Chief of the city Police Department, or his or her
designee, is designated Homeland Security Director for the city.



   (B)   Authority of Director; criminal record applicants.  The
Homeland Security Director shall be and he or she is hereby vested with the
power and authority granted, and subject to the duties imposed on the
Director of Home and Security by G.S. § 114-19 with respect to obtaining the
criminal record of persons applying for a paid or voluntary position with a
fire department or emergency medical service.  Prior to denial or
termination of employment based upon CHRI received from the criminal justice
agency, the non-criminal entity shall verify the existence of a record by
either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint
card of the individual to the CIIS for verification that the CHRI record
belongs to the individual.



(Ord. 09-04, passed 2-2-09)



CHAPTER 31: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Composition of Fire Department



   31.02   Supervision of Department



   31.03   (Reserved)



   31.04   Right of entry for fire suppression



   31.05   Calling assistance of citizens at fires



   31.06   Loitering near fires



   31.07   Interfering with firemen or apparatus



   31.08   Obstructing fire vehicles



   31.09   Obstructing hydrants



   31.10   Tampering with hydrants



   31.11   False fire alarms



   31.12   Protection of fire hose



   31.13   Fire limits, description



   31.14   Burning trash in fire limits



   31.15   Burning trash outside fire limits



   31.16   Permit for bonfire or outdoor fire



   31.17   Removal of dead wires



Fire Prevention Code



   31.25-1   Title



   31.25-2   Intent of code



   31.25-3   Fire chief to enforce code



   31.25-4   Adoption by reference: copies of file



   31.25-5   Inspection of buildings and premises



   31.25-6   Permits



   31.25-7   Service of order or notices



   31.25-8   Tank installation



   31.25-9   Fee schedule



   31.25-10   Removal of obstructions; prohibited parking



   31.25-11   Emergency entry



   31.25-12   Investigation of fires



   31.25-13   Fire records



   31.26   Enforcement



   31.27   Definitions



   31.28   Establishment of limits



   31.29   Amendments



   31.30   Modifications



Call Force



   31.50   Establishment of Call Force



New Materials, Processes, or Occupancies



   31.60   New materials, processes, or occupancies which require
permits



Appeals



   31.100   Appeals



   31.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  COMPOSITION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   The Fire Department of the city shall consist of a Fire Chief and any
other officers and firemen as the City Council deems necessary.



§ 31.02  SUPERVISION OF DEPARTMENT.



   Subject to the supervision of the City Manager, the Fire Chief shall
have general control of the Fire Department, the personnel, apparatus, and
all fire alarm systems and the Chief shall have the following duties.



   (A)   Supervise and direct the extinguishing of fires.



   (B)   Preserve and safekeep all equipment of the Fire Department.



   (C)   Compel, when necessary, all officers of the city or other
persons to aid in the extinguishing of fires.



   (D)   Enforce all rules and ordinances relative to fire prevention.



   (E)   Provide training for all members of the Fire Department and
insure that all fire employees attend the necessary training sessions
provided.



   (F)   Inspect all equipment of the Fire Department and report all
needed repairs to the City Council.



   (G)   Record and follow-up all violations of any fire prevention
ordinances.



   (H)   Annually report to the City Council the names, residences, and
occupation of all firemen, the number and location of fires which have
occurred during the year, the causes thereof if they can be ascertained, the
name of the owner and value of the property destroyed, insurance coverage,
and any other matters pertaining to the Fire Department, its organization and
operation as he deems best.



   (I)   Do those other and further things necessary for the proper and
efficient operation of his Department and for the prevention of fire.



('58 Code, § 6-3)



§ 31.03  (RESERVED).



§ 31.04  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION.



   Any member of the Fire Department, or any person acting under the
orders of the Chief, shall have the right to go on the premises of any
person, and to enter any building or room for the purpose of suppressing any
hostile fire.



§ 31.05  CALLING ASSISTANCE OF CITIZENS AT FIRES.



   During the continuance of any fire, the Chief and each member of the
Fire Department shall have the power to call on any person to assist in
extinguishing the fire, or in removing any goods, wares, merchandise, or
furniture from any building on fire, or in danger, to some place of safety. 
No person shall fail to obey any order given for this purpose.  It shall be
the duty of any able-bodied male person present at any fire at the command of
the Chief, to assist the firemen in managing the hose or other equipment, or
to perform any reasonable service looking toward the prevention or
extinguishing of the fire.



('58 Code, § 6-12)



§ 31.06  LOITERING NEAR FIRES.



   No person shall stand or be in any street, alley, or square at which or
near which a fire is in progress, in such a way as to interfere with the
duties of the Fire Department.



('58 Code, § 6-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.07  INTERFERING WITH FIREMEN OR APPARATUS.



   No person shall interfere with a fireman in the discharge of his duty
or hinder him in the performance of his duty.  No person, other than members
of the Fire Department, shall loiter about any fire station, or change,
handle, or meddle in any manner with any fire engine or any other fire
apparatus.



('58 Code, § 6-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.08  OBSTRUCTING FIRE VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way interfere with the
fire equipment of the city, whether it is in use or not.  No person shall
obstruct the streets so as to prevent the fire trucks or other fire equipment
from having free passage over them in case of fire.  All persons and
vehicles shall give the right- of-way to the fire equipment of the city.



('58 Code, § 6-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.09  OBSTRUCTING HYDRANTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any hydrant or fire
plug in such manner as to interfere with the easy approach to, or the
convenient use of it by the Fire Department.



('58 Code, § 6-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.10  TAMPERING WITH HYDRANTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except those designated by the
city, to operate or tamper with any fire hydrant, valve, or any other
implement owned by the city and operated by the Water and Sewer Department.



('58 Code, § 6-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.11  FALSE FIRE ALARMS.



   No person shall give or cause to be given any false fire alarm by means
of the city fire alarm system or otherwise.



('58 Code, § 6-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.12  PROTECTION OF FIRE HOSE.



   It shall be unlawful to in any way damage or mutilate any fire hose
while in use at a fire or otherwise.



('58 Code, § 6-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.13  FIRE LIMITS, DESCRIPTION.



   The territory comprised within the limits herein described hereby is
made and constituted the fire limits of the city:  beginning at the
intersection of North Street with the Carolina and Northwestern Railroad
(formerly Yadkin Railroad) and then run with North Street eastwardly
approximately 1500 feet to the center of the square at the intersection of
North and Third Street; then with Third Street southwardly approximately 1400
feet to the center of the square at the intersection of Third and East South
Streets; then with South Street westwardly approximately 500 feet to the
center of the square at the intersection of South and Second Street; then
with Second Street southwardly approximately 600 feet to the intersection of
Second and Old Charlotte Road; then with Old Charlotte Road westwardly
approximately 600 feet to the center of the Carolina and Northwestern
Railroad right-of-way; then with the center line of the Railroad right-of-way
northwardly approximately 2125 feet to the beginning; provided however, that
there is excluded from the above territory any lot or tract within the
territory on which a building is now or may hereafter be located that is or
would be greater than 30 feet from all adjoining property lines.  It is
hereby intended that any building located in an area excluded from the above
defined territory shall not be required to comply with the special conditions
required for construction or repair or renovation in the above defined
territory, but shall comply with the building codes requirements of similar
type construction in the city but otherwise outside the above defined
territory.



('58 Code, § 6-20) (Am. Ord. 95-22, passed 5-15-95)



§ 31.14  BURNING TRASH IN FIRE LIMITS.



   No person shall burn or cause to be burned any trash, refuse, shaving,
paper, leaves, litter, or other materials of any kind outside any house, on
or in any street, sidewalk, alley, lot, or yard within the fire limits.



('58 Code, § 6-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.15  BURNING TRASH OUTSIDE FIRE LIMITS.



   Trash or rubbish shall not be burned on any private lot outside the
fire limits except by permit issued by the Fire Department and must meet
provisions set forth by the Fire Department at the issuance of the permit.



('58 Code, § 6-22) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.16  PERMIT FOR BONFIRE OR OUTDOOR FIRE.



   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, or shall knowingly
furnish the material for any bonfire, or authorize any bonfire to be kindled
or maintained on or in any street, avenue, road, lane, or public ground or on
any private lot within the city unless a written permit to do so shall have
first been secured from the Fire Chief. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the burning of trash and rubbish on private lots of
residences without a permit when the burning is done in conformity with the
provisions of § 31.15.



('58 Code, § 6-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.17  REMOVAL OF DEAD WIRES.



   It shall be unlawful for any electric light, telegraph, or telephone
company to permit any of their disconnected, dead, or unused wires to hang or
remain on any pole, tree, or house where it has been formerly connected and
in use.  These wires shall be taken down and removed immediately upon notice
by the Building Inspector.  It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire
Department to notify the Building Inspector whenever he has knowledge of this
condition existing.



('58 Code, § 6-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



   FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 31.25-1  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the Fire Prevention and Protection
Code of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina, and may be cited as such and
referred to herein as the code.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98)



§ 31.25-2  INTENT OF CODE.



   (A)   It is the intent of the code to prescribe regulations
consistent with nationally recognized good practice for the safe guarding of
life and property within the jurisdiction of the city from hazards of fire
and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from hazardous conditions in the use
or occupancy of building or premises.



   (B)   The code shall not be construed to hold the county responsible
for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or
reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or the permits issued or
denied as herein provided or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any
equipment authorized herein.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 2-4-02)



§ 31.25-3  FIRE CHIEF TO ENFORCE CODE.



   The Fire Prevention and Protection Code of the city shall be enforced
by the City Fire Chief and his authorized representatives or as otherwise
provided herein.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98)



§ 31.25-4  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE: COPIES OF FILE.



   (A)   There is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein
that certain code known as and entitled 2009 edition of the International
Fire Code, which has been adopted by the State of North Carolina Fire Code,
together with each appendices thereto adopted by the State of North Carolina
Fire Code.  Copies of the City of Albemarle Fire Prevention and Protection
Code and all technical codes and standards adopted by references, and each
appendices thereto adopted in the State of North Carolina Fire Code shall be
filed with, and available for public inspection in the office of the Fire
Marshal.



   (B)   Amendments to codes and standards adopted by reference herein
which are adopted and published by the North Carolina State Building Code
Council shall be effective in the City at the time such amendments become a
part of "The Fire Code" of North Carolina.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 2-4-02; Am. Ord. 06-31,
passed 10-17-06; Am. Ord. 09-05, passed 1-26-09)



§ 31.25-5  INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.



   Subject to the limitations and conditions stated in the North Carolina
Fire Code, it shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to inspect or cause to be
inspected as often as he may deem necessary or appropriate all buildings,
structures, and premises within his jurisdiction for the purpose of
ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition which may cause fire
or explosion, endanger life from fire or explosion, or any violations of the
provisions of the Code, or any other ordinances pertaining to fire or
explosion hazards.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 2-4-02)



§ 31.25-6  PERMITS.



   (A)   This code shall require permits from the Fire Marshal as set
forth in the North Carolina Fire Code.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to evaluate
applications and issue, if approved, all permits for those conditions as
prescribed in this Code.



   (C)   No person shall maintain, store or handle materials or conduct
processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property or install
equipment used in connection with such activities without a permit as
required by the Fire Marshal and prescribed in North Carolina Fire Code.
Before a permit may be issued, the Fire Marshal shall inspect and approve the
receptacles, vehicles, buildings, structures, storage areas, devices,
processes and conditions related to the permit.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 2-4-02)  Penalty, see §
31.999



§ 31.25-7  SERVICE OF ORDER OR NOTICES.



   (A)   The service of orders or notices for the correction of
violations of the Code shall be made upon the owner, occupant or other
persons responsible for the conditions, either by personally delivering a
copy of the same to such person or by delivering the same to and leaving it
with any person in charge of the premises or by sending a copy of the order
of notice by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address.



   (B)   When buildings or other premises are occupied by one other
than the owner under a lease or other agreement, the orders or notices issued
to correct violations of the Code shall apply to the occupant thereof;
provided that where the order or notices require the making of additions to
or changes in the premises themselves which may become part of the real
property of the owner, then in such cases, the orders of notices shall also
be issued to the owner of the premises or real property.  Failure to deliver
an order or notice to the owner, if other than the occupant, shall not
invalidate such order or notice.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98)  Penalty, see § 31.999



§ 31.25-8  TANK INSTALLATION.



   Before any tank for underground or aboveground storage of volatile
flammable or combustible liquids or any other hazardous material covered by
the provisions of this Code shall be installed, a permit must be issued and
shall be granted only upon written application made to the Fire Marshal 
setting forth therein the location, character, size and capacity of the tank,
and the purpose for which it is to be used and an agreement that the
applicant or user will conform to all the provisions of this Code and the
ordinances then existing, and in case a pump is to be used in connection
therewith, the application shall state its location with respect to the tanks
and with respect to the property line.  The Fire Marshal shall determine
whether the proposed tanks comply with the provisions of this Code, the
ordinances of the city, and laws of the state, and shall issue the permit if
he finds there is compliance.  The Fire Marshal shall have the right to
inspect the tanks and appliances before, during, and after installation, and
see that its location, installation and operation are in accordance with this
Code, the ordinances of the city and laws of the state. After the tank is
placed in the excavation, and fittings and connections have been attached
thereto, and before it has been covered or concealed from inspection, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Fire Marshal and shall wait until
the installation of the tank connections and fittings have been approved
before covering them.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 2-4-02)  Penalty, see §
31.999



§ 31.25-9  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Fees for inspections and permits required by this Code shall
be determined by resolution of the City Council.  A fee schedule shall be
filed with the City and the Fire Chief's Office for public inspection.



   (B)   Inspection fees shall be paid within the number of days
specified in the billing notice of the amount of the fee.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98)  Penalty, see § 31.999



§ 31.25-10  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS; PROHIBITED PARKING.



   Any vehicle found obstructing any fire hydrant, marked rural water
point, fire protection equipment, designated and marked fire lane, or fire
station may be removed or towed away by or under the direction of the Fire
Marshal to a storage area or garage.  The owner of such vehicle shall be
deemed to have appointed the Fire Marshal as his agent for the purpose of
arranging for the transportation and safe storage of the vehicle.  The owner
of such vehicle, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay all
reasonable cost incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle due for
the violation of prohibited parking.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 2-4-02)  Penalty, see §
31.999



§ 31.25-11  EMERGENCY ENTRY.



   The City Fire Chief or his authorized representatives shall have the
right to enter any building or premises without permission or warrant in the
event of any emergency situation constituting a threat to human life,
property or the public safety for the purpose of eliminating, controlling, or
abating the dangerous conditions or situation.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98)  Penalty, see § 31.999



§ 31.25-12  INVESTIGATION OF FIRES.



   (A)   The Fire Chief's Office shall investigate the cause, origin,
and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city which is of a
suspicious nature or which involves loss of life or injury to persons, or
when notified by any fire department or a fire protection district or when
circumstances warrant. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the
occurrence of such a fire and, if it appears that such fire is of suspicious
origin, the Fire Marshal shall be immediately notified and coordinate
investigation activities.  Any information obtained pursuant to any such
investigation shall be confidential as authorized by law.



   (B)   Upon request of the Fire Marshal or his authorized
representatives, any law enforcement agency may render such assistance as
necessary in the investigation or any fire determined to be of suspicious
origin.



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 2-4-02)  Penalty, see §
31.999



§ 31.25-13  FIRE RECORDS.



   The Fire Department shall keep a record of all fires and of all the
facts concerning the same, including statistics as to the extent of such
fires and the damages caused thereby.  All such records shall be public
except as provided by § 31.25-13(a).



(Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 2-4-02)



§ 31.26  ENFORCEMENT.



   The code adopted in § 31.25 shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire
Department.



('58 Code, § 6-1.2)



§ 31.27  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Wherever the word "MUNICIPALITY" is used in the code adopted
in § 31.25, it shall be held to mean the City of Albemarle.



('58 Code, § 6-1.3)



   (B)   Wherever the word "CHIEF" is used in the code adopted in §
31.25, or any other place in this chapter, it shall be held to mean the Fire
Chief or his designated representative.



§ 31.28  ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS.



   (A)   The limits referred to in section 1902.1 to section 1902.2,
inclusive, of Chapter 19 of the North Carolina State Building Code, Volume V,
Fire Prevention, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited hereby are established as follows:  any area within the corporate
limits of the municipality, except that dealers shall be allowed to keep not
more than a case, not exceeding 50 pounds, of dynamite in locations and
containers approved by the Chief of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The limits referred to in section 902.2.1 of Chapter 9 of the
North Carolina State Building Code, Volume V, Fire Prevention, in which
storage of Class I liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited hereby
are established as follows:  any area within the corporate limits of the
municipality excepting the following.



      (1)   That area bounded on the east by United States Highway
No. 52, on the south by North Carolina Highway No. 27 Bypass, on the west by
the Carolina and Northwestern Railroad right-of-way, and on the north by the
Aquadale Road.



      (2)   That area bounded on the east by the United States
Highway No. 52, on the west by Biltmore Street, on the south by Snuggs
Street, on the north by an east-west line 1,150 feet north of Snuggs Street.



      (3)   That area bounded on the east by North Sixth Street, on
the south by Hawthorne Avenue, on the west by North Second Street, and on the
north by Palestine Road.



      (4)   That area bounded on the east by United States Highway
No. 52, and on the south, west, and north by Circle Drive.



      (5)   That area bounded on the north by West Main Street
(formerly Charlotte Road), on the east by Freedom Drive, on the south by
Hillcrest Avenue and on the west by a line from the intersection of Hillcrest
Avenue and South Slack Street to the intersection of Stanly Street and West
Main Street.



('58 Code, § 6-1.4)



   (C)   The limits referred to in section 21.6a of the Fire Prevention
Code in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted hereby
are established as follows.



      (1)   That area bounded on the east by United States Highway
No. 52, on the south by North Carolina No. 24- 27 Bypass, on the west by the
Carolina and Northwestern Railroad right-of-way, and on the north by the
Aquadale Road.



      (2)   That area beginning approximately 200 feet south of East
Main Street (North Carolina Highway No. 24-27-73) on Anderson and thence with
Anderson Road south 100 feet, thence westerly leaving Anderson Road
approximately 100 feet, thence northerly approximately 100 feet, and thence
easterly to the beginning point on Anderson Road.



      (3)   That area bounded on the north by Bethany Road, on the
east by Idlewood Drive, on the west by the Carolina and Northwestern Railroad
and on the south by a line parallel to and 250 feet south of the Bethany Road.



(Am. Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98)



§ 31.29  AMENDMENTS.



   The Fire Prevention Code adopted in § 31.25 is amended and changed by
adding another article at the end of the code to be numbered 32 and entitled
"Tents" as follows.



   (A)   Section 32.1.  Permit required.  No tent covering an area in
excess of 120 square feet shall be erected, maintained, operated, or used
without a permit.



   (B)   Section 32.2.  Fire watchers to be employed.  One or more
qualified persons to serve as fire watchers shall be employed by all
circuses, carnivals, or other exhibitions where large crowds assemble. They
shall familiarize themselves with all fire protection facilities and fire
prevention features and with the conditions of exits, and shall patrol the
entire tent area during the time of occupancy.  They shall see that aisles
and exitways are kept open and that no smoking rules are enforced.



   (C)   Section 32.3.  Tents for assembly to conform to recognized
good practice.  The design, construction, flameproofing, location,
maintenance, and use of tents for assembly shall be reasonably safe to
persons and property.



('58 Code, § 6-1.5)



§ 31.30  MODIFICATIONS.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the code adopted in § 31.25 upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his duly- authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code,
provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of the modification
when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department
thereon shall be entered on the records of the Department and a signed copy
shall be furnished the applicant.



('58 Code, § 6-1.6)



CALL FORCE



§ 31.50  ESTABLISHMENT OF CALL FORCE.



   The Chief is authorized to recruit an auxiliary Call Force of up to 25
citizens and train these citizens in the proper manner to aid the regular
firefighters in an emergency.  These Call Force members may be compensated
for training and fire service as provided by the City Council.



NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES, OR OCCUPANCIES



§ 31.60  NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH REQUIRE PERMITS.



   The Chief and the City Manager shall determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes, or occupancies which shall require permits in addition to those
listed in the Fire Prevention Code.  The Chief shall keep a current list on
the bulletin board in the Central Fire Station and furnish copies to
interested persons on request.



APPEALS



§ 31.100  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant is permitted to
appeal from the decision of the Chief of the City Council within 30 days from
the date of the decision appealed by filing written notice with the City
Manager.



§ 31.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §
31.25-1 through 31.30 hereby adopted or who shall fail to comply with any
judicial warrant, lawful order, or regulation made thereunder or who builds
in violation of any specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder
or any permit issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In the
name of the city, the City Fire Marshal, through the City Attorney, may
enjoin the construction or erection of any facility, building or structure
which does not conform to the provisions of the Code.



   (B)   § 31.25-1 through 31.30 may be enforced by any of the
remedies set forth in G.S. 153A-123, in addition to others specifically set
out herein or in the City Code.



   (C)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of § 31.25-1
through 31.30 shall be subject to a civil penalty for each violation in the
following amounts:



 




Chapter

 

Amount of Penalty




1.   Knox Box/Fire Dept Connection (FDC) Caps

 
$500.00/day (may be issued after 30 days and written notice) Knox Boxes
installed at locations that have an alarm that is monitored for dispatch of
fire department.  Knox FDC Caps installed to prevent obstruction in
sprinkler system.



2.   Burning without a Permit Residential

 
$50.00 (1st offense); $100.00 (2nd offense may be issued after one written
notice)



3.   Burning without a Permit

 
$500/stack or pile (1st offense); $1,000.00/stack or pile (2nd offense) (no
notice required)



4.   Chapter 10 Violation

 
$500/day (may be issued w/o notice usual practices is after 30 days and
written notice)



5.   Locked Exit/Exit Obstruction

 
$500 (1st offense); $1,000.00 (2nd offense May be issued w/o notice, in usual
practice, verbal and written warnings precede citation)



6.   Fire Detection/Protection

 
$250 (1st offense); $500/day for any recurring violation (may be issued w/o
notice, in usual practice, verbal and written warnings precede citation)


NOTE: Assembly, Hazardous, Institutional Systems must be in service at all
times or immediate fire watch provided or shut down and fine; All others a
fire watch must be provided in a reasonable period of time and maintained.



7.   Access During Construction

 
$1,000.00/day (May be issued w/o notice, in usual practice, verbal and
written warnings precede citation.)



8.   Occupancy without CO

 
$500/day (May be issued w/o notice, in usual practice, verbal and written
warnings precede citation.)  (Issued immediately for new structures and
after 30 days for existing, disconnection of utility service may be used in
lieu of fines.)



9.   General Violation

 
$100.00 (Issued after 30 days written notice. This fine is issued per item
and not violation.)



10.   False Alarm > 3 per 90 days

 
$250.00 (May be issued w/o notice, in usual practice, issued on fourth
violation within 90 days after one written notice on the third violation.
Alarms in rapid succession are considered an individual occurrence.)



11.   Fire Lane Parking Violations

 
$100.00 (May be issued w/o notice, when vehicle is not occupied.)



12.   Knox Program Maintenance

 
$100.00 (May be issued w/o notice when Knox box is found to contain no key or
incorrect key.  In usual practice one written warning precedes citation.)



13.   Overcrowding

 
$500.00 (1st offense); $1,000.00 (2nd offense Issued at the time of violation
after occupancy overcrowding conditions have been  corrected.  Third
offense may constitute court proceedings. Offense runs calendar year.)



14.   Matters Not Provided For

 
Any other violation of the fire code or City Ordinance not specifically
codified shall be fined $250.00.




 



   (D)   Civil penalties must be paid within three working days after a
citation has been issued by the Fire Chief for a violation. The Fire Marshal
is authorized to issue written citations in the name of the city for
violations.



(Ord. 98-09, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 98-15, passed 4-6-98; Am. Ord. 02-07,
passed 2-4-02; Am. Ord. 11-07, passed 4-18-11)



CHAPTER 32:  EMERGENCIES



Section



   32.01   Proclamation of restrictions in response to needs of an
emergency



   32.02   Dispersal of assemblies during emergency



   32.03   Storage of firearms and ammunition by dealers applicable
during state of declared emergency



§ 32.01  PROCLAMATION OF RESTRICTIONS IN RESPONSE TO NEEDS OF AN EMERGENCY.



   (A)   The Mayor by proclamation may impose the prohibitions and
restrictions specified in divisions (1) through (4) below in the manner
described therein.  The Mayor may impose as many of those prohibitions and
restrictions as he finds are necessary, because of an emergency, to maintain
an acceptable level of public order and services, and to protect lives,
safety, and property.  The Mayor shall recite his findings in the
proclamation.  The proclama- tion shall be in writing.  The Mayor shall
take reasonable steps to give notice of the terms of the proclamation to
those affected by it and shall post a copy of it in the city hall.  The
Mayor shall retain a text of the proclamation and furnish upon request
certified copies of it for use as evidence.  The proclama- tion may contain
the following.



      (1)   The proclamation may impose a curfew prohibiting in
certain areas and during certain periods the appearance in public of anyone
who is not a member of an exempted class.  The proclamation shall specify
the geographical area and the period during each 24-hour day to which the
curfew applies.  The Mayor may exempt from some or all of the curfew
restrictions classes of people whose exemption he finds necessary for the
preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare. The proclamation
shall state the exempted classes and the restrictions from which each is
exempted.  Unless otherwise specified in the proclamation, the curfew shall
apply during the specified period each day until the Mayor by proclamation
removes the curfew.



      (2)   The proclamation may prohibit the possession or
consumption of any intoxicating liquor, including beer and wine, other than
on one's own premises, and may prohibit the transfer of any intoxi- cating
liquor.  The prohibition, if imposed, shall apply to transfers of
intoxicating liquor by employees of alcoholic beverage control stores as well
as by anyone else within the city. If imposed, the restrictions shall apply
throughout the city.



      (3)   The proclamation may prohibit the possession of any
dangerous weapon or substance unless it remains in a place of storage within
the possessor's premises, or, if the weapon or substance cannot be readily
stored in the possessor's premises, unless it remains in a customary place of
storage not readily available to the possessor.  The proclamation may also
prohibit the sale or other transfer or the transportation of any dangerous
weapon or substance.  The Mayor may exempt from some or all of the
restrictions classes of people whose possession, transfer, or transpor-tation
of certain dangerous weapons or substances is necessary to the preservation
of the public health, safety, or welfare.  The proclamation shall state the
exempted classes and the restrictions from which each is exempted.  If
imposed, these restrictions shall apply throughout the jurisdiction of the
city.  For purposes of this division, "DANGEROUS WEAPON OR SUBSTANCE" means
any of the following.



         (a)   Any deadly weapon, ammunition, incendiary device,
or other instrument or substance designed for a use that carries a threat of
serious bodily injury or destruction of property.



         (b)   Any other instrument or substance that is capable
of being used to inflict serious bodily injury or destruction of property,
when the circumstances indicate that there is some probability that the
instrument or substance will be so destructively used.



         (c)   Any part or ingredient in any instrument or
substance included in divisions (a) and (b) above.



      (4)   The proclamation may prohibit obtaining access or
attemp- ting to obtain access to any area designated in the manner described
in this division, in violation of any order, clearly posted notice, or
barricade indicating that access is denied or restricted.  Areas to which
access is denied or restricted shall be designated by the Chief of Police and
his subordinates when directed in the proclamation to do so by the Mayor.
When acting under this authority, the Chief of Police and his subordinates
may restrict or deny access to any area, street, or location within the city
if that restriction or denial of access or use is reasonably necessary to
promote efforts being made to overcome the emergency or to prevent further
aggravation of the emergency.



   (B)   The Mayor may amend the proclamation from time to time, making
any modifications as he would have been authorized to include in the original
proclamation.



   (C)   The Mayor shall by proclamation remove the prohibitions and
restrictions as the emergency no longer requires them, or when directed to do
so by the City Council.



   (D)   The Mayor in his discretion may invoke the restrictions
authorized by this section in separate proclamations, and may amend any
proclamation by means of a superseding proclamation.



('58 Code, § 10-24.1)



§ 32.02  DISPERSAL OF ASSEMBLIES DURING  EMERGENCY.



   (A)   The Mayor by proclamation may prohibit assemblies of three or
more persons in specified geographic areas of the city after he finds that
these assemblies constitute a clear and present danger of prolonging or
aggravating an existing emergency which endangers lives, safety, and
property. The proclamation shall be in writing and state the Mayor's
findings.  The Mayor shall take reasonable steps to give notice of the terms
of the proclamation to those affected by it, and shall post a copy of it in
the city hall.  The Mayor shall retain a text of the proclamation and upon
request shall furnish certified copies of it for use as evidence.



   (B)   The proclamation authorized by division (A) above shall
specify the geographical area or areas in which the restrictions apply.  The
Mayor may amend the proclamation from time to time, making any modifica-
tions in the geographical area to which it applies as he determines to be
necessary to maintain the purposes of the prohibition.  The Mayor shall by
proclamation remove the prohibi- tion when the emergency no longer requires
it, or when directed to do so by the City Council.



   (C)   Any police officer may order any assembly prohibited by a
proclamation authorized by this section to disperse.



   (D)   The failure of any member of an assembly ordered to disperse
by a police officer acting under authority of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.



('58 Code, § 10-24.2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.03  STORAGE OF FIREARMS AND AMMUNIT ION BY DEALERS APPLICABLE DURING
STATE O F DECLARED EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Every person engaged in the business of selling firearms and
ammunition or both shall comply with the following rules.



      (1)   No ammunition shall be displayed on an open counter or
in any other place readily accessible to the public.



      (2)   No ammunition or firearms shall be displayed in windows
or display areas when the business is not regularly open.



      (3)   During any period in which firearms or ammunition or
both are unattended, they shall be stored in a place meeting the requirements
of regulations promulgated by the City Council under authority of this
section, or, if no regulations have been promulgated, in a place difficult
for access to unauthorized persons.



   (B)   The City Council is authorized to promulgate regulations
governing the construction, location, and accessibility of storage places for
firearms and ammunition required to be used by this section.  The Council
may adopt any regulations under this authority that in its judgment will
reasonably and effectively serve to prevent unauthorized persons from
obtaining the stored firearms and ammunition.



   (C)   The City Council shall take reasonable steps to notify all
persons that it can reasonably identify as being affected by these
regulations of their requirements.  The notification shall sufficiently
precede the effective date of the regulations to permit compliance with
them.  The city shall maintain on file an official copy of the regulations.



   (D)   Any person failing to comply with any requirements of this
section or of any reasonable regulations promulgated under authority of this
section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



('58 Code, § 10-24.3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 33: CURFEW FOR MINORS



Section



   33.01   Definitions



   33.02   Time limits



   33.03   Exceptions



   33.04   Responsibility of adults



   33.05   Responsibility of business establishment



   33.06   Enforcement



   33.07   Aiding and abetting by adult, guardian, or parent



   33.08   Refusal of custodian to take custody of a minor



   33.99   Penalty



§ 33.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "CUSTODIAN."  A parent, guardian, step-parent, foster parent, house
parent, or other person legally responsible for the care and custody of a
minor as defined by this chapter.



   "MINOR."  Any person who has not reached his/her sixteenth birthday
and is not married, emancipated, or a member of the armed services of the
United States.



   "PUBLIC PLACE."  Any place which is generally open to and used by the
public, whether it be publicly or privately owned, including but not limited
to streets, highways, public vehicular areas, places of business and
amusement parks, and other common areas open to the public.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)



§ 33.02  TIME LIMITS.



   It is unlawful for any minor to be or remain upon any public place as
defined in § 33.01 within the city or on any property or right-of-way
belonging to the city and located outside the corporate limits of the city
between the hours of midnight Friday and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or between
midnight Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday or between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 5:00 a.m. of the following mornings on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   The restrictions provided by § 33.02 shall not apply to any minor who
is:



   (A)   Accompanied by his custodian as defined in § 33.01;



   (B)   Accompanied by a responsible person over the age of 18 years
of age who has the written permission of the minor's custodian to have the
minor under his supervision;



   (C)   Traveling in connection with his employment, religious
activity, or



attendance at a function sponsored by the city or a school;



   (D)   Temporarily within the city or on city property while engaged
in interstate travels; or



   (E)   Attempting to obtain assistance in a medical emergency.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)



§ 33.04  RESPONSIBILITY OF ADULTS.



   It is unlawful for any custodian to allow or permit any minor to be in
or upon, or remain in or upon a public place within the city or on any
property or right-of-way belonging to the city and located outside the
corporate limits of the city, within the curfew hours set by § 33.02, except
as provided in § 33.03.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.05  RESPONSIBILITY OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation operating a place
of business or amusement to allow or permit any minor to be in or upon, or to
remain in or upon the premises of such place of business of amusement within
the curfew hours set by § 33.02, except as provided in § 33.03.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   When a minor is found to be in violation of this chapter, a
police officer will by telephone, check with the communication center of the
City Police Department to determine if the minor is a first offender.  If
the minor is a first time offender he or she will be take to the residence of
his or her custodian.  A written warning will be given to the custodian and
an information report will be taken by the officer.  The report shall
include the name of the minor and the custodian, the time, date, and location
of the offense.  This report will be turned into the Police Department
Records Division.



   (B)   If, upon checking with the communications center, the minor is
found to beta repeat offender, he or she will be taken to the residence of
his or her custodian and the custodian may be issued a criminal citation
charging him with a violation of this chapter.  A report will be turned in
to communications center and entered into the Police Department Records
Division.



   (C)   If the minor is found to be a repeat offender, the minor may
be treated as a delinquent juvenile.



   (D)   If the minor is under 12 years of age, a report will be made
and a copy forwarded to the Stanly County Department of Social Services.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)



§ 33.07  AIDING AND ABETTING BY ADULT, GUARDIAN, OR PARENT.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person over 18 years of
age to aid or abet a minor in the violation of § 33.02.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.08  REFUSAL OF CUSTODIAN TO TAKE CUSTODY OF A MINOR.



   If the custodian of a minor found to be in violation of this chapter
refuses to take custody of such minor, the officer having custody of the
minor shall contact the Stanly County Department of Social Services and
release the minor to that Agency, pending further investigation by the Police
Department and the Department of Social Services.  The custodian may be
issued a criminal citation charging him with a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall  be  fined not more than $50, or imprisoned for not more than 30
days.



(Ord. 94-26, passed 11-7-94)



TITLE IV: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      40.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



         APPENDIX:   VACATIONS



      41.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



CHAPTER 40:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Excavation and Repair



   40.01   Permit to dig in streets



   40.02   Application for permit



   40.03   City indemnified



   40.04   Street repair



   40.05   Excavations; leaving unprotected



   40.06   Supervision and control



   40.07   Streets not to be damaged



   40.08   Moving of buildings



   40.09   Placing of poles



   40.10   Use of poles and conduits for city purposes



   40.11   Barricades



   40.12   Obstructing streets



   40.13   Encroachments on or under street or sidewalk



Loading Platforms



   40.20   Permitted in certain zones



   40.21   Application for permit



   40.22   Construction of platforms



   40.23   Maintenance



   40.24   Removal order



   40.25   Compliance with code



Special Street Cleaning



   40.30   Acts and conditions requiring special street cleaning or
repair prohibited



   40.31   City to clean and repair streets, sidewalks, and drains
requiring special cleaning or repair



Property Numbering System



   40.40   Numbering map



   40.41   Numbering system



   40.42   Owners to purchase numbers



   40.43   Numbers for future buildings



   40.44   Unlawful to deface number



Obstructions to Cross-Visibilty at Street Intersections



   40.50   Obstructions to cross- visibility at intersections deemed
nuisance



   40.51   Application of restrictions



   40.52   Installation or maintenance of signs or certain vegetation
or objects prohibited



   40.53   Exceptions



   40.54   Emergency measures



   40.55   Conflicting provisions



   40.56   Administration



   40.57   Abatement procedure



   40.58   Additional remedies



   40.99   Penalty



   Appendix:  Vacations



EXCAVATION AND REPAIR



§ 40.01  PERMIT TO DIG IN STREETS.



   No person shall make any excavation or opening, or dig any ditch,
trench, tunnel, or hole in, along, across, or under any street, sidewalk, or
other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe,
electric conduit, or poles for any other purposes, unless a written permit
therefor has been issued by the city. 



(Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-06)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.02  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street
or sidewalk shall make written application therefor, which application shall
show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor, and the
approximate number of square feet of surface to be cut.  The application
shall be accompanied by the fee required by this section.  The fee required
for making any opening in any street or sidewalk shall be according to a fee
schedule for the permits, established by the City Council, which is hereby
adopted as though set out in full herein.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.03  CITY INDEMNIFIED.



   Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in §§ 40.01 and 40.02,
as a requirement for issuance of the permit, shall execute and deliver to the
city a good and sufficient bond, with corporate security or other surety
approved by City Council in an amount equal to one and one-half the estimated
amount of restoring the street or sidewalk as it existed prior to the
excavation, the aforesaid bond being conditioned upon the restored area
remaining in a good state of repair, free from maintenance for a period of
one year from the date the restoration made by the permitter is completed. 
In addition to the aforesaid bond, the city shall be provided an indemnity to
hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney
fees, for bodily injury, for property damages for accidents or accordance
rising out of the persons, firm or entity, excluding only the liability of
the city for its sole negligence except in connection with general
supervision of work performed by the person, firm or entity.



(Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-06)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.04  STREET REPAIR.



   When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place of
the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making the
excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or
opening so as to restore it to the city standards as specified in the city's
specifications for minimum standard street specifications ALD STD 018 or as
per instructions of the Division of Public Works.  Any person, firm, or
corporation, neglecting, refusing, or failing to comply with any provisions
of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof.



(Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-06) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.05  EXCAVATIONS; LEAVING UNPROTECTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation who obtains a
permit under the provisions of this subchapter to do any excavation of any
kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any city
maintained street right-of-way, city maintained alleyway, or public place of
the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails, signal lights,
or other warnings at, in, or around the excavation, sufficient to warn the
public of the excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable
care from injuries on account of the work.



(Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-06) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.06  SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.



   All excavations and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys, or public
places of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the
Department of Public Works, whose duty it shall be to inspect the work from
time to time during the progress thereof.  Upon the completion thereof, a
final inspection shall be made to see that the street, sidewalk, or public
place is restored to city specification and that all debris, materials,
tools, and equipment are removed therefrom. Any person refusing or failing to
comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation
thereof.



(Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-06) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.07  STREETS NOT TO BE DAMAGED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drag or
run, or cause to be dragged or run, any harrow or other implement, engine,
machine, or tool on any bituminous asphalt, or other type of permanently
paved street right-of-way of the city which shall be liable in any way to
injure or cut the surface thereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.08  MOVING OF BUILDINGS.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall move any building on or across
the public streets or sidewalks until the following procedures have been
complied with.



   (A)   An application for a house moving permit must be submitted to
the Director of Planning.



   (B)   A Stanly County building permit must be obtained.



   (C)   Approval of the moving route shall be from the Director of
Public Utilities.



   (D)   The Director of Planning will not approve moving permit unless
all appropriate fees have been submitted.  The fee shall be according to a
schedule for permits, established by the City Council, which is hereby
adopted as though set out in full herein.



(Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.09  PLACING OF POLES.



   No poles for electric, cable television, fiber optic shall be placed or
erected in any street right-of-way without a permit therefor from the city.



('58 Code, ' 13-9)  (Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.10  USE OF POLES AND CONDUITS FOR CITY PURPOSES.



   One duct in all underground conduit systems shall be provided, free of
charge and the city shall have the use of any and all poles on streets for
the same purpose.



('58 Code, ' 13-11)  (Am. Ord. 06-01, passed 1-3-06)



§ 40.11  BARRICADES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle into
or on any alley or street when the alley or street has been barricaded by an
employee  of the city. 



('58 Code, § 13-12)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of
the city, to remove, tear down, or destroy any barricade which has been
erected by the city. 



('58 Code, § 13-13) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.12  OBSTRUCTING STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any street, sidewalk,
alley, public road, or public square without the permission of the City
Council, or to occupy not more than one-half the width of the street.



('58 Code, § 13-14)



§ 40.13 ENCROACHMENTS ON OR UNDER STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to build or erect any
porch, step, platform, wall, fence, column, footing or other like obstruction
upon or under any sidewalk, street or alley within the city; provided,
however, that in the restoration, reconstruction, or addition to buildings of
an historical nature, in the CBD/Central Business District, where no building
setback lines are required by the zoning ordinance of the city, it shall be
permissible, upon the approval of the City Council, to make such restoration,
reconstruction, or addition to encroach upon or under a sidewalk.  As a
condition precedent to the City Council's issuance of any permit for such
encroachment, the following requirements shall be met:



      (1)  The building to be restored, reconstructed or added upon
shall be located in an existing or proposed local historic district.



      (2)    The right-of-way of the street upon which any such
building abuts shall be at least 45 feet wide.



      (3)    The encroachment shall not extend over or upon a
sidewalk, including the street curbing, for a distance of greater than four
feet or for more than one-third of the sidewalk width, whichever is less, nor
shall the encroachment extend under a sidewalk for a distance of greater than
four feet.



      (4)    Prior to the submittal to City Council, detailed plans
must be submitted and approved by the Director of Engineering and Director of
Public Works.



   (B)    Such encroachment upon or under any sidewalk shall constitute
the owner's agreement to protect and hold the city harmless against any and
all liability, cost, damage or expense suffered or sustained by the city as a
result of or growing out of the encroachment upon or under such sidewalk.



(Ord. 05-50, passed 11-21-05)



LOADING PLATFORMS



§ 40.20  PERMITTED IN CERTAIN ZONES.



   Owners of property abutting on a public alley in the city located in a
district zoned for uses other than residential may erect and maintain loading
and unloading platforms or structures in any public alleyway upon applying
for and receiving a permit from the City Council.



('58 Code, § 13-16)



§ 40.21  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Application for the permit required by § 40.21 must be in writing to
the City Council on forms furnished by the city.  The application shall
contain the name and address of the applicant- owner; the name and address of
the contractor or person who is to construct the platform or structure; the
location and width of the alley into which the platform or structure is to
encroach; the location in the alley and the dimensions of the proposed
platform or structure; and information showing that the proposed platform or
structure will not unduly obstruct the public's use of the alley.  The
application must be accompanied by complete plans and specifications for the
construction of the platform or structure, and a bond indemnifying the city
against loss by reason of damage to the alley during construction or use of
the platform or structure.



('58 Code, § 13-17)



§ 40.22  CONSTRUCTION OF PLATFORMS.



   Platforms or structures constructed pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter shall be not more than six feet in length and shall extend into
the public alley not more than four feet or to a point in the alley that is
five feet from the center line of the alley, whichever distance is less. 
All platforms or structures shall be constructed of fireproof material, and
the construction thereof shall conform to and comply with the requirements of
the building code of the city.  Construction of the platform or structure
shall be under the supervision of city personnel and shall be constructed in
accordance with the plans and specifications submitted with the application.



('58 Code, § 13-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.23  MAINTENANCE.



   The person to whom a permit to construct a platform or structure is
issued shall be responsible at all times for the care and upkeep of the
platform or structure and shall see that no merchandise, crates, trash,
boxes, and other articles are left on the platform or in the alley near the
platform, that the platform and the alley around the platform are in a
reasonably clean and sanitary condition at all times, and that the platform
is used only for loading and unloading purposes.  No platform shall be used
for the storage of any merchandise, tools, or other property.



('58 Code, § 13-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.24  REMOVAL ORDER.



   The City Council may, upon a finding that the public necessity requires
it, require and compel the removal of any platform or structure constructed
or erected under the provisions of this subchapter.  Upon notification that
the platform or structure should be removed, the property owner shall proceed
forthwith at his own expense to remove it.



('58 Code, § 13-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.25  COMPLIANCE WITH CODE.



   A permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be
deemed in compliance with the requirement for permission contained in §
40.12.



('58 Code, § 13-21)



SPECIAL STREET CLEANING



§ 40.30  ACTS AND CONDITIONS REQUIRING SPECIAL STREET CLEANING OR REPAIR
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Any act, neglect, or omission, or any condition caused or
allowed to continue which creates or results in causing a condition in or on
any public street, sidewalk, or storm drain which requires special cleaning
or repair of the street, sidewalk, or storm drain is hereby prohibited.
Prohibited acts, neglects, omissions, and conditions which result in
requiring special cleaning or repair shall include but shall not be limited
to the following.



      (1)   The hauling of dirt, debris, or materials removed from
the sites of construction or reconstruc- tion of buildings or structures, or
waste materials of any kind, in such manner that any portion of the dirt,
debris, or materials is spilled, lost, dropped, or left on the streets or
sidewalks.



      (2)   The depositing or leaving on the streets or sidewalks of
mud, dirt, or any other material as a result of the use of trucks,
construction equipment, or machinery, regardless of whether the materials are
spilled, lost, or dropped in transit or are deposited on the surface of the
street or public property by the tires or wheels of the trucks, construction
equipment, or machinery.



      (3)   The grading of lots, land, or driveways at elevations
higher than street or sidewalk level, or any other acts, neglects, or
conditions created or allowed to exist on the property which result in mud,
dirt, soil, gravel, debris, or other materials being washed onto city streets
or sidewalks or into the city storm drainage system.



      (4)   No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or cause to
be deposited any yard waste, including but not limited to leaves, grass
clippings, twigs or limbs, within the right of way of any public street,
sidewalk, or storm drain.



   (B)   Special cleaning or repair of streets, sidewalks, and the
storm drainage system shall be deemed to be required when their condition is
such that the public health, safety, welfare,  or public use of them is
threatened, limited, or impaired; the use and enjoyment of property abutting
the streets or sidewalks are diminished or limited; or substantial damage is
caused to the streets, sidewalks, or drainage facilities or to the abutting
property.  "SPECIAL CLEANING OR REPAIR" as used in this section and §§
40.31 and 40.99 shall include resurfacing, restoration of gravel, and similar
repairs made necessary by prohibited acts, neglects, or conditions.



(Ord. 79-7, passed 4-23-79; Am. Ord. 02-04, passed 1-22-02)  Penalty, see §
40.99



§ 40.31  CITY TO CLEAN AND REPAIR STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND DRAINS REQUIRING
SPECIAL CLEANING OR REPAIR.



   The Public Works Department will clean and repair all streets,
sidewalks, and storm drains as and when special cleaning or repair is
required by conditions defined in § 40.30(B). The Public Works Department
will keep records of the costs of all specially required cleaning and repair,
which may be computed on the basis of established per mile or per hour cost
of the use of city equipment, plus labor and materials, including water,
likewise computed at cost to the city.



(Ord. 79-7, passed 4-23-79)



PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM



§ 40.40  NUMBERING MAP.



   The property numbering map entitled "Property Numbering Map, dated
February 1, 1983, City of Albemarle, N.C.", is hereby adopted as the official
map and no other property numbers shall be used or displayed in the city
except numbers assigned in accordance with the official numbering map.  The
property numbering map shall be kept on file in the office of the Codes
Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 82-24, passed 11-15-82)



§ 40.41  NUMBERING SYSTEM.



   (A)   On the property numbering map, Second Street, south of its
intersection with North First Street is designated the "North-South axis".
North First Street becomes the "North-South axis" north of its intersection
with South Second Street. Main Street is hereby designated as the "East-West
axis".  All avenues, streets, and alleys running generally north and south
shall be numbered from the East-West axis consecutively to the corporate
limits of the extremity of such avenue, alley, or street. Avenues, streets,
or alleys running generally east and west shall be numbered from the
north-south consecutively to the corporate limits of the extremity of such
avenue, alley, or street.



   (B)   One whole number shall be assigned for every 50 feet of
ground, whether improved property or vacant lot, on every street within the
corporate limits.  Odd numbers shall be assigned to the left side of the
street moving away from the North- South and East-West axis.  Even numbers
shall be assigned to the right side of the street moving away from the axis
(North-South or East-West) which controls such street.



(Ord. 82-24, passed 11-15-82)



§ 40.42  OWNERS TO PURCHASE NUMBERS.



   Every property owner of improved property shall on or before the first
day of February, 1983, purchase and display in a conspicuous place on said
property the number assigned which shall be a type approved by the City
Council.  Numbers shall be of contrasting color to that of the background on
which they are attached.  Numbers shall be near the front entrance to the
principal structure on the lot.



(Ord. 82-24, passed 11-15-82)



§ 40.43  NUMBERS FOR FUTURE BUILDINGS.



   All residence and business buildings erected after the adoption of this
subchapter shall be assigned a number in accordance with the property
numbering map and shall purchase and display such number as provided in §
40.42.



(Ord. 82-24, passed 11-15-82)



§ 40.44  UNLAWFUL TO DEFACE NUMBER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface, or take down any
number on any property in accordance with this subchapter, except for repair
or replacement of such number.



(Ord. 82-24, passed 11-15-82)



OBSTRUCTIONS TO CROSS-VISIBILTY AT STREET INTERSECTIONS



§ 40.50  OBSTRUCTIONS TO CROSS-VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTION DEEMED NUISANCE.



   In order to promote and conserve the public health and safety and
pursuant to the police powers of the city and the power to prevent and abate
public nuisances as conferred upon the city by the General Statutes of North
Carolina, it is declared to be a public nuisance for a person owning and/or
having the legal control of any land within the corporate limits of the city
to maintain or permit upon any such land any fence, sign, billboard,
shrubbery, bush, tree, mailbox, or other object, or any combination thereof,
which obstructs the view of motorists using any street or approach to any
street intersection so as to constitute a traffic hazard or a condition
dangerous to the public safety.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)



§ 40.51  APPLICATION OF RESTRICTIONS.



   The restrictions set forth in § 40.50 shall apply to both of the
following triangles of land:



   (A)   That triangle bounded by the curb edges (or edges of pavement
where there is no curb), measured along the curb edge (or edge of pavement
where there is no curb) 50 feet from the midpoint of the radius of the curb
edge (or edge of pavement where there is no curb) in each direction and the
diagonal line connecting the further ends of such 50-foot lengths; and



   (B)   That triangle bounded by the right-of-way lines measured 35
feet from the point of their intersection in each direction and the diagonal
line connecting the further ends of such 35- foot lengths.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)



§ 40.52  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS OR CERTAIN VEGETATION OR
OBJECTS PROHIBITED.



   Within the triangles described in § 40.51, and except as provided in
§ 40.53, it shall be unlawful to install, set out, or maintain, or allow the
installation, setting out, or maintenance of, any sign, hedge, shrubbery,
tree, natural growth, earthen berm, or object of any kind which obstructs
cross-visibility at a level between 30 inches and 72 inches above the level
of the center of the adjacent intersection.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 40.53  EXCEPTIONS.



   The foregoing provisions of § 40.52 shall not apply to:



   (A)   Permanent buildings.



   (B)   Existing natural grades which, by reason of natural
topography, rise 30 or more inches above the level of the center of the
adjacent intersection.



   (C)   Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such manner that no
limbs or foliage extend into the area between 30 inches and 72 inches above
the level of the center of the adjacent intersection.



   (D)   Fire hydrants, public utility poles, street markers,
governmental signs, and traffic-control devices.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)



§ 40.54  EMERGENCY MEASURES.



   Where compliance with this section in the triangles described in §
40.51 or at the heights described in § 40.53 is insufficient to prevent a
dangerous condition, the City Director of Public Works may designate further
measures which must be taken by the owner or other responsible person to
eliminate such dangerous condition.  Such measures shall be designed to
provide an adequate sight and stopping distance for persons approaching the
intersection at prevailing speeds and may include the removal of obstructions
at different heights or in areas outside the triangles established in §
40.51.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)



§ 40.55  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions or any other law, ordinance, or regulation of the
city or of the state shall be in conflict with the provisions of this
subchapter, the more stringent provisions shall control.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)



§ 40.56  ADMINISTRATION.



   The administration of this subchapter shall be under the direction of
the City Director of Public Works who shall investigate violations, issue
such notices and orders as are required herein, and perform such other duties
as may be necessary to the enforcement hereof.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)



§ 40.57  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   Any obstruction to cross-visibility maintained in violation of his
subchapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance inconsistent with and
detrimental to the public safety and shall be abated in accordance with the
following procedure:



   (A)   The City Director of Public Works shall cause to be served by
certified mail a written notice and order of abatement upon the owner,
tenant, and/or person having legal control of the premises upon which such
obstruction exists.



   (B)   Such obstruction shall be removed within ten days from the
date of receipt of such notice and order.



   (C)   Any person receiving such notice and order may, within ten
days from receipt thereof, request, in writing, a hearing be fore the City
Manager or his designee.  If any person receiving such notice and order does
not comply with the order and does not request in writing, a hearing before
the City Manager or his designee within that ten- day period, the City
Director of Public Works may request, in writing, that the City Manager or
his designee fix the date of hearing and notify the person upon whom the
notice and order has been served of the time and place of such hearing.  If,
after such hearing, the City Manager or his designee finds that the
obstruction in question does in fact constitute a public nuisance, the City
Manager or his designee shall order that such nuisance be abated within ten
days from the date of such order.  Upon failure by any person to comply with
such order of the City Manager or his designee, the City Director of Public
Works shall cause the removal of such obstruction by city forces and/or an
independent contractor, the cost of such removal shall be billed to the owner
and/or person having legal control of the land.  If unpaid for more than 30
days, such cost shall be a lien against the property from which such
obstruction is removed.  The City Director of Public Works shall have the
authority to file the lien on the public records of Stanly County and to
cancel the lien when paid.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)



§ 40.58  ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.



   In addition to other remedies provided herein, the city shall be
entitled to seek a judicial injunction and order of abatement or other
equitable remedy to secure the enforcement of this subchapter regardless of
whether the City Manager has held or been requested to hold a hearing or the
Manager or City Council has declared the condition a nuisance.



(Ord. 94-34, passed 12-5-94)



§ 40.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates § 40.30 or 40.31 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any person whose act, neglect, omission, or who, by permitting
a condition to continue, whether done or neglected directly or through an
agent, servant, or employee, causes additional expense to the city for
necessary special street, sidewalk, or storm drain cleaning or repair, shall
reimburse the city for its expense upon receipt of an itemized statement of
expense submitted by the city, and upon failure to reimburse the city shall
incur and be liable to the city for a civil penalty of $200.



   (C)   The Finance Department shall send to any person responsible
for additional expense to the city an itemized statement of the expense
incurred and a request for reimbursement.  The City Attorney is authorized
to bring suit in the name of the city to recover any unpaid penalties.



(Ord. 79-7, passed 4-23-79)



APPENDIX:  VACATIONS



 


ORD. NO

 

DATE

 

DESCRIPTION





85-29
 
12-12-85
 
South Fifth Street from its  intersection with East Main Street to a point
l25 feet south; except as a pedestrian walkway, and reserving the utility
rights-of-way.


88-23
 
8-1-88
 
Sycamore Street from its intersection with Leslie Street northwardly to the
end thereof, and Leslie Street from its intersection with Sycamore Street to
the east right-of-way line extended of the roadway connecting Leslie Street
and Salisbury Avenue.


88-27
 
9-13-88
 
The segment of Moss Street from its intersection with Freeman Avenue to the
intersection of Montgomery Avenue Extension (formerly Crowell Avenue) and the
alleys shown in Block 4 and Block 5 of Crowell Heights Subdivision.


90-1
 
1-16-90
 
The public alley located approximately 100 feet north of the main square in
the City of Albermarle (intersection of Second Street and Main Street), said
alley extending from North Second Street westwardly and southwardly to West
Main Street.


97-20
 
5-19-97
 
North Third Street from its intersection with Yadkin Street to its
intersection with North Second Street.


98-45
 
10-19-98
 
Closing and vacating Nields Street from its intersection with Kingsley Drive
northwardly to the end thereof.


98-46
 
10-19-98
 
Closing the right-of-way and easement encumbering the 0.07 acre parcel lying
at the eastern terminus of Wiscassett Street and the 0.11 acre parcel located
on the northeast side of Carolina Avenue from its intersection with U.S. 52
and Wiscassett Street.


99-58
 
11-1-99
 
Closing a section of Rebel Road from its intersection with Ridge Street
eastwardly to the west line of a proposed cul-de-sac, 247 feet more or less.


00-06
 
2-21-00
 
Closing a section of High Street from its intersection with Highland Avenue
to its intersection with Elmwood Avenue.


16-21
 
7-18-16
 
Closing the unopened, unnamed street traversing the real property of the Main
Street Methodist Church, in a generally southwesterly direction from NC
Highway 73 (Concord Road) to the Church’s westernmost property line.


16-25
 
8-15-16
 
Closing East Drive traversing the real property of RANA, LLC, in a generally
southwesterly direction from Inger Street across RANA, LLC’s land to its
southwesterly terminus at RANA, LLC’s property line.


 
 
 
 
 









CHAPTER 41: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Section



Garbage and Refuse Collection



   41.01   Definitions



   41.02   Collection by city; exceptions



   41.03   Collection supervised by Director of Public Works



   41.04   Pre-collection practices



   41.05   Collection practices



   41.06   City sanitary landfill



§ 41.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  For
the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their
derivations, shall have the meanings given herein.  When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.



   "ASHES."  The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other
combustible materials.



   "BUILDING MATERIALS."  Materials such as lumber, brick, plaster,
guttering, or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or
additions to existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition
of existing structures.



   "CITY."  City of Albemarle, North Carolina.



   "COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS UNIT." Any building or structure in or from
which a business, trade, or commerce is conducted.



   "CONSTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION MATERIAL."  Waste building materials
resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations.



   "CONTRACT DOCUMENTS."  The request for proposals, instructions to
proposers, contractor's proposal, general specifications, the contract
performance bond and any addenda or changes to the foregoing documents agreed
to by the city and the contractor.



   "CONTRACTOR."  The person, corporation or partnership performing solid
waste collection services under contract with the city.



   "DIRECTOR." The Director of Public Works of the city.



   "DISPOSAL SITE."  A refuse depository including but not limited to
sanitary landfills, transfer stations and waste processing/separation centers
licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies
having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits or approvals to
receive refuse for processing or final disposal.



   "GARBAGE."  Every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or
other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption,
dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or
decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or
vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used tin cans and
other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable animal or
vegetable waste matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except
(in all cases) any matter included in the definition of construction debris,
household trash, yard waste, or hazardous waste.



   "HAZARDOUS WASTE."  Waste, in any amount, which is defined,
characterized or designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or
state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or state
law.  For purposes of this contract, the term hazardous waste shall also
include motor oil, gasoline, paint, and items containing freon or
chlorofluorocarbons.



   "LANDFILL."  City of Albemarle Landfill.



   "LARGE MULTI-FAMILY UNITS."  Any group of apartments under the same
ownership with more than ten living units.



   "MEDICAL WASTE."  Generated in the diagnosis, treatment, or
immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining thereto, or
in the production or testing of biologicals.



   "RESIDENTIAL TRASH."  Uncompacted trash from the home such as
furniture, televisions, mattresses, household fixtures, etc.



   "RECYCLING CONTAINER."  Container designed for use by residential
units for storage and removal of recyclable materials.



   "RECYCLABLE MATERIAL(S."  Newsprint; brown, clear and green glass and
jars; corrugated cardboard; aluminum and bi-metal cans; HDPE clear plastic
milk jugs and PET plastic soft drink containers; or any other commodity
agreed upon in writing by the city and contractor.



   "REFUSE."  All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except
body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Including all garbage and/or rubbish and/or yard waste generated by a
producer.



   "RESIDENTIAL UNITS."  An occupied dwelling (whether a single family
home or a multi-family unit) containing ten or less units within the
corporate limits of the city requiring curbside collection.  A residential
unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power
services are being supplied thereto.



   "RUBBISH."  All chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper,
pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded
shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used
for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor
sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other
similar waste materials not included in the definition of bulky waste,
construction debris, garbage, or hazardous waste.



   "SMALL DEAD ANIMALS." Cats, dogs, and small household pets of 50 pounds
or less in weight.



   "SMALL MULTI-FAMILY UNITS."  Any duplex apartment or group of
apartments under common ownership and with more than one dwelling unit, but
with ten or less.



   "WHEELED CONTAINER."  A plastic covered container permanently attached
to wheels designed for use by residential units for storage of garbage and
other miscellaneous refuse with a capacity of not less than 90 gallons.



   "WHITE GOODS."  Large domestic appliances, including but not limited
to, stoves, water heaters, refrigerators, freezers, window air conditioning
units.



   "YARD WASTE."  All tree trimmings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, and
dead tree debris not exceeding six feet (6') in length, and which can be
readily loaded by two laborers; and trimmings and grass clippings placed in
plastic bags which weigh no more than 50 lbs.



(Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-07)



§ 41.02  COLLECTION BY CITY; EXCEPTIONS.



   Except as provided in divisions (A) through (C) below, all refuse
accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the
city or its authorized contractor. No person shall collect, convey over any
of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of, any refuse accumulated
in the city.



   (A)   This chapter shall not prohibit the actual producers of
refuse, or the owners of premises on which refuse has accumulated, from
personally collecting, conveying, and disposing of the refuse, provided the
producers or owners comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any
other governing law or ordinances.



   (B)   This chapter shall not prohibit any person operating under a
license or franchise expressly granted by the governing authorities the City
of Albemarle from collecting, conveying, and disposing of refuse provided the
persons comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other
governing law or ordinances.



   (C)   This chapter shall not prohibit collectors of refuse from
outside of the city from hauling refuse over city streets, provided the
collectors comply with the provisions of this chapter and with any other
governing law or ordinances.



(Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-07)



§ 41.03  COLLECTION SUPERVISED BY DIREC TOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and
disposed of by the city or its contractor under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works.  The Director shall have the authority to make
regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste
containers, and any other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance,
and disposal as he shall find necessary, and to change and modify the
regulations after notice to the public, provided that the regulations are not
contrary to the provisions of this chapter.  Any person aggrieved by a
regulation of the Director shall have the right of appeal to the City Manager
who shall have the authority to confirm, modify, or revoke any regulations.



(Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-07)



§ 41.04  PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   (A)   Preparation of refuse.



      (1)   Garbage.  All garbage, before being placed in a
container for collection, shall have drained from it all free liquids and
must be bagged.



      (2)   Rubbish. All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before
being deposited for collection.



      (3)   Excess garbage, rubbish residential trash.  Garbage,
rubbish and residential trash that cannot be placed in the wheeled container
shall be placed next to the container for collection.  This type of waste
shall be secured and placed in a manner for easy disposal by the city or its
contractor, such as in bags or boxes.  The cumulative amount of excess
garbage and rubbish permitted in one collection period shall not exceed four
cubic yards.



      (4)   Yard waste.  Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, and
similar material shall be cut to a length not to exceed six feet.  Tree and
shrub trimmings, leaves, and grass clippings that have been placed in plastic
bags and which weigh no more than 50 pounds.  Each residence shall be
limited to a maximum of four cubic yards of yard waste per pick-up under the
city's contract.  If a residence has more than this allotted amount of yard
waste, the occupant may pay the contractor an amount agreed upon by the city
and contractor as a uniform per cubic yard surcharge.



      (5)   Recyclable materials.  All recyclable materials being
placed in a container for collection shall have drained from it all free
liquids.



   (B)   Refuse containers.



      (1)   Residential units.  Refuse containers for residential
units shall be a wheeled container provided by the city or contractor without
charge to the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of any residential unit for
use at the residential unit.  Any owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any
residential unit desiring up to three additional wheeled containers beyond
what is provided for by the city or its contractor as part of the basic
service, shall have the option of contacting the city or its contractor for
up to three additional carts.  The additional carts shall be provided to the
owner, tenant, lessee or occupant by the city or its contractor and the
owner, tenant, lessee or occupant shall be billed for these extra wheeled
containers.  The owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the residential unit
to whom a wheeled container is furnished shall be responsible to the city and
contractor for the proper care and maintenance of the container, and the
owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant will be billed for damages to the wheeled
container, reasonable wear and tear excepted, following the discovery of the
damages. If the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of any residential unit
shall vacate the occupied premises while in possession of a wheeled container
he or she shall, before departing from the premises, notify the Director of
Public Works or the city contractor, and the Director, his or her agent or
the contractor will promptly pick up the container and issue a receipt to the
person, notify the city or its contractor for removal of the wheeled
container.



      (2)   Commercial and business units.  All businesses shall
have the option of contracting with the city or its contractor for up to
three wheeled garbage containers.  The wheeled garbage containers shall be
collected once weekly by the city or its contractor in accordance with the
city's solid waste collection schedule.  The cost of the wheeled containers
shall be the responsibility of each business.  All waste set out for
collection must be placed in the wheeled container.  At no time shall any
waste be set outside the wheeled garbage container nor will such waste be
collected by the city or contractor.  Businesses also have the option of
contracting directly with any commercial solid waste hauler franchised by the
City of Albemarle for the placement of a dumpster or roll-off container at
the business location and for the removal of the solid waste.



   (C)   Storing of refuse.



      (1)   Containers.  All refuse which readily fits into the
container shall be placed in the type container referred to in division (B)
above for pickup by the city's garbage collection crews, or its contractor.



      (2)   Public places.  No person shall place any refuse in any
street, alley, or other public place, or on any private property whether
owned by the person or not, within the city except in proper containers for
collection, or under express approval granted by the Director of Public
Works.  Nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or
other body of water.



      (3)   Scattering of refuse.  No person shall cast, place,
sweep, or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that
it may be carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk,
alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place, or into any occupied premises
within the city.  Remedy for the correction of such a situation shall be
performed by the property owner at the direction of the city.



   (D)   Points of collection.



      (1)   Wheeled containers.  Where the wheeled container is
used the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises shall be
responsible for causing the wheeled container to be placed at the curb or
side of the street, but not in the portion of the street used for vehicular
travel, at a place readily accessible for collection by the city or contract
garbage collection crews once each week on the day designated by the Director
of Public Works for the area in which the premises are located.  The wheeled
containers shall be so located not earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day prior to
collection nor later than 8:00 a.m. on the day of the pickup and must be
removed from the street location not later than 7:00 p.m. the same day.  If
there is no member of the premises or household to which a wheeled container
is assigned who is capable of moving the wheeled container as required
herein, he shall notify the Director of Public Works or the city's contractor
in writing of the existence of the disability.  In this event, the disabled
person shall furnish a physician's certificate confirming the disability and
on the failure of the alleged disabled person to furnish the certificate
within ten days after required, the alleged disabled person shall be deemed
physically able to comply with all the provisions of this section.  No
person shall molest or interfere with the contents of any wheeled container
or the container itself which has been set out for collection and removal by
the city.



      (2)   Roll-off container, detachable containers and
dumpster.  Where a roll-off container, detachable containers or dumpster is
used, the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises shall provide a
location for the container off the right of way.  Requests for the temporary
placement of such containers and dumpsters must be made to the city.



   (E)   Obstacles to collection.  The owner, tenant, lessee, or
occupant of the premises shall have the responsibility of keeping the
premises free from dogs or any other obstacle which would hinder or impede
city or contractor personnel from removing or returning the container to the
premises.



   (F)   Penalty.  Violations may be enforced through the provisions
of § 10.84, the penalty established by § 10.99 may be enforced, or
violations may be considered a nuisance by the city as provided by in §
82.16 and enforceable through §§ 82.17 and 82.18.  Nothing in the above
shall prohibit the pursuit of criminal procedures for remedy.



(Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-07)



§ 41.05  COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   (A)   Collection.



      (1)   Residential units and small multi-family units.  Refuse
accumulation by residences shall be collected on the days fixed therefore by
the Director of Public Works, but in all events at least once a week.



      (2)   Large multi-family units.  Refuse generated by Large
Multi-Family Units is not a part of the city's solid waste collection
contract or services.  Collection of accumulated refuse at these locations
shall be provided for in the manner arranged by the property owner(s).



      (3)   Commercial and business units.  Refuse generated by
commercial and business units is not a part of the city's residential solid
waste collection service, therefore, all waste must fit inside the collection
containers.  Business and commercial entities may opt to pay for up to three
small business roll-out containers from the city franchise hauler.  If
another option for refuse collection is selected, the collection of
accumulated refuse at these locations shall be provided for in the manner
arranged by the property owner(s) or occupant(s) with a private waste
collection company franchised to do business in the city by the City of
Albemarle.



      (4)   Yard waste.  Residential yard waste shall be placed
along the ditchline or curb line of the residence from which the waste is
generated for collection and shall not be placed across the street or beyond
the side property lines of the residence.  Residents are encouraged to place
such waste out as closely to their collection day as possible.  The
placement of the residential yard waste shall not be placed in a manner to
disrupt the flow of traffic or to create a traffic hazard.  Collection shall
occur once each week on the same schedule as the residential garbage is
collected.  Trimmings or clippings shall not exceed six feet in length, and
tree and shrub trimmings, leaves, and grass clippings which have been placed
in plastic bags and which weigh no more than 50 pounds.  Grass clippings put
out for collection may not be placed loose at the curb or roadside and must
always be bagged.



      (5)   Leaf collection. 



         (a)   The city or its contractor shall collect, during
the period beginning with the third full week in October through the last
full week prior to Christmas of each year, leaves loose in windrows at the
curb or ditch line of all streets of the city as shown on the map of streets
as published annually prior to the commencement of leaf collection by the
city or its contractor.  During this period, leaves shall be picked up on
each street once every other week. 



         (b)   During the months of January, February, March, and
April of each year, contractor shall pick up leaves on each street once a
month.



         (c)   After the April collection cycle, the city or its
contractor shall pick up only those leaves that have been bagged and placed
at the curb on normal yard waste collection days.



      (6)   Recyclable materials.  Materials for collection by the
city or its contractor shall be placed in the recycling container provided by
the city or its contractor.  The recycling container shall be placed at the
curb or side of the street, but not in the portion of the street used for
vehicular travel, at a place readily accessible for collection by the city's
garbage collection crews once each week on the day designated by the city for
the area in which the premises are located.  The recycling containers shall
be so located not earlier than 6:00 p.m. the day prior to collection nor
later than 8:00 a.m. on the day of the pickup and must be removed from the
street location not later than 7:00 p.m. of the collection day.



      (7)   Residential trash.  Materials for collection by the
city or its contractor shall be placed at the roadside for collection. 
Residential trash shall be placed at the curb or side of the street, but not
in the portion of the street used for vehicular travel, at a place readily
accessible for collection by the city's garbage collection crews once each
week on the day designated by the city for the area in which the premises are
located.



      (8)   White goods.  White goods for collection by the city or
its contractor shall be placed at the curb or side of the street, but not in
the portion of the street used for vehicular travel, at a place readily
accessible for collection by the city or contractor garbage collection
crews.  Collection shall be on Friday's only and residents shall be required
to call in the item to be collected to the city or its contractor.



      (9)   Issues outside contract services.  Any materials or
amounts outside this policy shall be the responsibility of the property owner
or tenant to arrange for the removal of such materials or waste.



   (B)   Special refuse issues.



      (1)   Contagious disease refuse.  The removal of wearing
apparel, bedding, or other refuse from homes or other places where highly
infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed should be performed under
the supervision and direction of the North Carolina Department of Environment
and Natural Resources.  This refuse shall not be placed in containers for
regular collections.



      (2)   Flammable or explosive refuse.  Highly flammable or
explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection
but shall be disposed of as directed by the Director of Public Works at the
expense of the owner or possessor thereof.



      (3)   Tires.  Whole automobile, truck, tractor, or implement
tires shall not be placed in containers for collection and will not be
collected under any circumstances.  Tires can be disposed of by removing the
tire from the rim and depositing free of charge in the designated
container(s) at the City of Albemarle Landfill.



      (4)   No tree limbs, stumps, logs, or other large material
that cannot be readily loaded by two laborers shall be hauled by the city. No
tree limbs cut by landscape or tree service contractors or workmen will be
hauled by the city or its contractor.



      (5)   No building materials, roofing, soil, dirt, rock, or
concrete will be collected or hauled by the city or its contractor.



      (6)   Small dead animals will be picked up at the on the
designated solid waste collection day.  Persons having small dead animals on
Saturday, Sunday and holidays should put the animal in an airtight plastic
bag and securely tie same until next available collection day.



      (7)   No hazardous solid or liquid waste shall be put in any
receptacle for collection by the city or its contractor.



      (8)   Medical waste.  Medical waste shall not be placed in
any receptacle provided by the city or its contractor and shall not be placed
out for collection by the city or its contractor.



      (9)   Ashes.  No hot ash shall be placed in wheeled
containers. All ashes set out for collection shall be cooled and be placed in
plastic bags for collection.



   (C)   Holidays.



         New Year's Day



         Martin Luther King Day



         Good Friday



         Memorial Day



         Independence Day



         Labor Day



         Thanksgiving Day



         Christmas Day



   The city or its contractor may decide to observe any or all of the
above referenced holidays by suspension of service on the holiday.  Such
suspension does not relieve the city or its contractor of the obligation to
provide for the collection of any materials scheduled for the designated
holiday.  The city or its contractor shall give notice of its holiday
schedule at least ten days prior to the holiday to the general public by
newspaper advertisement at least one week prior to the holiday.



   (D)   Collection by actual producers, franchised collectors, and
outside collectors.



      (1)   Requirements for vehicles.  The actual producers of
refuse or the owners of premises on which refuse is accumulated who desire
personally to collect and dispose of the refuse, persons who desire to
dispose of waste material not included in the definition of refuse, the
collectors of refuse under franchise granted by the City of Albemarle, and
collectors of refuse from outside of the city who desire to haul over the
streets of the city, shall use a water-tight vehicle provided with a tight
cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and
refuse from being blown, dropped, or spilled.



      (2)   Rules and regulations. The Director shall have the
authority to make any other reasonable regulations concerning individual
collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over city
streets by outside collectors and franchised collectors as he shall find
necessary, subject to the right of appeal as set forth in § 41.03.



   (E)   Refuse property of city. Ownership of refuse material set out
for collection by the city or its contractor or deposited on the city
landfill shall be vested in the city.



   (F)   Penalty.  Violations may be enforced through the provisions
of § 10.84, the penalty established by § 10.99 may be enforced, or
violations may be considered a nuisance by the city as provided by in §
82.16 and enforceable through §§ 82.17 and 82.18.  Nothing in the above
shall prohibit the pursuit of criminal procedures for remedy.



(Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-07; Am. Ord. 12-04, passed 2-6-12)



§ 41.06  CITY SANITARY LANDFILL.



   (A)   The city landfill shall be open to the public at the hours
established by the Director of Public Works with approval of the City
Council.  No person shall be permitted to enter into, trespass on, or dump
garbage or trash at the city's sanitary landfill other than during the normal
operating hours posted by sign notice at the entrance gate to the sanitary
landfill.



   (B)   Every person using the sanitary landfill shall place his
refuse at a point designated by the operator of the sanitary landfill.  The
operator of the sanitary landfill shall make any reasonable regulations for
the day-to-day operation of the landfill so as to ensure that it will be
maintained in a sanitary manner satisfactory to the North Carolina Department
of Environment and Natural Resources.



   (C)   No person shall be permitted to scavenge or salvage items from
the sanitary landfill.



   (D)   No person other than a duly-authorized employee of the city
shall be permitted to walk or stand within 50 feet of any of the equipment
used for the operation of the sanitary landfill while the equipment is in
operation, the motor is running, or the operator is either operating or
maintaining the piece of equipment.



   (E)   No person shall place any refuse or waste material in the
sanitary landfill which may cause any harm to the operation of the landfill
or the personnel operating the landfill.  This includes any flammable or
explosive solid or liquid material which might give off toxic fumes.



   (F)   No hazardous or liquid wastes shall be accepted or disposed of
in the city's sanitary landfill except as may be permitted by the North
Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources.



   (G)   For any automobile, truck, tractor, or implement tires to be
accepted at the landfill, tires must be removed from the rim and deposited in
specified tire recycling containers.



(Ord. 07-01, passed 1-2-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE V:  MUNICIPAL UTILITIES



   Chapter



      50.   UTILITY CHARGES AND BILLING



      51.   SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



      52.     CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL



      53.     EMERGENCY WATER MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES



      54.   IN-GROUND IRRIGATION SYSTEMS



CHAPTER 50:  UTILITY CHARGES AND BILLING



Section



   50.01   Bills



   50.02   Deposits; refunds



   50.03   Rates



   50.04   Protested bills



   50.05   Electrical connections



   50.06   Connection fees



   50.07   Order of payments



§ 50.01  BILLS.



   Bills for all utility services furnished by the city shall be paid on
or before the twentieth day of the calendar month next following the calendar
month in which the bills are rendered.  If not so paid, services for the
delinquent utility account shall be discontinued until all charges against
the utility account shall have been paid in full.



('58 Code, § 17-1)



§ 50.02  DEPOSITS; REFUNDS.



   Prior to receiving electric, water, or sewer service, consumers may be
required to deposit a sum of money not to exceed the estimated cost of the
service for a period of two months, the sum of money to be held by the city
and applied to the payment for utility services in the event the consumer
defaults in payment therefor.  The city will pay interest on the deposit
required hereunder and so remaining for six months at the rate of 6% per
annum, payable when service is discontinued. Upon discontinuance of service,
the city shall refund the deposit with accumulated interest and less any
unpaid bills.



('58 Code, § 17-3)



§ 50.03  RATES.



   The rates for electric current, water, and sewer service furnished by
the respective systems of the city and the rules and regulations governing
the furnishing of them shall be established by resolution adopted by the City
Council.  Any person desiring to obtain electric current, water, or sewer
service from the city shall first obtain a service contract from the
utilities business office.



('58 Code, § 17-4)



§ 50.04  PROTESTED BILLS.



   In case of protested bills, when it is alleged that meters are
defective, the meters shall be tested, and if found defective, proper
allowance shall be made on the bills, but if found not defective, then §
50.01 shall apply to the complainant.



('58 Code, § 17-5)



§ 50.05  ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS.



   The city will make all necessary electrical connections from its main
line to all buildings free of charge, but all wiring from that point shall be
done by the owner at his own expense subject to the approval of the
Electrical Inspector.



('58 Code, § 17-6)



§ 50.06  CONNECTION FEES.



   The following charges shall apply to all water and sewer connections.



   (A)   Water and sewer taps.



 

 

Inside

 

Outside



5/8 in. by 3/4 in. water tap
 

$200

 

$250



3/4 in. water tap
 

225

 

275



l in. water tap
 

350

 

350



1-1/2 in. water tap
 

425

 

475



2 in. water tap
 

1,000

 

1,050



4 in. sewer tap
 

200

 

250









   (B)   Plumbing permit.



 

Cost per fixture
 
$1.50 with a minimum of $10.00


Water service
 
5.00


Sewer service
 
5.00


Water and sewer service
 
5.00



 



   (C)   The charge for making a sewer connection larger than that
listed in division (A) above shall be $200 plus the cost in excess of $200
incurred in providing the connection inside the corporate limits and shall be
$250 plus the cost in excess of $250 incurred in providing the connection
outside the corporate limits.  In cases where a city sewer is not available
in the street adjacent to the property to be served by the connection, but a
sewer connection can be made to the city sewer system within an easement or
otherwise, the tap fee shall be $50.



   (D)   Inspection rates.



      Per fixture - $1



('58 Code, § 4-42)  (Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-20-83)



§ 50.07  ORDER OF PAYMENTS.



   Payments made to the city and utility deposits shall be applied to
utility accounts in the following order of priority:  Late fees and/or
penalties; household solid waste collection fee; household solid waste
disposal fee; roll out fee; electric charges prior; electric charges current;
water charges prior; water charges current; sewer charges prior; sewer
charges current; green power.



(Ord. 07-19, passed 6-18-07)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



Section



   51.01   General provisions



   51.02   General sewer use requirements



   51.03   Fees



   51.04   Wastewater discharge permit application and issuance



   51.05   Reporting requirements



   51.06   Compliance monitoring



   51.07   Confidential information



   51.08   Enforcement



   51.09   Annual publication of significant noncompliance



   51.10   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations



   51.11   Private sewage disposal



   51.12   Fats, oil and grease control



   51.13   Severability



   51.14   Conflict



   51.15   Effective date



§ 51.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose and policy.



      (1)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct
and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system
for the City of Albemarle, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the
city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 United States Code 1251 et seq.) and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).



      (2)   The objectives of this chapter are:



         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and
wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will
interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting
sludge;



         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and
wastewater discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will pass
through the system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the state or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;



         (c)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial
wastewater and sludges from the municipal system;



         (d)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be
affected by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as
well as protecting the general public;



         (e)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost
of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the municipal wastewater
system; and



         (f)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its
NPDES or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use, and disposal
requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the municipal
wastewater system is subject.



      (3)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the
issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.



      (4)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system, as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-312 and/or 153A-275.  The
city shall designate an administrator of the publicly owned treatment works
or POTW and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the POTW Director.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.  Any powers granted
to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to
other city personnel.



      (5)   By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater
system, industrial users located inside or outside the city limits agree to
comply with the terms and conditions established in this chapter, as well as
any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. This includes
all industrial users discharging in the wastewater collection system owned by
any satellite POTW.



   (B)   Definitions and Abbreviations.



      (1)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:



         (a)   "ACT" or "THE ACT."  The Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251,
et seq.



         (b)   "APPROVAL AUTHORITY."  The Director of the
Division Of Water Quality of the North Carolina Department of Environment and
Natural Resources or his or her designee.



         (c)   "AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL
USER." 



            1.   If the industrial user is a corporation,
authorized representative shall mean:



               a.   The president, secretary, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



               b.   The manager of one or more
manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is
authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the
regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making
major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has
been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.



            2.   If the industrial user is a partnership or
sole proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general
partner or the proprietor, respectively.



            3.   If the industrial user is a federal, state,
or local government facility, an authorized representative shall mean a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.



            4.   The individuals described in division
(B)(1)(c)1. through 3. above may designate another authorized representative
if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the
individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility
from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is
submitted to the city.



            5.   If the designation of an authorized
representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or
position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted
to POTW Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an
authorized representative.



         (d)   "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD)."  The quantity
of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g., milligrams per liter (mg/l)).



         (e)   "BUILDING SEWER."  A sewer conveying wastewater
from the premises of a user to the POTW.



         (f)   "BYPASS."  The intentional diversion of
wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.



         (g)   "CATEGORICAL STANDARDS."  National categorical
pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard.



         (h)   “CONTROL AUTHORITY.”  Refers to the POTW
organization if the POTW organization's Pretreatment Program approval has not
been withdrawn.



         (i)   "ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY" or "EPA."  The
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also
be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized
official of said Agency.



         (j)   "GRAB SAMPLE."  A sample which is taken from a
waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste
stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.



         (k)   "HOLDING TANK WASTE."  Any waste from holding
tanks, including but not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks.



         (l)   "INDIRECT DISCHARGE" or "DISCHARGE."  The
discharge or the introduction from any nondomestic source regulated under
Section 307(b),(c), or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW
(including holding tank waste discharged into the system).



         (m)   "INDUSTRIAL USER" or "USER."  Any person which is
a source of indirect discharge.



         (n)   “INTERFERENCE.”  The inhibition, or
disruption of the POTW collection system, treatment processes, operations, or
its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes or contributes to a
violation of any requirement of the Control Authority's (and/or POTW's, if
different from the Control Authority) NPDES, collection system or
Non-discharge Permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or
permits.  The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA)(42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.), the Clean Air Act (33 U.S.C.
1251 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act (42 U.S.C. 2601 et seq.), the
Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) (33 U.S.C. 1401 et seq.)
or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to
the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



         (o)   "LIMITING METAL POLLUTANT."  Any metal, such as
but not limited to silver, cadmium, chromium, copper, nickel, lead, and zinc,
discharged into the sanitary system, which in comparison to the concentration
and characteristics of other metals discharged into the system, causes the
most interference with the operation of the POTW, and/or the most
contamination of sludge for its disposal or restage.



         (p)   "MEDICAL WASTE."  Isolation wastes, infectious
agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body
parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.



         (q)   "NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD" or
"CATEGORICAL STANDARD."  Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of
the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial
users, and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



         (r)   "NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD" or
"PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD."  Absolute prohibitions against the
discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in § 51.02(A) and
are developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR,
Section 403.5.



         (s)   "NEW SOURCE."



            1.   Any building, structure, facility, or
installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be
applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with Section 307(c), provided that:



               a.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation is constructed at a site which no other source is located;



               b.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



               c.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site.  In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



            2.   Construction on a site at which an existing
source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of division (B)(1)(s)1.b. or c. above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



            3.   For purposes of this definition, construction
of a new source has commenced if the owner or operator has:



               a.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:



                  i.   Any placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or



                  ii.   Sig-nificant site preparation
work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Entered into a binding contractual
obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to
be used in its operation within a reasonable time.  Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and
contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute
a contractual obligation under this definition.



         (t)   "NON CONTACT COOLING WATER."  Water used for
cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.



         (u)   "NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM"
or "NPDES PERMIT."  A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33
U.S.C. 1342), or pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation
from the EPA.



         (v)   “NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT.” A permit issued by the
state pursuant to G.S. 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged
directly to surface waters of the state or for a wastewater treatment works
which does not discharge directly to surface waters of the state.



         (w)   “PASS THROUGH.”  A discharge which exits the
POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or
with discharges from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation, of the control authority's
(and/or POTW’s, if different from the control authority) NPDES, collection
system, or non-discharge permit or a downstream water quality standard even
if not included in the permit.



         (x)   "PERSON."  Any individual, partnership,
copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local government entities.



         (y)   "pH."  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of
a substance, expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm
(base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed
in grams per liter of solution.



         (z)   "POLLUTANT."  Any "waste" as defined in G.S. §
143-213(18) and dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater(for example, pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, metals, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor).



         (aa)   "POTW DIRECTOR."  The City Director of Public
Utilities or his or her duly authorized representative.



         (bb)   "POTW TREATMENT PLANT."  That portion of the
POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater.



         (cc)   "PRETREATMENT" or "TREATMENT."  The reduction of
the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of
the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollution into a POTW collection
system and/or treatment plant.  The reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other
means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed
by an applicable pretreatment standard.



         (dd)   "PRETREATMENT PROGRAM."  The program for the
control of pollutants introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources
which was developed by the city in compliance with 40 CFR, Section 403.8 and
approved by the approval authority as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14)
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.



         (ee)   "PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS."  Any substantive or
procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment
standard.



         (ff)   “PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.” Prohibited
discharge standards, categorical standards, or local limit which applies to
an industrial user.



         (gg)   "PUBLICITY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW)" or
"MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM."  A treatment works as defined by Section 212
of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned in this instance by the city.
This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and
other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant.
For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that
convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by
contract or agreement with the city, or in any other way, users of the city's
POTW.



         (hh)   “SATELLITE POTW.”  City, town or entity
which the City of Albemarle has agreed to receive and treat their wastewater.



         (ii)   "SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE."  Substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the user's treatment facilities which causes
them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a
bypass. "SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE" does not mean economic loss caused by delays
in production.



         (jj)   “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” or “SIU.”
An industrial user that discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment
works and that:



            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per
day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters), or



            2.   Contributes process wastewater which makes up
5% or more of the NPDES or non-discharge permitted flow limit or 5% of more
of the maximum allowable headworks loading of the POTW treatment plant for
any POTW pollutant of concern, or



            3.   Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment
Standards under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471; or



            4.   Is designated as such by the Control
Authority, the Division Of Water Quality or the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable
potential, either singly or in combination with other contributing industrial
users, for adversely affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, or for contributing to violations of
the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge
permit, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream
standard, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options, or



            5.   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC
02H .0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user
meeting the criteria in paragraphs (1) and (2) above has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of
the POTW's effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge
permit, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream
standard, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options, and thus is not
a significant industrial user, or



            6.   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC
02H .0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user
meeting the criteria in § 51.01(B)(1)(jj)3. above meets the requirements of
40 CFR Part 403.3(v)(2) and thus is a non-significant categorical industrial
user.



            7.   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC
02H .0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user
meeting the criteria in § 51.01(B)(1)(jj)3. above meets the requirements of
40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(3) and thus is a middle tier significant industrial
user.  Sampling and inspection requirements may be cut in half as per 40 CFR
Parts 403.8 (f)(2)(v)(C) and 403.12 (e)(3).



         (kk)   “SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE” or “SNC.” The
status of noncompliance of a significant industrial user or any industrial
user which meets the criteria in Subparagraph (B)(1)(jj) when one or more of
the following criteria are met. 



            1.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge
limits, defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements
taken for the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six
month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part
403.3(l);



            2.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here as those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l) multiplied by the
applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all
other pollutants (except flow and pH);



            3.   Any other violation of a pretreatment
standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l) (daily maximum,
long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the
control authority and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public);



            4.   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater
that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in either the control authority's or the POTW's,
if different from the control authority, exercise of its emergency authority
under 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and Section [8.1(e)] of this SUO to halt
or prevent such a discharge;



            5.   Violations of compliance schedule milestones,
contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the schedule date.



            6.   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the
due date.



            7.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.



            8.   Any other violation or group of violations
that the control authority and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.



         (ll)   "SLUG LOAD OR DISCHARGE."  Any discharge at a
flow rate or concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause
interference or pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW's
regulations, local limits, or Industrial User Permit conditions.  This can
include but is not limited to spills and other accidental discharges;
discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature;  a non-customary batch
discharge; or any other discharges that can cause a violation of the
prohibited discharge standards in § 51.02(A) of this chapter.



         (mm)   "STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC)."  A
classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget, 1987.



         (nn)   "STORM WATER."  Any flow occurring during or
following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



         (oo)   "SUSPENDED SOLIDS."  The total suspended matter
that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater or other
liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering (EPA Method 160.2).



         (pp)   "UPSET."  An exceptional incident in which there
is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user.  An
"UPSET" does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
facilities lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



         (qq)   "WASTEWATER."  The liquid- and water-carried
industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial facilities, mobile sources, treatment facilities, and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into
or permitted to enter the POTW.



         (rr)   "WASTEWATER  PERMIT."  As set forth in §
51.04(B).



         (ss)   “WATERS OF THE STATE.”  All streams, rivers,
brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways,
reservoirs and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.



      (2)   This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender
shall include the feminine and vice-versa.



      (3)   Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary.



      (4)   The use of the singular shall be construed to include
the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the
context of its use.



      (5)   The following abbreviations when used in this chapter,
shall have the designated meanings:



         (a)   BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand.



         (b)   CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.



         (c)   COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand.



         (d)   EPA - Environmental Protection Agency.



         (e)   gpd - Gallons per day.



         (f)   l - liter.



         (g)   mg - Milligrams.



         (h)   mg/l - Milligrams per liter.



         (i)   G.S. - North Carolina General Statutes.



         (j)   NPDES - National-Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System.



         (k)   O&M - Operation and Maintenance.



         (l)   POTW -  Publicly-owned treatment works.



         (m)   RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



         (n)   SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.



         (o)   SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act.



         (p)   TSS - Total suspended solids.



         (q)   U.S.C. - United States Code.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.02  GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prohibited Discharge Standards.



      (1)   General Prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause
to be contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass through.  These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a
significant industrial user or subject to any national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



      (2)   Specific Prohibitions.



         (a)   No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



            1.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive
hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed
cup flashpoint of less than 140°F. (60°C.) using the test methods specified
in 40 CFR 261.21.



            2.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which
will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but
in no case solids greater than ½ inch in any dimension.



            3.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil,
or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through.



            4.   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or
more than 12.5 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage to the POTW or equipment.



            5.   Any wastewater containing pollutants,
including oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD and the like) in sufficient
quantity, (flow or concentration) either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants to cause interference with the POTW.



            6.   Any wastewater having a temperature greater
than 150°F. (66°C.), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104°F. (40°C.).



            7.   Any pollutants which result in the presence
of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems.



            8.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at
discharge points designated by the POTW Director in accordance with division
(I) of this section.



            9.   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or
solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.



            10.   Any substance which may cause the POTW's
effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or
scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW
cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations
or permits issued under Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.



            11.   Any wastewater containing any radioactive
wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.



            12.   Storm water, surface water, ground water,
artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool
drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and
unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW
Director.



            13.   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or
vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l unless authorized by
the POTW Director.



            14.   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues
from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.



            15.   Any medical wastes, except as specifically
authorized by the POTW Director in a wastewater discharge permit.



            16.   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia
salts, or other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that
interfere with the municipal wastewater system.



            17.   Any material that would be identified as
hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer
except as may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director.



            18.   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant
effluent to violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as
described in 15A NCAC 2B .0200.



            19.   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction
with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.



            20.   Recognizable portions of the human or animal
anatomy.



            21.   Any wastes containing detergents, surface
active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
municipal wastewater system.



            22.   Any wastes causing two successive readings
on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or
at any point in the system) to be more than 5% nor any single reading over
10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.



         (b)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other
wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a
manner that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. 
All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge
to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the
system.  When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to
the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts which may
cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the
POTW Director shall:



            1.   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of
the contribution on the POTW in accordance with § 51.08(A); and



            2.   Take appropriate actions in accordance with
§ 51.04 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.



   (B)   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable
standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471 and
incorporated herein.



      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed
only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass
limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).



      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
POTW Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical
pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.



      (4)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.



   (C)   Industrial Waste Survey and Local Limits.



      (1)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user
discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following average
discharge limits:



 



300mg/l
 
BOD


300mg/l
 
TSS


800mg/l
 
COD


15mg/l
 
NH 3


0.003mg/l
 
arsenic


0.003mg/l
 
cadmium


0.061mg/l
 
copper


0.013mg/l
 
cyanide


0.049mg/l
 
lead


0.0001mg/l
 
mercury


0.021mg/l
 
nickel


0.005mg/l
 
silver


0.05mg/l
 
total chromium


0.175mg/l
 
zinc




 



      (2)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to
develop user specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW's
maximum allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for particular pollutants
of concern.  User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of
concern shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose
mass limits in addition to, or in place of, concentration-based limits.



   (D)   State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on
discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.



   (E)   Right of Revision. The city reserves the right to establish
limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those required by
either state or federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in § 51.01(A) or the general and specific prohibitions
in division (A) of this section, as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4.



   (F)   Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water
or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state.



   (G)   Pretreatment of Wastewater.



      (1)   Pretreatment Facilities. Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits
issued under § 51.04(B) and shall achieve compliance with all national
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set
out in division (A) of this section within the time limitations as specified
by EPA, the state, or the POTW Director, whichever is more stringent. Any
facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for
review, and shall be approved by the POTW Director before construction of the
facility.  The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions
of this chapter.  Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director
prior to the user's initiation of the changes.



      (2)   Additional Pretreatment Measures.



         (a)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may
require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate
that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate,
and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from
industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the users' compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.



         (b)   The POTW Director may require any person
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at
their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.



         (c)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for
the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and
oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the POTW Director and shall be so located to be easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned,
and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.



         (d)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



   (H)   Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each
significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and
prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in §
51.01(B)(1)(ll).  All SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being
designated an SIU.  The POTW Director may require any user to develop,
submit for approval, and implement such a plan or other specific action. 
Alternatively, the POTW Director may develop such a plan for any user.



      (2)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW Director
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills
and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see § 51.05(E) and §
51.05(F).



      (3)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address,
at a minimum, the following:



         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including
nonroutine batch discharges;



         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;



         (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW
Director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 51.05(F); and



         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any
accidental or slug discharge.  Such procedures include, but are not limited
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



   (I)   Hauled Wastewater.



      (1)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only
at locations designated by the POTW Director, and at such times as are
established by the POTW Director. Such waste shall not violate this section
or any other requirements established by the city. The POTW Director may
require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.



      (2)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial
waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
The POTW Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste
if he or she adopts a uniform rule for determining which wastes are
prohibited. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other
requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at
locations designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without
prior consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of
each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW
Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis
of any load prior to discharge.



      (4)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking
form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and
address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification,
names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste.  The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



   (J)   Special Agreement.  Any wastewater or wastes discharged by a
user, which has characteristics prohibited in this section, may be admitted
into the sanitary sewers when the discharge is approved by the POTW Director
within the wastewater discharge permit as a special agreement.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.03  FEES.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for
the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for
the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges
or fees shall be set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and fees
proposed by the POTW Director and approved by the City Board. A copy of these
charges and fees will be made available from the POTW Director.



   (B)   User Charges.  A user charge shall be levied on all users,
including but not limited to persons, firms, corporations or governmental
entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the
POTW.



      (1)   The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt
service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.



      (2)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on
volume of flow.



      (3)   The City Manager shall review annually the sewage
contributions of users, the total costs of debt service, operation and
maintenance of the POTW and will make recommendations to the Council or Board
serving the city for adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as
necessary.



      (4)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable
to the users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the
volume of flow of the users.



   (C)   Surcharges.  All industrial users under special agreement
with the city are subject to industrial waste surcharges for COD, TSS, NH3-N,
and limiting metal pollutant.  The surcharges shall reflect the total cost
of treating the pollutant pounds of industrial waste.  The method to
determine the surcharge amount shall consist of dividing the total budget
cost for operating each unit process of the city's wastewater treatment which
is affected by COD, TSS, NH3-N, or limiting metal pollutant, by the total
poundage of COD, TSS, NH3-N, or limiting metal pollutant discharged to the
wastewater treatment system during the preceding fiscal year. The rates shall
be adjusted more frequently if warranted.  The amount of surcharge will be
based upon the mass emission rate (in pounds per day) discharged. The amount
charged per pound will be set forth in the schedule of charges and fees. 



      (1)   The volume of flow used in determining the total
discharge of wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be
based on the following:



         (a)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records
of meter readings maintained by the city; or



         (b)   If required by the city or at the individual
discharger's option, other flow-monitoring devices which measure the actual
volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be
accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in
accordance with plans approved by the city. The metering system shall be
installed and maintained at the user's expense according to arrangements that
may be made with the city.



         (c)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her
water supply from sources other than the city, the user shall install and
maintain at his or her own expense a flow-measuring device of a type approved
by the city.



      (2)   The character and concentration of the constituents of
the wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected analyzed by the city. Samples shall be collected in such a manner
as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed using
procedures set forth in 40 CFR, Part 136.



      (3)   The determination of the character and concentration of
the constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his or
her duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.



   (D)   Pretreatment Program Administration Charges.  The schedule of
charges and fees adopted by the city may include charges and fees for:



      (1)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program;



      (2)    Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;



      (3)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental
and/or slug load discharge procedures and construction plans and
specifications;



      (4)   Permitting; and



      (5)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements of the pretreatment program.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.04  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Wastewater Dischargers. It shall be unlawful for any person to
connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of
the city.  When requested by the POTW Director, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30
days of the request.  The POTW Director is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.



   (B)   Wastewater  Permits. All significant industrial users shall
obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of
discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the
POTW Director to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant
industrial user permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW
Director's determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant
industrial user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW Director, be
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-significant
industrial users.



      (1)   Significant Industrial User Determination. All persons
proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the
volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic
wastewater, shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial
user determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the
proposed discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will
require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed.



      (2)   Significant Industrial User Permit Application.  Users
required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and
file with the city, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW
Director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in
the schedule of charges and fees.  Significant industrial users shall apply
for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of
the POTW Director's determination in division (B)(1) above.  The application
shall include at a minimum:



         (a)   Name of industrial user;



         (b)   Address of industrial user;



         (c)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s)
or expected classification and industrial user category;



         (d)   Wastewater flow;



         (e)   Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants
contained in the discharge;



         (f)   Major products manufactured or services supplied;



         (g)   Description of existing on-site pretreatment
facilities and practices;



         (h)   Locations of discharge points;



         (i)   Raw materials used or stored at the site;



         (j)   Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user;



         (k)   Number of employees;



         (l)   Operation and production schedules; and



         (m)   Description of current and projected waste
reduction activities in accordance with G.S. 143-215.1(g);



      (3)   Application Signatories and Certification.  All
wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by
the current authorized representative of the user on file with the city as
defined in § 51.01(B)(1)(c) and contain the following certification
statement:



"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."



      (4)   Application Review and Evaluation.  The POTW Director
will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.



         (a)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept
applications for the city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff
for review and evaluation.



         (b)    Within 30 days of receipt the POTW Director shall
acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional
information is required.



      (5)   Tentative Determination and Draft Permits.



         (a)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the
application and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user,
including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation
and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user
permit.



         (b)   If the staff's tentative determination in division
(a) above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations
shall be made in writing:



            1.   Proposed discharge limitations for those
pollutants proposed to be limited;



            2.   A proposed schedule of compliance, including
interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and



            3.   A brief description of any other proposed
special conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge
described in the application.



         (c)   The staff shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to divisions (B)(5)(a) and (B)(5)(b) above and the city's general
permit conditions into a significant industrial user permit.



      (6)   Permit supporting documentation.  The Control Authority
staff shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial
user permits.



         (a)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit
information for all significant industrial users, including but not limited
to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of
total permitted flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable
loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the
Division.  The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as
permits are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is
revised.



         (b)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment
limitations, including the following:



            1.   Documentation of categorical determination,
including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical
pretreatment standards; and



            2.   Documentation of the rationale of any
parameters for which monitoring has been waived under 40 CFR Part
403.12(e)(2).



      (7)   Final Action on Significant Industrial User Permit
Applications.



         (a)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all
applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.



         (b)   The POTW Director is authorized to:



            1.   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1;



            2.   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements;



            3.   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days
notice and pursuant to division (B)(9) of this section;



            4.   Revoke any permit pursuant to § 51.08(A);



            5.   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 51.08(A); and



            6.   Deny a permit application when in the opinion
of the POTW Director such discharge may cause or contribute to pass through
or interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to
effectuate the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.



      (8)   Hearings. The local government may conduct hearings in
accordance with its regular hearing procedure.



         (a)   Initial Adjudicatory Hearing. An applicant whose
permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he deems unacceptable,
a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under § 51.08(B), or one issued an
administrative order under § 51.08(A) shall have the right to an
adjudicatory hearing before a hearing officer designated by the POTW Director
upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested,
to the POTW Director within 30 days following receipt of the significant
industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative order.
Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the
action shall be final and binding. The hearing officer shall make a final
decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within 45 days of the
receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall transmit
a copy of the hearing officer's decision by registered or certified mail.



            1.   New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a
newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed
and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial
review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.



            2.   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including
judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions
of a renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain
in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.



            3.   Terminated permits.  Upon appeal, including
judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no
permit is in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until
the parties reach a mutual resolution.



         (b)   Final Appeal Hearing. Any decision of a hearing
officer made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division
(B)(8)(a) of this section may be appealed, to the City Council upon filing a
written demand within ten days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings
held under this division shall be conducted in accordance with local hearing
procedures.  Failure to make written demand within the time specified herein
shall bar further appeal. The City Board shall make a final decision on the
appeal within 90 days of the date the appeal was filed and shall transmit a
written copy of its decision by registered or certified mail.



         (c)   Official Record. When a final decision is issued
under division (B)(8)(b) of this section, the City Council or Board shall
prepare an official record of the case that includes:



            1.   All notices, motions, and other like
pleadings;



            2.   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;



            3.   A certified transcript of all testimony
taken, if testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not
transcribed, then a narrative summary of any testimony taken.



            4.   A copy of the final decision of City Council
or Board serving the city.



         (d)   Judicial Review. Any person against whom a final
order or decision of the City Council is entered, pursuant to a hearing
conducted under division (B)(8)(b) of this section, may seek judicial review
of the order or decision by filing a written petition within 30 days after
receipt of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or decision,
but not thereafter, with the Superior Court of Stanly County along with a
copy to the city. Within 30 days after receipt of the copy of the petition of
judicial review, the City Council shall transmit to the reviewing court the
original or a certified copy of the official record.



      (9)   Permit Modification.



         (a)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the
same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed
below.  Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.



            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge
when no other change in the permit is indicated.



            2.   A single modification of any compliance
schedule not in excess of four months;



            3.   Modification of compliance schedules
(construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will
not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational.



         (b)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a
national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permits
of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance
with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a
user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not
previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as
required by division (B)(2) of this section, the user shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable national categorical pretreatment standard.



         (c)   A request for a modification by the permittee
shall constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. §
143-215.1(b) for modifications.



      (10)   Permit Conditions.



         (a)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to
grant a permit with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to
achieve the purpose of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1.  Wastewater
permits shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:



            1.   A statement of duration (in no case more than
five years);



            2.   A statement of nontransferability;



            3.   Applicable effluent limits based on
categorical standards or local limits or both;



            4.   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification, and record keeping requirements.  These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;



            5.   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the
event of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in §
51.01(B)(1)(ll);



            6.   Requirements to implement a Plan or other
controls for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined
in § 51.01(B)(1)(ll), if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for
the User; and



            7.   Requirements for immediately notifying the
POTW of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and
other accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in  §
51.01(B)(1)(ll).  Also see § 51.05(E) and § 51.05(F);



            8.   A statement of applicable civil and/or
criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements
and any applicable compliance schedule.



         (b)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not
limited to, the following:



            1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.



            2.   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or
monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of
identified wastewater pollutants or properties.



            3.   Requirements for the installation of
pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices,
and the like, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works.



            4.   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharges to the
municipal wastewater system.



            5.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges
and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system.



            6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance
of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment.



            7.   Specifications for monitoring programs which
may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests, and reporting schedules.



            8.   Requirements for immediate reporting of any
instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within
30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s).



            9.   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment
standards and requirements.



            10.   Requirements for submission of periodic
self-monitoring or special notification reports.



            11.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining
plans and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in §
51.05(1) and affording the POTW Director, or his or her representatives,
access thereto.



            12.   Requirements for prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any new introduction of wastewater
pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the
wastewater prior to introduction in the system.



            13.   Requirements for the prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee.



            14.   A statement that compliance with the permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the terms of the permit.



            15.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by
the POTW Director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations.



      (11)   Permit Duration.  Permits shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a
period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



      (12)   Permit Transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation.



      (13)   Permit Reissuance. A significant industrial user shall
apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with division (B) of this section a minimum of 180 days prior to
the expiration of the existing permit.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.05  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Baseline Monitoring Reports.



      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (A)(2) of this section. At least 90 days prior
to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (A)(2) of this section. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



      (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set
forth below.



         (a)   Identifying Information. The name and address of
the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



         (b)   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



         (c)   Description of Operations. A brief description of
the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.



         (d)   Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



         (e)   Measurement of Pollutants.



            1.   The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.



            2.   The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the POTW Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.  The
sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in division (J) of this section.



            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in division (K) of this section and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and
(g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4).



         (f)   Certification.  A statement, reviewed by the
user's current authorized representative as defined in § 51.01(B)(1)(c) and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.



         (g)   Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in division (B) of this section.



         (h)   Signature and Certification. All baseline
monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.04(B)(3).



   (B)   Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by division (A)(2)(g) of this
section:



      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW
Director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and



      (4)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between
such progress reports to the POTW Director.



   (C)   Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard
Deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the POTW Director a report containing the information described in
division(A)(2)(d) through (f) of this section. For users subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(C), this report shall contain a reasonable measure
of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 51.04(B)(3).



   (D)   Periodic Compliance Reports. Municipalities may sample and
analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring the users to conduct sampling
and analysis.



      (1)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the POTW Director but in no case less than once every six
months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
applicable flows for the reporting period.  Sampling and analysis must be
performed in accordance with procedures set out in § 51.05(J) and §
51.05(K) of this chapter.  All periodic compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with § 51.04(B)(3) of this chapter.



      (2)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this
section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW
Director, using the procedures prescribed in § 51.05(J) and § 51.05(K), the
results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.



   (E)   Reports of Changed Conditions. Each user must notify the POTW
Director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at
least 30 days before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes
until receiving written approval from the control authority. See §
51.05(F)(4) for other reporting requirements.



      (1)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 51.04(B).



      (2)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under § 51.04(B) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under § 51.04(B) in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.



      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes
include, but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of 20% or
greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, 
increases or decreases to production;  increases in discharge of previously
reported pollutants;  discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the
control authority and/or municipality; new or changed product lines;  new or
changed manufacturing processes and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers.



   (F)   Reports of Potential Problems.



      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited
to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in §
51.01(B)(1)(ll), that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user
shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW Director of the incident.
This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, the user
shall, unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.



      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in
the event of a discharge described in division (F)(1) of this section.
Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to
occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.



      (4)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of
any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in §
51.01(B)(1)(ll).



   (G)   Reports from Unpermitted Users. All users not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
POTW Director as the POTW Director may require. All users classified as
non-significant categorical industrial users under § 51.01(B)(1)(jj)6. shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may
require.  At a minimum, this shall include the annual certification of
continuing to meet the non-significant categorical industrial user criteria
as required under 40 CFR 403.12(q).



   (H)   Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting.



      (1)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation,
the user must notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days
after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director, the
user is not required to resample:



         (a)   If the POTW monitors at the user's facility at
least once a month;



         (b)   If the POTW samples between the user's initial
sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.



      (2)   If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and
analysis in lieu of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user
indicates a violation, the POTW shall repeat the sampling and obtain the
results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violations, unless one of the following occurs:



         (a)   The POTW monitors at the user's facility at least
once a month;  or



         (b)   The POTW samples the user between their initial
sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or



         (c)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform
sampling and submit the results to the POTW Director within the 30 day
deadline of the POTW becoming aware of the violation.



   (I)   Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste.  The city
prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without notification to and
approval by the POTW Director.



      (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director,
and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261.  Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).  If the
user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to
the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to
the extent such information is known and readily available to the user:  an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months.  All notifications must take
place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences.  The user shall
not begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the city. Any
notification under this section need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharge.  However, notifications of changed conditions
must be submitted under division (E) of this section.  The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of divisions (A),(C), and (D) of this section.



      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division
(I)(1), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than
15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specific in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).  Discharge of more
than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.  Subsequent months during which
the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification.



      (3)   In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of
RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section,
the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to
be economically practical.



      (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



   (J)   Analytical Requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed  by a laboratory certified by the
state to perform the wastewater analyses in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard or unless otherwise performed in accordance
with procedures approved by EPA or city. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA and
the city. Analyses must be performed by a state certified lab for each
parameter analyzed, if such certification exists for that parameter.



   (K)   Grab and Composite Sample Collection.



      (1)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user's discharge.  Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times.  The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.



      (2)   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other
pollutants as required by 40 CFR 136.  The POTW shall determine the number
of grabs necessary to be representative of the user's discharge.  See 40 CFR
403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90
Day Compliance Reports.  Additionally, the POTW Director may allow
collection of multiple grabs during a 24 hour period which are composited
prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136.



      (3)   Composite samples:  All wastewater composite samples
shall be collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour
that there is a discharge.  All wastewater composite samples shall be
collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
POTW Director.  When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the
samples must be representative and the decision to allow the alternative
sampling must be documented.



   (L)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted
on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
of receipt of the report shall govern.



   (M)   Record Keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of
this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained
pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements.  Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the POTW Director.



   (N)   Special Reporting Requirements for IUs in Satellite POTWs. 
In the case of industrial user located in a Satellite POTW organization's
jurisdiction, all information required to be reported to the industrial
user's Pretreatment Program Control Authority by this chapter shall also be
reported to the POTW treatment plant organization.



(Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04,
passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.06  COMPLIANCE MONITORING.



   (A)   Monitoring Facilities.



      (1)   The city requires the user to provide and operate at the
user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and
flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but
the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.



      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.



      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city.



   (B)   Inspection and Sampling. The city will inspect the facilities
of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and
all requirements are being complied with.  Persons or occupants of premises
where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city, approval
authority and EPA or their representative ready access at all reasonable
times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their
duties.  The city, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up
on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering  operations. Where a user
has security measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities. Denial of the POTW's, approval authority's, or
EPA's access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.



   (C)   Search Warrants. If the POTW , approval authority, or EPA has
been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part
thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may
be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the POTW, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the court having jurisdiction within the city.



(Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04,
passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.07  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data provided by an industrial user to the
POTW Director pursuant to this chapter identifying the nature and frequency
of a discharge, shall be available to the public without restriction.  All
other information which may be so submitted by an industrial user to the POTW
Director in connection with any required reports shall also be available to
the public unless the industrial user or other interested person specifically
identifies the information as confidential upon submission and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the disclosure of
such information or a particular part thereof to the general public would
divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets.



   (B)   Information provided by an industrial user to the POTW
Director that is determined to be entitled to confidential treatment shall be
made available upon written request to the Division of Water Quality or any
state agency for uses related to the Pretreatment Program, the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, collection system
permit, stormwater permit, and/or Non-discharge permit, and for uses related
to judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing
the report.



   (C)   Information and data received by the Division or other state
agency under paragraph (b) above shall be subject to the processes set forth
in G.S. 143-215.3C.



(Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04,
passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.08  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Administrative Remedies.



      (1)   Notification of Violation. Whenever the POTW Director
finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter,
wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained
therein or any other pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may serve
upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the
city by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



      (2)   Consent Orders. The POTW Director is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as an administrative order issued pursuant to division (A)(4) below.



      (3)   Show Cause Hearing. The POTW Director may order any
industrial user who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge,
has violated this chapter or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge
permit to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
In the event the POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be
issued, a notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place
for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or
officer of a corporation. The POTW Director shall review the evidence
presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement
action is appropriate. A show cause hearing under this section is not a
prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under division (B) of this
section nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this
section subject to an administrative appeal under § 51.04(B)(8).



      (4)   Administrative Orders.  When the POTW Director finds
that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter,
permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the
POTW Director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and
direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



         (b)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time
schedule set forth in the order;



         (c)   Take appropriate remedial or preventative action
in the event of a continuing or threatened violation; or



         (d)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated
within a specified time period.



      (5)   Emergency Suspensions.



         (a)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary
in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to
violate any condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit.



         (b)   Any user notified of a suspension of the
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of
the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or
the user's waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take
such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit
and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director to the date of
the above-described hearing.



      (6)   Termination of Permit or Permission to Discharge.



         (a)   The POTW Director may revoke a wastewater
discharge permit or permission to discharge for good cause, including, but
not limited to, the following reasons:



            1.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;



            2.   Failure to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



            3.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



            4.   Violation of conditions of the permit or
permission to discharge, conditions of this chapter, or any applicable state
and federal regulations.



         (b)   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of
the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause under division (A) of this section why the proposed
action should not be taken.



   (B)   Civil Penalties.



      (1)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty up to twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000) per day per violation.



         (a)   Penalties of up to $25,000 per day per violation
may be assessed against a violator:



            1.   For any class of violation, only if a civil
penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years preceding
the violation; or



            2.   In the case of failure to file, submit, or
make available, as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required
by this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder, only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was
intentional and a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within
the five years preceding the violation.



      (2)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
Director shall consider the following:



         (a)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting
from the violation;



         (b)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



         (c)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



         (d)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



         (e)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



         (f)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



         (g)   The prior record of the violator in complying or
failing to comply with the pretreatment program; and



         (h)   The costs of enforcement to the city.



      (3)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with
this section shall be as provided in § 51.04(B)(8).



   (C)   Other Available Remedies. Remedies, in addition to those
previously mentioned in this chapter, are available to the POTW Director who
may use any single one or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional
available remedies include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Criminal Violations. The District Attorney for the
applicable judicial district may, at the request of the city, prosecute
noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. 143-215.6B. Note: 
Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term,
condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to
apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S.
143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or
requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to
apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S.
143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a
pretreatment permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply
for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in
imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. 143-215.6B(h)), and
to falsify information required under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the
General Statutes (G.S. 143-215.6B(i)).



      (2)   Injunctive Relief.  Whenever a user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the
POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order and/or a preliminary and
permanent injunction which restrain or compel the activities in question.



      (3)   Water Supply Severance. Whenever an industrial user is
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated ability to comply.



      (4)   Public Nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of § 10.99, the city code
governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs
incurred in removing, abating or remedying that nuisance.



   (D)   Remedies Nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this
chapter are not exclusive. The POTW Director may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's
enforcement response plan. However, the POTW Director may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director
is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.09  ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in  a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW a list of those industrial users which
were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable
noncompliance in 15A NCAC 02H .0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04,
passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.10  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upset.



      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of division (A)(2) of this section, are met.



      (2)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user has submitted the following information
to the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days):



            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (3)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (4)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (5)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



   (B)   Prohibited Discharge Standards Defense. A user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 51.02(A)(1) or the specific
prohibitions in § 51.02(A)(2)(b), (c), (e)through (g) and (i) through (v) if
it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass through or interference and that either:



      (1)    A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case
of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of division (C)(2) and (3) of this
section.



      (2)   (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least ten days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.



         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW
Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass.  A
written submission shall also be provided within five days of this time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned
to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW
Director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.



      (3)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may
take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;



            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent
a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



            3.   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C)(2) of this section.



         (b)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated
bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in division(C)(3)(a)
of this section.



(Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04,
passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.11  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   When Required.  Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available, a building sewer shall be connected to a private sewer disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Permit Required.  Before commencement of construction of a
private sewage disposal system, the owner first shall obtain a written permit
signed by the County Health Sanitarian. The application for the permit shall
be made on a form furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement
to any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary
by the Sanitarian.



   (C)   Effective Date of Permit.  A permit for a private sewage
system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the County Health Sanitarian. He or she shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction, and in any event, the
applicant for the permit shall notify the Sanitarian when the work is ready
for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of the notice by the
Sanitarian.



   (D)   Type, Capacity, Location, Layout.  The type, capacity,
location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with
all recommendations of the State Division of Health Services. No permit shall
be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil
absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square
feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted into discharge into any
public sewer or natural outlet.



   (E)   Connection to Public Sewer; When Required.  When a public
sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal
system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this section at the first malfunction of the private system, and any
septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



   (F)   Operation and Maintenance.  The owner shall operate and
maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all
times, at no expense to the city.



   (G)   Additional Requirements by County Health Sanitarian.  No
statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that shall be imposed by the County Health Sanitarian.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.12  FATS, OIL AND GREASE CONTROL.



   (A)   Scope and Purpose.  To aid in the prevention of sanitary
sewer blockages and obstructions from the contributions and accumulation of
fats, oils, and greases into said sewer system from industrial, commercial
and institutional establishments, particularly food preparation and serving
facilities.



   (B)   Definitions.



      (1)   Fats, oils, and greases. Organic polar compounds derived
from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain
triglyceride molecules.  These substances are detectable and measurable
using analytical test procedures in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time
to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases."



      (2)   Grease trap or interceptor.  A device for separating
and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater
exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment
system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by
and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and
entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps and
interceptors are sometimes referred to herein as "grease interceptors."



      (3)   Cooking establishments. Those establishments primarily
engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available
for consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following
preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all
methods), grilling, sautéing , rotisserie cooking, broiling, boiling,
blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared
heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that
produces hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires
washing.



      (4)   Non-cooking establishments.  Those establishments
primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not
include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs
preparation and serving establishments.



      (5)   Minimum design capacity. The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public
sanitary sewer.



      (6)   User.  Any person, including those located outside the
jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of discharge of wastewater into the publicly owned treatment
works (POTW), including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile
sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.



   (C)   Grease Interceptor Maintenance; Record Keeping and Grease
Removal.



      (1)   Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as
required by the City Code Enforcement Officer.  Grease interceptors shall be
installed at the user's expense, when such user operates a cooking
establishment. Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooking or
cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs establishments and other industrial
commercial, or institutional establishments when they are deemed necessary by
the City Code Enforcement Officer for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease.



      (2)   No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration
from subject grease interceptor to exceed 100 milligrams per liter.



      (3)   All grease interceptors shall be of a type, design, and
capacity approved by the City Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee
and shall be readily and easily accessible for user cleaning and City
inspection. No grease  interceptor shall be less than 1,000 gallons total
capacity unless otherwise approved by the City Code Officer.



      (4)   All grease interceptors shall be subject to review,
evaluation, and inspection by the City Code Enforcement Officer during normal
working hours. Results of inspections will be made available to facility
owner, lease-holder, or operator. The City Code Enforcement Officer may make
recommendations for correction and Improvement.



      (5)   All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and
emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum
design capacity or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less
than every 30 days.



      (6)   Users who are required to pass water through a grease
interceptor shall:



         (a)   Provide a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24
minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak
flow rate predicted by the Uniform Plumbing Code fixture criteria, between
influent and effluent baffles with 20% of the total volume of the grease
interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified
hereafter as "sludge pocket".



         (b)   Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge
pocket as required, but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the user's
expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials
such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells,
towels, rags, etc., which could settle into the sludge pocket and thereby
reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor.



         (c)   Accept the following conditions: If any skimmed or
pumped wastes or other materials removed from grease interceptors are treated
in any fashion onsite and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an
activity of and after said onsite treatment, the user shall be responsible
for the attainment of established grease numerical limit consistent with and
contained in division (C)(2) on all discharges of wastewater from said grease
interceptor into the city's sanitary sewer collection and treatment system.



         (d)   Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as
to maintain said device such that attainment of the grease limit is
consistently achieved. "CONSISTENT" shall mean any wastewater sample taken
from the grease interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit
attainment described in division (C)(2). If an establishment desires to use
an alternative to an out-of-building grease interceptor, because of
documented space restraints, the request for an alternative location shall
contain the following information: location of city sewer main and easement
in relation to available exterior space outside building; and existing
plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that
site.



         (e)   Understand and agree that the use of biological
additives as a grease degradation agent is not permitted.



         (f)   Understand and agree that the use of automatic
grease removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written
approval by the City Code Enforcement Officer.  Any establishment using this
equipment shall operate the system in such a manner that attainment of the
grease wastewater discharge limits outlined in (C)(2), as measured from the
unit's outlet, is consistently achieved.



         (g)   Understand and agree the use of hot water flushing
to clear the interceptor is prohibited.



         (h)   Understand and agree that the City Code
Enforcement Officer reserves the right to make determinations of grease
interceptor adequacy and need, based on a review of all relevant information
regarding grease interceptor performance, facility site and building plan
review and to require repairs to, modifications, or replacement of such traps.



         (i)   Understand and agree that a minimum of once per
year, the City Code Enforcement Officer will conduct an  inspection of the
user's grease interceptor. The City Code Enforcement Officer will coordinate
with the user during regular monthly pumping to inspect the condition of the
grease interceptor walls, bottom, top, cover, inlet and outlet pipes, and
baffles.



      (7)   The user shall submit a grease trap service record form
provided by the City Code Enforcement Officer on the first day of each month.
The user shall maintain a written record of trap maintenance for three years.
All such records will be available for inspection by the city at all times.



      (8)   Non-grease laden sources are allowed to be connected to
sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service.



      (9)   Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches,
shall be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee.  The access manholes
shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to
prevent water inflow and infiltration.  The manholes shall also have readily
removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater
sampling activities.



   (D)   Violations and Penalties.



      (1)   Any user failing to submit the grease trap service
record, due by the first of each month, to the City Code Enforcement officer
by the tenth day of the month, may be fined $100 per week until said document
is submitted.



      (2)    It shall be a violation of this section for any user to
allow floatable oils, fats, or greases to enter the city wastewater
collection or treatment system, in excess of the limits outlined in division
(C)(2), because of grease interceptors or other grease handling facilities
being inadequately serviced or maintained.



      (3)   Users receiving unsatisfactory evaluations during
inspections may be required, at the user's expense, to sample its grease
interceptor discharge and have it analyzed for oil and grease. Results of
such analyses shall be reported to the Code Enforcement Officer.



      (4)   Any user found to be in violation shall be notified in
writing through certified mail of any non-compliance and will be required to
provide a schedule whereby corrections will be completed.  Users known to be
in violation shall be subject to fines of $500 per day until actions are
taken to prevent said violations from recurring.



      (5)   Users who continue to violate this section, three
violations in 12 months, may be considered for discontinuance of sewer
service.



      (6)   Users whose operations cause or allow excessive grease
to discharge or accumulate in the city wastewater collection and treatment
system may be liable to the city for costs related to service calls for sewer
line blockages, line cleaning, line and pump repairs including all labor,
materials, and equipment. Failure to pay all service related charges may also
be grounds for sewer service discontinuance.



   (E)   Existing Facilities.



      (1)   All existing cooking establishments shall have grease
interceptors approved by the City Code Enforcement Officer. Cooking
establishments without grease interceptors will be given a compliance
deadline not to exceed six months from the date of the ratification of this
chapter.



      (2)   Failure to comply will be considered a violation of this
section and such facilities may be subject to penalties and corrective
actions. Existing facilities shall meet the same requirements for design as
new facilities.



      (3)   In the event an existing cooking establishment's grease
interceptor is either under designed or substandard in accordance with this
policy, the owner(s) will be notified in writing through certified mail of
the deficiencies and required improvements and given a compliance deadline
not to exceed six months to conform with the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 07-12, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.13  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision, division, word, or section of this chapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
divisions, words, and sections shall not be affected and shall continue in
full force and effect.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.14  CONFLICT.



   All other ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency or conflict.



(Ord. 90-27, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-19, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 07-12,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



§ 51.15  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication, as provided by law.



(Ord. 07-12, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-04, passed 2-17-14)



CHAPTER 52: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL



Section



   52.01   Purpose



   52.02   Definitions



   52.03   Responsibility



   52.04   Customer responsibility



   52.05   Right of entry



   52.06   Cross-connections



   52.07   Installation



   52.08   Degree of hazards



   52.09   Notices



   52.10   Violations



   52.11   Applicability



   52.12   Severability



§ 52.01  PURPOSE.



   To protect the public potable water supply of the City of Albemarle
from the possibility of contamination or pollution, due to back siphonage or
backpressure, by isolation within the consumer's private water system such
contaminants or pollutants, which could backflow into the City of Albemarle
public water conveyance system.  Additionally, to define the authority of
the City of Albemarle as the water purveyor entitled to eliminating all
cross-connections, new or existing, within its public water system and to
provide a comprehensive inspection program of cross-connections.  Lastly to
have inspection authority over those that will be installed in the future.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 



   (A)   "AIR-GAP SEPARATION."  The unobstructed vertical distance
through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or
faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the
flood level rim of the receptacle.  An "approved air-gap separation" shall
be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above
the top rim of the vessel. In no case shall the gap be less than four (4)
inches.



   (B)   "APPROVED."  As used herein in reference to a water supply
system or backflow prevention device (or method) shall mean one that has been
approved by the department.



   (C)   "BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE, TYPE: A."  Any effective device,
method, or construction used to prevent backflow into a potable water system.



   (D)   "BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW." Backflow caused by a pump, elevated
tank, boiler, or other means that could create pressure within the system
greater than the supply pressure.



   (E)   "BACK-SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW."  A reversal of the normal
direction of flow in the pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being
created in the supply line with the backflow source subject to atmospheric
pressure.



   (F)   "APPROVED CHECK VALVE."  A check valve that is drip tight in
the normal direction of flow when the inlet pressure is one psi and the
outlet pressure is zero.  The check valve shall permit no leakage in a
direction reversed to the normal flow.  The closure element (e.g. clapper)
shall be internally weighted or otherwise internally loaded to promote rapid
and positive closure.



   (G)   "CONSUMER."  Any person, firm, or corporation using or
receiving water from the City of Albemarle water supply.



   (H)   "CONTAMINATION."  An impairment of the quality of water by
sewage or industrial fluids or waste to a degree which creates an actual
hazard to public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.



   (I)   "CROSS-CONNECTION."  A "cross-connection" shall mean any
actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a public or
a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through
which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any
used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended
potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other
temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can
or may occur are considered to be cross-connections.



   (J)   "POINT OF CROSS-CONNECTION." The specific point or location in
a public or a consumer's potable water system where a cross-connection exists.



   (K)   "DOUBLE-CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY."  An assembly composed of two
(2) single, independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly
closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable
connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.



   (L)   "DEGREE OF HAZARD."  The evaluation of a health, system,
plumbing, or pollution hazard.



   (M)   "HEALTH HAZARD."  An actual or potential threat or
contamination or pollution of physical or toxic nature to the public potable
water system or the consumer's potable water system to such a degree or
intensity that there would be a danger to health.



   (N)   "HAZARD, PLUMBING."  A plumbing-type cross-connection in a
consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a
vacuum breaker, air-gap separation, or other device. Unprotected
plumbing-type cross-connections are considered to be a health hazard.  They
include, but are not limited to, cross-connections to toilets, sinks,
lavatories, wash trays, domestic washing machines and lawn sprinkling
systems. Plumbing-type cross-connections can be located in many types of
structures, including homes, apartment houses, hotels, and commercial and
industrial establishments.



   (O)   "HAZARD, POLLUTION."  An actual or potential threat to the
physical properties of the water  system or the potability of the public or
consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or
system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree or intensity or pollution to
which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would
cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor
damage to the system or its appurtenances.



   (P)   "HAZARD, SYSTEM."  An actual or potential threat or severe
danger to the physical properties of the public or the consumer's potable
water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted
effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.



   (Q)   "INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS."  Any fluid or solution which may be
chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration such as would constitute a health system, pollution, or
plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply.



   (R)   "CONSUMER'S INDUSTRIAL PIPING SYSTEM."  System used by the
consumer for transmission of or to confine or store any fluid, solid, or
gaseous substance other than an approved water supply. Such a system would
include all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and
appurtenances used to produce, convey, or store substances which are or may
be polluted or contaminated.



   (S)   "POLLUTION."  An impairment of the quality of the water to a
degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which
does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.



   (T)   "REDUCED-PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE
(RPZ)."  A device containing within its structure a minimum of two (2)
independently acting, approved check valves, together with an automatically
operating pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2)
check valves. The first check valve reduces the supply pressure a
predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of normal
flow and pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply pressure.
In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by
discharging to atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the
checks less than the supply pressure.  The unit shall include tightly
closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device and each device
shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.



   (U)   "SERVICE CONNECTION."  The terminal end of  a service
connection from the public potable water system. There should be no
unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow
prevention device located at the point of delivery to the consumer's water
system.



   (V)   "POTABLE WATER."  Water from any source which has been
investigated by the health agency having jurisdiction, and which has been
approved for human consumption.



   (W)   "AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY." Any water supply on or available to
the premises other than the City of Albemarle approved public potable water
supply.  These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's
public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring,
river, stream, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. They may be
polluted or contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an
unacceptable water source over which the City of Albemarle does not have
sanitary control.



   (X)   "CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM." Any water system located on the
consumer's premises whether supplied by a public potable water system or an
auxiliary water supply.  The system or systems may be either a potable water
system or an industrial piping system.



   (Y)   "CONSUMER'S POTABLE WATER SYSTEM."  That portion of the
privately owned potable water system lying between the service connection and
the point of use. This system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks,
receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances used to produce, convey,
store or use potable water.



   (Z)   "PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM."  Any publicly or privately
owned water system operated as a public utility under a valid health permit
to supply water for domestic purposes. This system will include all sources,
facilities, and appurtenances, between the source and the service connection
such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures,
equipment, and appurtenances used to produce, convey, treat, or store potable
water for public consumption or use.



   (AA)   "USED WATER."  Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a
public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed
through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the
water purveyor.  The City of Albemarle Department of Public Utilities will
be primarily responsible for preventing any contamination or pollution of the
public water system.  This responsibility begins at the point of origin of
the public water supply and includes all of the public water distribution
system, and ends at the service connection as defined under the Safe Drinking
Water Act.  The Backflow Administrator shall exercise vigilance to ensure
that the consumer/customer has taken the proper steps to protect the public
potable water system.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.03  RESPONSIBILITY.



   When it has been determined that a backflow protection assembly is
required for the prevention on contamination of the public water system, the
Backflow Administrator shall notify the owner, in writing, of any such
building or premises, to correct within a time set by this chapter, any
plumbing installed or existing that is in violation of this chapter.  After
surveying the private water system the Backflow Administrator will select an
approved backflow prevention assembly required for containment control to be
installed at service entrance.  Prior to the installation of any backflow
prevention assembly, the owner of the private water system must be notified
that the installation of a backflow prevention assembly may create a closed
system, and as a result thermal expansion may occur. Under such circumstance,
the customer must understand and assume all liability and responsibilities
for that phenomenon.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.04  CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITY.



   The customer has the responsibility of preventing contaminants and
pollutants from entering the customer's private water system or the public
water system operated by the City of Albemarle.  The customer, at his own
expense, shall install, operate, and maintain all backflow prevention
assemblies specified within this ordinance.  If a tenant customer does not
maintain the private water system and has no authority to bring the system
into compliance with the provisions of this chapter the City of Albemarle may
assert any available action against the tenant to assure the private water
system is brought into compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.05  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Authorization.



   (A)   Any authorized representative from the City of Albemarle, upon
presentation of  proper credentials and identification, shall have the right
to enter any building, structure or premises during normal business hours to
perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this ordinance.  Those duties may
include sampling and testing of water, or inspection and observation of all
piping systems connected to the public water supply. Refusal to allow these
representatives to enter for these purposes will result in the disconnection
of water service.



   (B)   Where the consumer has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises,
the consumer shall make necessary arrangements with security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, City of Albemarle personnel
will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their
specific responsibilities.  Refusal to allow entry for these purposes may
result in discontinuance of water service.



   (C)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the City of
Albemarle any pertinent information regarding the water supply system on such
property where cross-connection and backflow are deemed possible.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.06  CROSS-CONNECTIONS.



   Unprotected cross-connection prohibited.



   (A)   No water service connection to any private water system shall
be installed or maintained by the City of Albemarle.  Service of water to
any premises shall be discontinued by the City of Albemarle if a backflow
assembly, required by this chapter, is not installed, tested, and maintained
or if a backflow assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected
cross-connection exists on the premises.  Service will be restored after all
such conditions or defects are corrected.



   (B)   No customer shall allow an unprotected cross-connection to be
made or to remain involving the customer's private water system.



   (C)   No connection shall be made to an unapproved auxiliary water
supply unless the public water supply is protected against backflow by an
approved backflow assembly, appropriate to the degree of hazard.



   (D)   No customer shall fail to maintain in good operating condition
any backflow prevention assembly, which is part of the customer's private
water system and is required by this chapter.



   (E)   No customer shall fail to submit to the City of Albemarle any
record, which is required by this chapter.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.07  INSTALLATION.



   Installation and testing of backflow prevention assembly.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to require that all water
flowing from the public water system, must flow through an approved backflow
prevention assembly and that each backflow prevention assembly be properly
located, installed, maintained and tested so that the backflow prevention
assembly is effective in protecting the public water system from any possible
contamination or pollution.



   (B)   The installation or replacement of a backflow prevention
assembly for domestic water use shall only be performed by a licensed plumber
or licensed utility contractor. The installation or repair of a backflow
prevention assembly on a dedicated fire sprinkler service shall be performed
by a licensed fire sprinkler contractor or utility contractor.  All backflow
prevention assemblies may be tested by a certified Backflow Technician
authorized by the City of Albemarle.  Repairs to a backflow prevention
assembly on a dedicated fire sprinkler system may only be performed by a fire
sprinkler contractor or licensed plumber.



   (C)   All new construction plans and specifications which will
directly effect the City of Albemarle Public Utilities system, and/or
required by the North Carolina Building Code, the North Carolina Department
of Environment and Natural Resources (NCDENR), City of Albemarle Planning and
Zoning and Technical Review Committee (TRC), shall be made available to the
City of Albemarle Backflow Administrator for review, approval and to
determine the degree of hazard.



   (D)   All existing facilities zoned commercial or industrial and
have existing water services with the City of Albemarle Public Utilities and
requesting a Certificate of Occupancy from the City of Albemarle's Fire
Department or Planning and Zoning offices, shall be inspected for compliance
of backflow and cross-connection control prevention. Any facility not having
backflow protection or changing the degree of hazard shall be brought into
compliance before the Backflow Administrator will recommend to the City of
Albemarle Fire Marshall a release of the Certificate of Occupancy.



   (E)   All backflow prevention assemblies must be installed and
maintained on the customer's premises as part of the customer's private water
system at or near the service connection and before the service line is
connected to any other pipes except as authorized by the City of Albemarle
Public Utilities.



   (F)   If it has been determined that a backflow prevention assembly
cannot be installed at the meter service, an approved backflow assembly must
be installed at another location as specified by the City of Albemarle Public
Utilities.



   (G)   Any branch of plumbing installed on the private water system
that may be of a greater hazard than the supply line, (example: chemical
induced irrigation or fire systems, pump systems, etc.) shall be protected
with a reduced pressure zone assembly (RPZ).



   (H)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in
accordance with the Backflow and Cross-Connection approved practices and
reviewed by the City of Albemarle Back Flow Administrator for compliance.



   (I)   All sprinkler systems utilizing double check valve assemblies,
two (2) inch or larger, shall only be used with specific written permission
from the Director of Public Utilities.



   (J)   Reduce pressure principle assemblies must be installed in a
horizontal position either above ground or in a vault.



   (K)   Each backflow prevention assembly that is required must
function properly at time of installment. Each customer will be required to
test, maintain and repair each assembly required which is a part of the
customer's private water system.  A certified backflow prevention technician
may only conduct such test. Testing shall be done immediately following
installation of any backflow prevention assembly and on an annual basis. 
This will also apply to the RPZ portion of the backflow prevention device.



   (L)   If repair is found necessary on an assembly it must be
re-tested following any repair. A complete duplicate copy of any testing
and/or repair shall be sent to the City of Albemarle Public Utilities within
thirty (30) days of completion of test or repair. Each customer must maintain
a complete copy of test or repair. Each customer must maintain a complete
copy of any test or repair for no less than five (5) years.  All test and
repair records must be maintained on forms approved by the Backflow
Administrator of the City of Albemarle.



   (M)   All rubber components must be replaced every five (5) years or
as often as needed.



   (N)   Any customer installing a reduced pressure zone (RPZ) or
double check valve assembly (DCVA) must provide the following information to
the Backflow Administrator within ten (10) days after installation with the
following exception.  Sprinkler systems shall be coordinated directly with
the City of Albemarle Fire Marshall. 



      (1)   Service address where assembly is located.



      (2)   Owner.



      (3)   Description of assembly's location.



      (4)   Date of installation.



      (5)   Type of assembly.



      (6)   Manufacturer.



      (7)   Model number.



      (8)   Serial number.



      (9)   Test results/reports.



   (O)   The Backflow Administrator must approve each backflow assembly
required by this chapter.  A list of approved assemblies can be obtained
through the City of Albemarle Backflow Administrator.



   (P)   The Backflow Administrator will provide the customer with a
notification and list of approved backflow assemblies.  The following time
periods shall be set forth for the installation of the specified assemblies:



      (1)   Health hazard 60 days.



      (2)   Non-health hazard 90 days.



   (Q)   If an imminent hazard or unreasonable threat of contamination
or pollution to the public water system is detected, the Backflow
Administrator may require the installation of the required backflow assembly
immediately or within a shorter time period than specified in division (P).



   (R)   If a customer does not wish for water service to be
interrupted when a backflow assembly is tested, repaired, or replaced, a
parallel installation must be made using an approved assembly of the same
degree of hazard.  The parallel line may be of the same size or smaller.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.08  DEGREE OF HAZARDS.



   (A)   Determining degree of hazard.  No service shall be completed
until the Backflow Administrator has been provided information or has
surveyed the private water system to determine the degree of hazard and make
a determination of a backflow prevention assembly to be installed to protect
the public water supply.



      (1)   Any customer making any modification to the private
system's configuration or use of, which may change the degree of hazard,
shall notify the Backflow Administrator before any modification is made.  If
the Backflow Administrator determines that such modification requires a
different backflow prevention assembly, it must be installed before the
modification is made.



      (2)   The following types of facilities or services have been
identified by the City of Albemarle Public Utilities Department as having a
potential for backflow or non-potable water into the public water supply
system.  Therefore, an approved backflow prevention assembly will be
required on all such services according to the degree of hazard present. 
Other types of facilities or services not listed below may also be required
to install approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined necessary by
the City of Albemarle Backflow Administrator. 



   DCVA = Double Check Valve Assembly



   RP = Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly



   DCDA = Double Check Detector Assembly



   RPDA = Reduced Pressure Detector Assembly



   AG = Air Gap



   PVB = Pressure Vacuum Breaker



         (a)   Aircraft and missile plants:  RP



         (b)   Automotive service station, dealerships, etc:



            1.   No health hazard: DCVA



            2.   Health hazard: RP



         (c)   Automotive plants: RP



         (d)   Auxiliary water systems:



            1.   Approved public/private water supply:  DCVA



            2.   Unapproved public/private water supply: AG



            3.   Used water and industrial fluids: RP



         (e)   Bakeries:



            1.   No health hazard: DCVA



            2.   Health hazard: RP



         (f)   Beauty shops/barber shops.



            1.   No health hazard: DCVA



            2.   Health hazard: RP



         (g)   Beverage bottling plants: RP



         (g)   Breweries: RP



         (h)   Buildings - hotels, apartment houses, public and
private buildings, or other structures having unprotected cross connections.



            1.   (Under five stories) No health hazard: DCVA



            2.   (Under five stories) Health hazard: RP



            3.   (Over five stories) All: RP



         (i)   Canneries, packing houses, and rendering plants: RP



         (j)   Chemical plants - industrial, processing,
compounding or treatment:  RP



         (k)   Chemically contaminated water system: RP



         (l)   Commercial car-wash facilities: RP



         (m)   Commercial greenhouses: RP



         (n)   Individual commercial sales establishments
(department stores)



            1.   No health hazards: DCVA



            2.   Health hazard: RP



         (o)   Concrete/asphalt plants: RP



         (p)   Dairies and cold storage plants: RP



         (q)   Dye works: RP



         (r)   Film laboratories: RP



         (s)   Fire systems



            1.   No health hazard: DCDA



            2.   Health hazard: (booster pumps, foams,
antifreeze solution, etc.): RPDA



         (t)   Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitarium, morgues,
mortuaries, autopsy facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, medical
clinics, and veterinary hospitals: RP



         (u)   Industrial facilities:  RP



         (v)   Laundries:  RP



         (w)   Lawn irrigation systems:  RP



         (x)   Malls or strip malls (Frequent tenant change and
photo labs, etc.)



            1.   Health hazard: RP



         (y)   Metal manufacturing, cleaning processing, and
fabricating plants: RP



         (z)   Mobile home parks:



            1.   No health hazard: DCVA



            2.   Health hazard: RP



         (aa)   Oil and gas production, storage or transmission
properties: RP



         (bb)   Paper and paper products plants: RP



         (cc)   Pest control (exterminating and fumigating): RP



         (dd)   Plating plants: RP



         (ee)   Power plants: RP



         (ff)   Radioactive materials or substances - plants or
facilities handling: RP



         (gg)   Restaurants:  RP



         (hh)   Restricted, classified, or other closed
facilities: RP



         (ii)   Rubber plants (natural or synthetic): RP



         (jj)   Sand and gravel plants: RP



         (kk)   Schools, and colleges: RP



         (ll)   Sewage and storm drain facilities: RP



         (mm)   Public swimming pools: RP



         All assemblies an installations shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the City of Albemarle Public Utilities Department.



      (3)   Filling of tanks/tankers or any other container from a
City of Albemarle owned fire hydrant is strictly prohibited unless it has
been equipped with the proper meter and backflow protection.  Any
unauthorized connection to a fire hydrant is considered an illegal
cross-connection to the public water system and will be subject to fines and
or imprisonment.  City of Albemarle Fire Department and Stanly County
Volunteer Fire Departments are exempt from this rule due to emergency or
training requirements.



      (4)   If a cross-connection control inspector is unable to
survey any portion of a private water system to determine the degree of
hazard, due to confidential activities, a reduced pressure zone assembly will
be required.



   (B)   Low hazard.



      (1)   All single-family residential homes will be considered a
low hazard and shall have a minimum of a check valve device installed at the
meter service.



      (2)   If no other backflow prevention assembly is specified a
double check valve assembly must be installed on all private water systems.



   (C)   Imminent hazard.



      (1)   If it has been determined a customer's private water
system has an imminent hazard; such customer must install a backflow
prevention assembly specified by the Backflow Administrator and this
chapter.  This assembly must be installed within twenty-four (24) hours of
notification from the Administrator.  If the customer fails to install the
specified assembly within the allowed time limit, water service to the
customer's private water  system will be terminated and may be subject to
specified civil penalties.  In the event the Backflow Administrator is
unable to notify the customer in twenty-four (24) hours of determining an
imminent hazard existing, the Administrator may terminate water service until
the specified assembly is installed.  These actions may be carried out under
the Safe Drinking Water Act (Title XIV Section 1431) and the N.C. State
Plumbing Code (appendix D104.2.6).



      (2)   Only a backflow prevention assembly offering a greater
degree of protection may be installed in place of a specified assembly
required by this chapter.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.09  NOTICES.



   In the event a customer has reason to believe or that the customer's
private water system has contaminated or polluted the public water system the
customer shall notify the City of Albemarle Public Utilities Department
immediately.  The City of Albemarle will take immediate steps to isolate the
area of contamination.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.10  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Notification of violation.



      (1)   A written notice must be presented to any
customer/person who has been found to be in violation of any part of this
chapter.



      (2)   Such notice must explain the violation and give the time
period within which the violation must be corrected.  The time period set to
correct a violation shall not exceed thirty (30) days after receiving notice
unless otherwise specified.  If the violation has been determined to be an
imminent hazard the customer shall be required to correct the violation
immediately or water service will be discontinued.



      (3)   In the event a customer is found in violation of this
chapter and fails to correct the violation in a timely manner or to pay any
civil penalty or expense assessed under this section, water service will be
terminated and shall be reestablished when the violation is corrected and any
applicable penalties are paid.



      (4)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private water
system, which has an imminent hazard - $1,000 per day not to exceed $10,000.



      (5)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private water
system which is of a moderate or high hazard - $500.



      (6)   Submitting false records or failure to submit records,
which are required by this chapter - $500.



      (7)   Failure to test or maintain backflow prevention
assemblies as required - $100 per day.



   (B)   Reduction of penalty.



      (1)   The Administrator may reduce or dismiss any civil
penalty imposed under this section if the Administrator has determined that
the person charged with the violation has no past history of violation and
has made corrections in a timely manner as set by the City of Albemarle
Public Utilities.



      (2)   No civil penalty shall be reduced if it has been
determined the violation was intentional.



      (3)   Any person violating any part of this chapter must
reimburse the City of Albemarle for any expenses in repairing damage to the
public water system caused by any violation and any expenses incurred for
investigating a violation.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.11  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this section shall apply to all such persons or
entities using public water both in and outside the city, regardless of
whether any such person or entity using water shall have a contract for water
service with the City.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



§ 52.12  SEVERABILITY.



   If any division, cause, or provision of this section shall be judged
invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to such division, clause, or
provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this section shall be declared
valid and effective.



(Ord. 07-25, passed 9-4-07)



CHAPTER 53: EMERGENCY WATER MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES



Section



   53.01   Purpose



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Water emergency



   53.04   Enforcement



   53.05   Termination of water emergency



   53.06   Applicability



   53.07   Severability



§ 53.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the declaration of
official phases of water supply shortage situations and the implementation of
voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures throughout the city in
the event a water emergency is declared.



(Ord. 07-26, passed 9-4-07)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 



   (A)   "WATER."  Any type of water, including fresh water, brackish
water,  wastewater, or reclaimed water.



   (B)   "CUSTOMER."  Any person using water for any purpose from the
city's water distribution system and for which either a regular charge is
made or, in this case of bulk sales, a cash charge is made at the site of
delivery.



   (C)   "EMERGENCY."  Whenever water supplies are below the level
necessary to meet normal needs and serious shortages exist in the area.



   (D)   "FRESH WATER."  Water withdrawn from surface or groundwater
which has not been previously used, other than brackish water.



   (E)   "MANDATORY CONSERVATION."  Raw water supplies (i.e., stream
flow, reservoir levels or groundwater levels) are consistently below seasonal
averages, and should the seasonal average continue to decline, may not be
adequate to meet normal needs.



   (F)   "NON-RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER." Commercial, industrial,
institutional, public and all other such users, with the exception of
hospitals and health care facilities.



   (G)   "RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER."  Any customer who receives water
service for a single- or multi-family dwelling unit. The term residential
customer does not include educational or other institutions, hotels, motel,
or similar commercial establishments.



   (H)   "SERVICE INTERRUPTION."  The temporary suspension of water
supply, or reduction of pressure below that required for adequate supply, to
any customer, portion of a water supply, or entire system.



   (I)   "SOURCE OF WATER FOR TREATMENT."  Water available to the City
of Albemarle treatment by virtue of its water rights or withdrawal permit or
any treated water introduced by the city into its water distribution system,
including water offered for sale.



   (J)   "VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION." Conditions exist which indicate the
potential for serious water supply shortages.



   (K)   "WASTE OF WATER."  Includes, but is not limited to (1)
permitting water to escape down a gutter, ditch, or other surface drain, or
(2) failure to repair a controllable leak of water due to defective plumbing.



   (L)   "WASTEWATER."  Water which has been previously used for
industrial, municipal, domestic, or other purpose, and has not been returned
to the surface or groundwater source.



(Ord. 07-26, passed 9-4-07)



§ 53.03  WATER EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Declaration of emergency.  Subject to review by the City
Council at any regular or special meeting of the City Council, a water
emergency may be declared by the City Manager or his or her designee to exist
when any condition or situation exists that may threaten the availability
and/or safety of either treated or potable water from the water supply,
treatment, and distribution system operated and maintained by the City.  A
water emergency shall be declared by the City Manager or his or her designee
to exist when users of the city water system cannot be supplied with treated
or potable water without substantially curtailing the water demand placed on
the city's water system.  Furthermore, a water emergency shall be declared
to exist when production, treatment, transmission, and storage facilities are
incapable of meeting all daily water demands or when projections of available
water show that the available supply of water will not meet the daily water
demands.



   (B)   Level of emergency.



      (1)   A declaration of the existence of a water emergency by
the City Manager or his or her designee shall specify the level of severity
of the emergency and be in the form of a signed executive order that, upon
its issuance, shall be distributed to the Mayor and members of the City
Council in a manner calculated to provide the most expeditious notification
possible.



      (2)   Once the distribution of the declaration of the
existence of a water emergency to the Mayor and members of the City Council
has been undertaken, the City Manager or his or her designee shall give
notice to the general public by means of a public press announcement of the
existence of a water emergency and the severity of the emergency.  The
regulatory provisions authorized by this section will become effective
"immediately" after the issuance of the public press announcement specified
in the preceding sentence.



   (C)   Sudden disruption.  In the event of a sudden and severe water
shortage created by a disrupted waterline or some other
malfunction/disruption of the city's water system, the City Manager or his or
her designee may immediately place into effect the appropriate restrictive
provisions authorized herein. The restrictive provisions implemented by the
City Manager or his or her designee may include, but are not limited to, the
temporary discontinuance of service without prior notice to any person,
entity, or structure receiving water from the city water system. Restrictive
provisions implemented as a consequence of a sudden and severe disruption of
water service may include, but are not limited to, any combination of the
various restrictions found within the different levels of water use
restrictions.  Any restrictive provisions implemented pursuant to this
chapter shall be city-wide in scope and/or limited to the geographic area of
the city affected by a localized disruption of the city's water system.  The
necessity of such restrictive provisions shall be re-evaluated on a daily
basis by the City Manager or his or her designee, in consultation with the
Director of Public Utilities.  The restrictive provisions authorized by
§53.03 shall be terminated by the City Manager or his or her designee as
soon as is practicable to do so.  In the event of the imposition of such
temporary restrictive provisions due to a sudden disruption to the water
system, notification to those affected shall be implemented as soon as is
practicable.



   (D)   Classification of severity of disruption.  The severity of a
water emergency shall be classified and expressed by the City Manager or his
or her designee in terms of the level of staged water use restrictions
imposed on consumers of water from the city water system.  For the purpose
of this section, the staged water use restrictions are as follows:



      (1)   Level I (Voluntary).  During a declared Level I water
emergency, consumers of water from the city water system shall be encouraged
to implement the following voluntary water conservation practices:



         (a)   Watering of lawns, ornamental plants, and gardens
should be limited to the hours between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;



         (b)   Use of water for wash down of outside areas such
as driveways, parking lots, and sidewalks should be curtailed;



         (c)   Faucets should not be left running while
conducting personal hygiene, or washing dishes;



         (d)   The use of clothes and dishwashers should be
limited where possible, and these units should be operated with full loads;



         (e)   Washing cars and other vehicles should be
curtailed to Saturday and Sundays;



         (f)   The use of flow restriction and other water saving
devices is encouraged;



         (g)   Showers should be used for bathing, and showers
should be limited to four minutes or less; and filling of pools should be
deferred or limited to hours between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



      (2)   Level II (Mandatory). During a declared Level II water
emergency, the following mandatory water use restrictions shall be in effect
for consumers of water from the city water system:



         (a)   The watering of lawns, ornamental plants, and
gardens shall not be done except by handheld containers (buckets, jugs, etc.)
and  limited to the hours between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;



         (b)   With the exception of situations where a wash down
of outside areas is necessary due to public health and safety concerns, the
residential use of water for wash down of outside areas is prohibited;
provided however, commercial pressure washers shall be permitted to continue
normal operations; 



         (c)   Residential washing of cars and other vehicles is
prohibited.  Automobile retail establishments and commercial automobile
washing facilities including those providing hand held washing nozzles shall
be permitted to continue normal operations;



         (d)   Restaurants and other food serving establishments
shall serve water to patrons only at the request of the patron(s);



         (e)   Commercial, industrial and construction operations
shall eliminate all possible waste of water.  Large scale commercial and
industrial operations and construction activities that utilize 15,000 cubic
feet or more of water per month shall submit a water reduction compliance
plan to achieve 25%, 50%, or 75% water reduction as specified under the 
Level II water emergency declaration within 14 days of the effective date of
the regulations and restrictions specified in the Level II water emergency
declaration; and



         (f)   Above-ground pools, jacuzzis, and hot tubs having
a capacity of 500 gallons or more and all newly constructed or drained
in-ground pools shall be filled by permit only.  The Director of Public
Utilities or his or her designee shall review applications for such fill
permits.  The issuance of such a permit may be denied on the basis of the
assessment by the Director of Public Utilities of the severity of the
situation.



      (3)   Level III (Mandatory). During a declared Level III water
emergency, the following mandatory use restrictions shall be in effect for
consumers of water from the city water system:



         (a)   Any form of watering or irrigating lawns, gardens,
and/or other plants is prohibited;



         (b)   With the exception of situations where the wash
down of certain outside areas is necessary due to public health and safety
concerns, the use of water for wash down of outside areas is prohibited;



         (c)   With the exception of situations where the washing
of certain items is necessary due to public health and safety concerns, the
washing of cars, vehicles, and/or other equipment is prohibited;



         (d)   Restaurants and other food serving establishments
shall utilize single serving utensils and plates in addition to serving water
to patrons only at the request of the patron(s);



         (e)   Recreational use of potable water, including
filling of pools, is prohibited;



         (f)   Large scale commercial and industrial water
customers and construction activities utilizing 15,000 cubic feet or more of
water per month shall achieve mandatory reductions in daily water usage of
25%, 50%, or 75% through whatever means are available.  The target reduction
percentage shall be determined by the severity of the water emergency and
shall be publicly announced as part of the emergency declaration.  The
Director of Public Utilities or his or her designee shall determine
compliance with the daily usage reduction targets.  Variances may be granted
by the Director of Public Utilities to public health facilities including,
but not limited to, hospitals and nursing homes;



         (g)   Drinking water taps or hydrant permits shall be
issued or revoked at the discretion of the Director of Public Utilities; and



         (h)   Unless a bulk water sale is made pursuant to an
existing contract, bulk water sales shall be prohibited.



      (4)   Level IV (Mandatory). During a declared Level IV water
emergency, the following mandatory water use restrictions shall be in effect
for consumers of water from the city water system:



         (a)   All use of water for purposes other than the
maintenance of public health and safety is prohibited;



         (b)   Unless a bulk water sale is made pursuant to an
existing contract, bulk water sales shall be prohibited;



         (c)   Where the city water system is functional, monthly
residential water use shall not exceed 50 cubic feet (384 gallons) of water
per day or what is required to maintain public health and safety concerns at
each metered location;



         (d)   Where the city water system is not functional City
of Albemarle, Mutual Aid Cities/Towns and National Guard vehicles shall be
utilized, if available, to distribute water for household use at prearranged
locations within the effected area of the city.  Usage by individuals shall
be limited to those amounts necessary to sustain life through drinking, food
preparation, and personal hygiene; and



         (e)   The compliance plans for industries during Level
IV remain the same as Level III or as directed by the North Carolina State
Public Health Officials.



(Ord. 07-26, passed 9-4-07)



§ 53.04  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violation of provisions unlawful.  In the event of the
declaration of a water emergency by the City Manager or his or her designee
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to use or permit the use of  water from the water system of the
city in violation of any of the provisions set forth in this chapter until
such time as the City Manager or his or her designee has declared the
restrictive  provision(s) in question to be no longer in effect.



   (B)   Review of operational status of water system.  Once a water
emergency has been declared and the appropriate staged restrictions imposed,
the Director of Public Utilities or his or her designee shall review the
operational status of the city's water system and the supply of water
available to the city's water system at least once daily.  The Director of
Public Utilities shall notify the City Manager or his or her designee of the
operational status of the city's water system and the available water supply.
The Director of Public Utilities or his or her designee shall recommend to
the City Manager or his or her designee during the course of this daily
notification procedure whether a different stage of restriction should be
implemented.  The City Manager or his or her designee shall make the final
determination as to whether any change in the stage of restriction is
warranted.  If such a change in the stage of restriction is warranted, the
notification procedures shall be followed in the same manner as for the
initial declaration of a water emergency.



   (C)   Enforcement by Public Utilities Departments, et al. 
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by personnel
of the Public Utilities Department, the Albemarle Police Department, and any
other personnel designated by the City Manager.  Failure to comply with any
of the regulations or restrictions of this chapter shall be considered
unlawful and a violation of this section.  All remedies authorized by law
for noncompliance with this chapter, including the issuance of a civil
penalty citation or an action for injunctive relief, may be exercised to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to fail to act
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or to use water in any
manner that constitutes an attempted and/or actual evasion or avoidance of
the water restrictions prescribed by this chapter.



   (D)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   Any consumer of water from the city water system who
violates any  provision of this chapter shall be subject to civil penalties
as follows:



         (a)   During a declared Level II water emergency,
residential users who violate any of the mandatory restrictions of this
chapter shall be subject to a written warning for the first offense; a civil
penalty in the amount of $100 for the second offense; and a civil penalty in
the amount of $200 for the third and each successive offense;



         (b)   During a declared Level III or Level IV water
emergency, there shall be no warnings issued, and residential users who
violate any of the mandatory restrictions of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty in the amount of $100 for the first offense and a civil
penalty in the amount of $200 for the second and each successive offense;



         (c)    During any declared water emergency, any
non-residential user who violates any of the mandatory restrictions of this
chapter shall be subject to a written warning for the first offense; a civil
penalty of $200 for the second offense; a civil penalty of $500 for the third
offense; and a civil penalty of $1,000 for the fourth and each successive
offense.



      (2)   Violations shall be accumulated by all consumers of
water from the city water system so long as a declared water emergency, in
any stage, is continuously in effect and until no stage of this chapter has
been in effect for one calendar year.  Violations of any of the mandatory
restrictions of any stage of a declared water emergency under the provisions
of this section shall accumulate with violations of the mandatory
restrictions of any of the other stages under this section.  If a customer
of the water system moves or ceases service and subsequently renews service
during any of the stages of a declared water emergency under this section,
the customer's violations shall continue to accumulate as if such move or
cessation had not occurred.



   (E)   Administrative review of citation.  Any citation that is
issued by authorized personnel under this chapter and that is enforceable by
civil penalties shall be subject to administrative review by the Director of
Planning and Community Development or his or her designee.  This
administrative review shall occur only when the alleged violator has made a
written request for such a review within 15 calendar days of the issuance of
the citation at issue.  This written request for administrative review must
be hand delivered or sent by certified mail to the Director of Planning and
Community Development at his office.  If a request for administrative review
is not received in person by the Director of Planning and Community
Development or his or her designee or postmarked within 15 calendar days of
the date of issuance of a citation, administrative review of the matter shall
be deemed to have been waived.



   (F)   Hearing.  When an alleged violator of the provisions of this
chapter has filed in a timely manner a written request for administrative
review that conforms to the provisions, the Director of Planning and
Community Development or his or her designee shall hold a hearing within 30
calendar days of the date of receipt of the written request for such a
hearing.  At this hearing, the Director of Planning and Community
Development or his or her designee shall review the violation alleged in the
citation and shall provide the alleged violator an opportunity to be heard in
response to the allegations alleged in the citation under review.  Within
five calendar days of the date on which the administrative hearing is held,
the Director of Planning and Community Development or his or her designee
shall render a written decision whereby liability or no liability on the part
of the alleged violator is found to exist.  Such a decision shall be
delivered to the person or entity that filed the request for administrative
review by means of hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested.
Upon receipt of notification of any decision finding liability, the violator
shall make payment of any civil penalty incurred within 15 calendar days. 
If payment of any civil penalty due is not received within 15 calendar days
following receipt of notice of liability after administrative review,  the
violator shall be liable for an additional civil penalty of $100.



   (G)   Failure to pay civil penalty.  Cases involving any person or
entity that fails to pay any civil penalty assessed against that person or
entity after the later of either 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of
a citation alleging liability or the date of receipt of notice finding
liability following administrative review shall be referred to the City
Attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the city, in the
appropriate division of the General Courts of Justice, for recovery of the
penalty.



   (H)   Repeated violations.  Upon a fourth violation of this
section, a violator shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $500 as provided by G.S. § 14-4, and, in addition
thereto, such violation may be enjoined and restrained as provided in G.S. §
160A-175. The issuing of a criminal warrant shall not prohibit the imposition
of further civil penalties.



   (I)   Discontinuance of service upon violation of mandatory
restrictions.  The Director of Public Utilities or his or her designee shall
have the authority to discontinue or restrict water service to any person,
entity, or structure in the event of any violation of the mandatory
restrictions imposed pursuant to this section.  The Director of Public
Utilities shall provide by the most expeditious means reasonably available a
minimum of two working days written notice of his or her intent to
discontinue or restrict water service to a particular person, entity, or
structure before such discontinuance or restriction of service is
implemented.  During the period of the two day notice, any person or entity
claiming the status of an aggrieved party may make a request of the City
Manager or his or her designee to be heard as to why such discontinuance or
restriction of water service should not be enforced.  If such a request is
received by the City Manager or his or her designee in a timely manner, the
requesting party shall be heard by the City Manager or his or her designee on
the said matter as soon as is practicable.  Once a matter is scheduled by
the City Manager for hearing, the decision of the Director or her designee
renders a decision as to the aggrieved party's request.  The decision
rendered by the City Manager or his or her design in such a matter shall be
final.  When water service has been discontinued or restricted pursuant to
and in accordance with this division, it shall be unlawful to reactivate such
service without the permission of the Director of Public Utilities.



   (J)   Separate offenses.  Each day's continuing violation of this
chapter shall be a separate and distinct criminal and civil offense.  Each
violation of this chapter shall be a separate offense even if occurring on
the same day.



(Ord. 07-26, passed 9-4-07)



§ 53.05  TERMINATION OF WATER EMERGENCY.



   Termination of any stage of a declared water emergency shall be
determined and ordered by the City Manager or his or her designee when he or
she, in direct consultation with the Director of Public Utilities or his or
her designee, determines that the water supply available for use by the city
water system is no longer so low as to constitute a water emergency under the
terms of this section.  Upon termination of any water emergency and any
stage thereof, all fines or penalties incurred by any consumer of water from
the city's water system shall remain in effect until paid.  Upon such
termination, discontinued users may have their service restored upon payment
of the regular fees charged to customers who have had their water service
disconnected; provided however, no such fees shall be charged to consumers
who had their water service discontinued.



(Ord. 07-26, passed 9-4-07)



§ 53.06 APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all such persons or
entities using public water both in and outside the city, regardless of
whether any such person or entity using water shall have a contract for water
service with the city.



(Ord. 07-26, passed 9-4-07)



§ 53.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any division, clause, or provision of this chapter shall be judged
invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to such division, clause, or
provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this chapter shall be declared
valid and effective.



(Ord. 07-26, passed 9-4-07)



CHAPTER 54: IN-GROUND IRRIGATION SYSTEMS



Section



   54.01   Purpose



   54.02   Definitions



   54.03   Methods of connection



   54.04   Technical and other requirements



§ 54.01  PURPOSE.



   All new residential or non-residential lawn in-ground irrigation
systems installed after application of this section that will be supplied
from the city water system shall be independently connected to the system and
water consumption shall be measured through a separate irrigation meter. 
The new lawn in-ground irrigation system must have a backflow device of the
RP (reduced pressure zone) type as a minimum containment device.



(Ord. 09-31, passed  - -09)



§ 54.02  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   (A)   "WATER."  Any type of water, including fresh water, brackish
water, wastewater, or reclaimed water.



   (B)   "NON-RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER."  Commercial, industrial,
institutional, public and all other such uses, with the exception of
hospitals and health care facilities.



   (C)   "RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER."  Any customer who receives water
service for a single- or multi-family dwelling unit.  The term residential
customer does not include educational or other institutions, hotels, motels,
or similar commercial establishments.



(Ord. 09-31, passed  - -09)



§ 54.03  METHODS OF CONNECTION.



   An irrigation service line may be installed by a direct tap into the
water main (separate tap) or by a split line off the non-irrigation service
line at a point between the water main and the non-irrigation meter (split
tap).  The irrigation service line shall be installed with a backflow device
of the RPZ (reduced pressure zone) type and a cut off valve, of a
manufacturer's type as determine by the city, no more than six inches from
the city irrigation meter to prevent any possible contamination of the city
water system.  Either method of connection shall be performed by the city
Public Utilities Department only.  No contractor shall be allowed to
complete connections to the water main unless a permit is obtained prior to
installing an irrigation service line from the Director of Public Utilities.



(Ord. 09-31, passed  - -09)



§ 54.04  TECHNICAL AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   An irrigation service line, the irrigation meter and all of the related
appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with the same regulations,
policies and procedures that apply to non-irrigation water meters.



(Ord. 09-31, passed  - -09)



TITLE VI:  LICENSING AND REGULATION



   Chapter



      60.   TAXICABS



      61.   CABLE TELEVISION



      62.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      63.   MASSAGE PARLORS AND RELATED BUSINESSES



      64.   PEDDLERS



      65.   STREET AND SIDEWALK USE AND REGULATION



      66.   PAWNBROKERS



      67.   MUNICIPAL SMOKING RESTRICTIONS



      68.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



CHAPTER 60:  TAXICABS



Section



General Provisions



   60.01   Definition



   60.02   Rates



   60.03   Parking on street prohibited



   60.04   Mechanical condition



Owners



   60.10   Certificate of convenience and necessity required



   60.11   Application for certificate



   60.12   Issuance of certificate



   60.13   Duration of certificate



   60.14   Determination of convenience and necessity



   60.15   Hearings; notices



   60.16   Burden of proof



   60.17   Failure to begin operations



   60.18   Transfer of certificate



   60.19   Revocation of certificate



   60.20   Substitution of vehicles



   60.21   Indemnity insurance required



   60.22   Signs identifying vehicle as taxi



Drivers



   60.30   Driver's permit required



   60.31   Application for permit; investigation



   60.31A   Criminal history of applicant for franchise



   60.32   Permit issuance fee



   60.33   Permit duration



   60.34   Revocation of permit



   60.35   Displaying permit



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 60.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TAXICAB.  Any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers operated
on any street or highway on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting
passengers indiscriminately for hire between the points along streets or
highways as may be directed by the passenger so being transported, and shall
not include motor vehicles or motor vehicle carriers as defined in G.S.
Chapter 62.



('58 Code, § 18-15)



§ 60.02  RATES.



   Every person operating taxicabs within the city shall observe and
charge only the rates established from time to time by the City Council and
filed in the office of the City Clerk. No charge shall be made for children
under six years of age when accompanied by an adult.  The fares established
shall be conspicuously and permanently posted inside the taxicab in
reasonable view of all passengers.



('58 Code, § 18-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 60.03  PARKING ON STREET PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store a taxicab on the
public streets of the city for any purpose other than brief stops to pick up
and discharge passengers.



('58 Code, § 18-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 60.04  MECHANICAL CONDITION.



   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each taxicab to keep the
vehicle in good mechanical condition sufficient to meet the state inspection
standards at all times.



('58 Code, § 18-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OWNERS



§ 60.10  CERTIFICATE OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab on and over
the streets of the city without first having applied for and secured from the
City Council a certificate of convenience and necessity as herein set forth.



('58 Code, § 18-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 60.11  APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.



   Every person desiring to operate a taxicab on and over the streets of
the city shall file on forms supplied by the City Clerk an application for a
certificate of convenience and necessity.



('58 Code, § 18-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 60.12  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.



   The City Council shall have power and it shall be its duty to order
certain certificates issued or to refuse to issue certain certificates or to
issue certificates for a partial exercise only of the privileges sought. It
may attach to the exercise of the rights granted only by the certificates,
those terms and conditions as in its judgment the public convenience and
necessity may require.



('58 Code, § 18-3)



§ 60.13  DURATION OF CERTIFICATE.



   A certificate of convenience and necessity shall constitute a franchise
from the city for the operation of taxicabs within the city, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, for one year, unless a shorter period of time is
specified in the certificate. Applications for renewal shall be filed
annually on or before June l, and the City Council shall review all
certificates to be considered for renewal at its first regular meeting in the
month of June of each year. Renewal applications may be filed by letter
stating any change which has occurred from the original certificate or
application, such as the average number of pieces of equipment operated
during the previous year, and the name of the owners of stock if the
franchise shall be a corporation.  At the time of renewal each year the City
Council may reduce the number of taxicabs authorized to the average number of
taxicabs which the applicant has been actually operating during the previous
12 months.  The owner of a franchise from the city for the operation of
taxicabs within the city shall give the City Council at least 30 days prior
notice of intention to cease operating taxicabs under the franchise.



('58 Code, § 18-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 60.14  DETERMINATION OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.



   (A)   In determining whether the public convenience and necessity
require the franchising of taxicabs, the City Council shall, among other
things, take into consideration the following factors.



      (1)   Whether or not the public convenience and necessity
require the proposed or additional taxicab service within the city.



      (2)   The financial responsibility of the applicant and the
likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible, and
satisfactory.



      (3)   The number and condition of equipment.



      (4)   The schedule of proposed rates to be charged.



      (5)   The number of taxicabs now operated and the demand for
increased service, if any, and whether or not the safe use of the streets by
the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved, and whether or
not adequate provision has been made for off-street parking of the taxicabs.



      (6)   The experience of applicant in the taxicab business.



      (7)   Any other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and
advisable.



   (B)   Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a
certificate of convenience and necessity, the Council, or a committee
thereof, shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts, and may,
if it so desires, subpoena witnesses and utilize the service of the Chief of
Police or any other officer or employee of the city.



('58 Code, § 18-5)



§ 60.15  HEARINGS; NOTICES.



   Each application for a certificate of convenience and necessity shall
be scheduled for a hearing not later than 20 days after the application is
filed. The applicant shall be notified by the City Clerk by mail to the
business address set forth in the application of the date and time of the
hearing, the notification to be sent at least ten days before the date and
time of the hearing.  The City Clerk shall also, within the same time,
notify all persons who at that time hold certificates of convenience and
necessity for the operation of taxicabs within the city, of the date and time
of the hearing, and the name of the applicant.  In addition, the City Clerk
shall cause to be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation at least ten days before the hearing, a notice setting forth the
name of the applicant and the date and time of the hearing.  The cost of the
publication shall be paid for by the applicant.



('58 Code, § 18-6)



§ 60.16  BURDEN OF PROOF.



   The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish the
existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the
taxicab specified in his application, and all other facts required for the
granting of a certificate.



('58 Code, § 18-7)



§ 60.17  FAILURE TO BEGIN OPERATIONS.



   If a certificate is granted to an applicant, and the applicant shall
fail, in accordance with the provisions of the certificate, to begin
operations within 60 days after the date of the certificate, the certificate
shall become null and void.



('58 Code, § 18-8)



§ 60.18  TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATE.



   A certificate is not transferable without the consent of the City
Council.  Applications for a permit to transfer shall be filed in the same
manner as an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity. 
The proceedings upon the application for a transfer shall be the same as
those described for the issuance of a certificate, except that the question
of public convenience and necessity need not be proved.  In the event the
franchise has been issued to a corporation, any change in the ownership of
the stock shall be approved by the Council.



('58 Code, § 18-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 60.19  REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   The City Council may at any time after a public hearing revoke
any certificate issued by authority of this subchapter for any one, or more,
of the following causes.



      (1)   Failure to operate the taxicabs specified in the
certificate in such a manner as to serve the public adequately and
efficiently.



      (2)   Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair.



      (3)   Failure to carry liability insurance or bond as required
by ordinance.



      (4)   Failure to pay to the city the taxes or license fee for
each taxicab, imposed upon the taxicabs.



      (5)   Repeated and persistent violation by the taxicab drivers
of traffic and safety ordinances, or state laws relating to alcoholic
beverages or prostitution.



      (6)   Failure to report accidents.



      (7)   Wilful failure to comply with any provision of this
chapter or ordinances or state laws relating to the operation of taxicabs.



   (B)   No certificate shall be revoked until the owner has had at
least five days' notice  by personal service or registered mail of the
charges against him and of the time and place of the hearing.  If, after the
hearing, it is found that the owner is guilty of one or more of the offenses
listed in division (A) above, Council shall have the power to revoke the
certificate, or to condition a revocation upon compliance with its order
within any time fixed by it.



('58 Code, § 18-10)



§ 60.20  SUBSTITUTION OF VEHICLES.



   The person to whom a certificate has been issued may, by appropriate
endorsement thereon by the City Clerk, substitute other vehicles for the
vehicles for which the certificate was granted.  In this instance, the
liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to the substitute
vehicle.



('58 Code, § 18-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 60.21  INDEMNITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   All taxicabs and jitneys hauling passengers in the city shall carry
indemnity insurance while operating in or out of the city.  The insurance
shall be in the sum of not less than the minimum level of liability insurance
required by G.S. Chapter 20, Article 9A (Motor Vehicle Safety and
Responsibility Ace of 1953) to cover injury to one or more persons on account
of the operation of the taxicab or jitney.



('58 Code, §§ 18-12 and 18-13) (Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 1-5-04



§ 60.22  SIGNS IDENTIFYING VEHICLE AS TAXI.



   Every person operating taxicabs shall have permanent signs at
conspicuous places on each taxicab showing that it is a taxi and the name of
the franchise and the number of the taxicab assigned.



('58 Code, § 18-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DRIVERS



§ 60.30  DRIVER'S PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire from
place to place within the city, or within a distance of five miles thereof,
unless that person shall have first applied to and secured from the Chief of
Police a permit to drive a taxicab.



('58 Code, § 18-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 60.31  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; INVESTIGATION.



   The application required of applicants to drive a taxicab shall be made
on blanks furnished by the city for the purpose and shall, among other
things, state the name, address, physical condition, physical description,
former employers, court record, and prove applicant has a valid North
Carolina driver's license as provided in G.S. Chapter 20, Article C. The
application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant.



('58 Code, §§ 18-20 and 18-21) (Am. Ord. 04-01, passed 1-5-04)



§ 60.31A  CRIMINAL HISTORY OF APPLICANT FOR FRANCHISE.



   The Chief of the Police Department or his or her designee is hereby
designated officer of the city to check the criminal history concerning the
suitability of applicants for a franchise to operate taxi cabs in the city,
or to operate a taxi cab as an employee of the owner of the taxi franchise
and to access the SBI/DCI criminal history record information to obtain the
history of the applicant.  The information shall be provided to the City
Manager, or designee, and shall be and remain confidential.  Prior to denial
or termination of employment based upon CHRI received from the criminal
justice agency, the non-criminal entity shall verify the existence of a
record by either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a
fingerprint card of the individual to the CIIS for verification that the CHRI
record belongs to the individual.



(Ord. 09-04, passed 2-2-09)



§ 60.32  PERMIT ISSUANCE FEE.



   If the Chief of Police finds that the applicant to drive a taxicab has
not been convicted of a felony; a violation of any federal or state statute
relating to the use, possession, or sale of intoxicating liquors; any federal
or state statute relating to prostitution; any federal or state statute
relating to the use, possession, or sale of narcotic drugs; within the past
five years, and that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and is
not a habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; has not been a
habitual violator of traffic laws; and is a careful and prudent driver, the
Chief may issue a permit to the applicant to drive a taxicab on receipt of
the fee established by Council for these permits.



('58 Code, § 18-22)



§ 60.33  PERMIT DURATION.



   All permits issued by the city shall be for a maximum term of one year
and shall expire on May 31 of each year.  Drivers may renew their permits by
filing an application and paying the required fee.



('58 Code, § 18-23)



§ 60.34  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   At any time after the issuance of a permit to any person to drive a
taxicab, the City Council may revoke the permit, if the person holding the
permit is convicted of a felony; a violation of any federal or state statute
relating to the use, possession, or sale of intoxicating liquors; a violation
of any federal or state statute relating to the use, possession, or sale of
narcotic drug; repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances; a violation
of any state or federal statute relating to prostitution; or becomes an
habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs.



('58 Code, § 18-24)



§ 60.35  DISPLAYING PERMIT.



   The driver of every taxicab shall at all times while operating the
taxicab, prominently post and display in the taxicab, so as to be visible to
the passengers therein, his permit to drive a taxicab.



('58 Code, § 18-25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 61:  CABLE TELEVISION



Section



General Provisions



   61.001   Purpose



   61.002   Title of chapter



   61.003   Definitions



Grant of Franchise



   61.010   Grant



   61.011   Franchise area



   61.012   Use of public rights of way



   61.013   Use of city facilities



   61.014   Use of grantee facilities



   61.015   Franchise required



   61.016   Term of franchise



   61.017   Franchise nonexclusive



   61.018   Time is of the essence



   61.019   Law governs



   61.020   Transfer of ownership or control



   61.021   Franchise renewal



   61.022   Police powers



   61.023   Franchise fees



   61.024   Forfeiture or revocation



   61.025   Receivership and foreclosure



   61.026   Equal opportunity policy



   61.027   Notices



   61.028   Failure of city to enforce



   61.029   Rights reserved to the grantor



   61.030   No recourse against the grantor



Regulation of Franchise



   61.040   Regulatory authority



   61.041   Supervision of franchise



   61.042   Rates and charges



   61.043   Performance evaluation



Bonds, Insurance, and Indemnification



   61.055   Performance bond and letter of credit



   61.056   Liability and insurance



   61.057   Indemnification



Design and Construction Provisions



   61.065   Authority to construct



   61.066   Construction and technical standards



   61.067   System construction schedule



   61.068   Extension of service



   61.069   Use of streets



   61.070   Erection, removal and common use of poles



   61.071   Construction reporting requirements



   61.072   Tests and performance monitoring



Service Provisions



   61.080   Service standards



   61.081   Services to subscribers and users



   61.082   Installations, connections, and other grantee services



   61.083   Service calls and complaint procedures



   61.084   Continuity of service mandatory



   61.085   Protection of subscriber privacy mandatory



   61.086   Rights of individuals



Books, Records, and Reports



   61.095   Books and records available to grantor



   61.096   Reports required



   61.097   Records required



Miscellaneous Provisions



   61.105   Captions



   61.106   Franchise applications



   61.107   Public notice



   61.108   Public hearings



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 61.001  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The city finds that the development of a cable television
system has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the people
of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology
associated with cable television, the city further finds that the public
convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing
regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the
city shall designate. It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent
amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible
public interest and public purpose in these matters, and any franchise issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an
integral part thereof.



   (B)   Further, it is recognized that cable television systems have
the capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to
the city's residents, but can provide a variety of broadband, interactive
television services to institutions and individuals. Many of these services
involve city agencies and other public institutions, by providing
governmental, educational or health care communications.



   (C)   For these purposes, the following goals underlie the
regulations contained herein:



      (1)   Television services should be provided to the maximum
number of city residents.



      (2)   The system should be capable of accommodating both the
present and reasonably foreseeable future communications needs of the city.



      (3)   The system should be improved and upgraded during the
franchise term.



      (4)   The television system authorized by this chapter shall
be responsive to the needs and interests of the local community, and shall
provide the widest possible diversity of information sources and services to
the public.



      (5)   Each of the goals enumerated in subsections (1) - (4)
above shall be sought taking into account the costs and benefits to the
residents of the city.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.002  TITLE OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as The City of
Albemarle's Cable Television Ordinance, and it shall become a part of the
ordinances of the city.



   (B)   This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after
its passage.



   (C)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.



   (D)   This chapter shall be governed by and subject to the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including any future amendments
relating to cable television communications.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless otherwise
defined by federal and state law. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in their present tense include the future tense; words in the
plural number include the singular number. The word shall is mandatory and
may is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.



   ADDITIONAL SERVICE.  Any cable service other than basic service
provided over the cable television system.



   ACCESS CHANNELS.  Any channels on the system designed for public,
educational or governmental use.



   BASIC SERVICE.  A separately available basic service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service. Such basic
service tier shall, at a minimum, consist of the following: all signals
carried in fulfillment of the Cable Act, §§ 614 and 615; any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required in this chapter or
the Franchise; any signal of any television broadcast station that is
provided by the cable operator to any subscriber, except a signal which is
secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area
of such station. Additional signals may be added to the basic tier by the
grantee.



   CABLE ACT.  See below.



   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM.  Also referred to as system. A facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide
cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include any
of the following: (a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (b) a
facility that does not use any public rights-of-way; ©) a facility of a
common carrier which is subject in whole or in part to the provision of Title
H of the Cable Act, except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system to the extent that such facility is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers; or (d) any facilities of any electric
utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.



   CABLECAST SIGNAL.  A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable system.



   CHANNEL.  A six Megahertz (MHz) frequency band, which is capable of
carrying either one standard video signal, a number of audio, digital or
other nonvideo signals or some combination of such signals.



   CITY.  The City of Albemarle, located in the state of North Carolina.



   CLOSED-CIRCUIT, or INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE.  Such video, audio, data and
other services provided to institutional users on an individual application
basis. These may include, but are not limited to, one-way video, two-way
video, audio or digital signals among institutional subscribers.



   COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER.  A subscriber who receives a service in a place
of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a business,
trade or profession.



   COMMUNICATIONS POLICY ACT, or CABLE ACT.  The Communications Policy
Act of 1934 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
of 1992 as they may be amended or succeeded.



   CONVERTER.  An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber, and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all
signals delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set.



   COUNCIL.  The Albemarle City Council. The Albemarle City Council is
the elected representative governmental body of the City of Albemarle.



   CPI.  The national percentum increase for the most recently completed
calendar year of the Average Consumer Price Index for all items as published
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor,
subject to maximum limits as are set forth within the franchise agreement.



   DEDICATED INSTITUTIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS.  Broadband television
channels dedicated to serving selected city, county, state or federal
governmental agencies, or institutions specified by the franchise agreement.



   DOWNSTREAM SIGNAL.  A signal originating from or provided by a cable
television system to a subscriber terminal or other terminal including video,
audio, or digital signals or any other type of data or information for either
programs or other uses such as security alert services, etc.



   DROP.  A coaxial, fiber, or other connection from feeder cable to the
subscriber/user residence or place of business.



   EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL.  Any channel designated for educational
access use.



   FAIR MARKET VALUE.  The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed
successor.



   FRANCHISE.  The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter
to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system along the
public rights of way within all or a specified area in the city. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any
license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a
business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws of the
city, state or federal governments.



   FRANCHISE AREA.  All territory described in § 61.011.



   FRANCHISE FEE.  The percentage, as specified by the city, of the
franchisee's gross revenues from all sources payable (as permitted by the
Cable Act) in exchange for the rights granted pursuant to this chapter and
the franchise agreement.



   FRANCHISE, or GRANTEE.  The natural person(s), partnership(s),
domestic and foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s), or
organization(s) of any kind which has been legally granted a franchise by the
city and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.



   GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS CHANNEL.  Any channel specifically designated or
dedicated for government access use.



   GRANTOR.  The City of Albemarle as represented by the Council acting
within the scope of its jurisdiction.



   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES.  All revenue received annually directly or
indirectly by the grantee, from the provision of cable television service
within the franchise area.



   HEADEND.  The electronic control center of the cable television system
including components that amplify, filter, and convert incoming broadcast and
other television and electronic signals for distribution over the cable
system.



   INSTALLATION.  The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.



   LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL.  Any channel or portion thereof designated or
dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee.



   MONITORING.  Observing a television signal, or the absence of a
signal, where the observer is not a party to the signal, whether the signal
is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever.



   OPERATOR.  Any person or group of persons who provides cable
television service over a cable television system and directly or through one
or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable television
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable television system.



   ORIGINATION SITE.  A location capable of transmitting audio-video
television signals to the operator's headend or other location as provided.



   PARTICIPATING UNITS.  The County of Stanly, the City of Albemarle, the
Town of Badin, the Town of New London, the Town of Norwood, the Town of
Oakboro, the Town of Richfield and the Town of Stanfield.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation or any lawful successor or transferee of said individual,
partnership, association, organization or corporation.



   PLANT MILE.  A linear mile of cable as measured on the street or
easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.



   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL.  Any channel designated or dedicated for use by
the general public or noncommercial organizations which is made available for
use without charge, on a nondiscriminatory basis, in accordance with the
rules and regulations specified in the franchise and over which the grantee
has no editorial control.



   PUBLIC WAY, or PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY.  The surface, the air space above
the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway,
lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway,
waterway, utility easement or other public right-of-way now or hereafter held
by the city, county or state which shall entitle the city and the company to
the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the company
cable television system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to the
public way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the city
that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such
purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain
only such rights to use property in the city as the city may have the
undisputed right and power to give or as granted by federal or state law.



   REASONABLE NOTICE.  Written notice addressed to the grantee at its
principal office in proximity to the city or such other office as the grantee
has designated to the city as the address to which notice shall be
transmitted to it, which notice shall be certified and postmarked not less
than seven business days prior to that day in which the party giving such
notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of notice. In
computing said seven days, holidays recognized by the city shall be excluded.



   RESIDENT.  Any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by
applicable law.



   RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER.  A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in
connection with a business, trade, or profession.



   SALE.  Any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.



   SCHOOL.  Any public or nonprofit educational institution including
primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and
private.



   SERVICE AREA.  The entire geographic area within the franchise
territory.



   STATE.  The State of North Carolina.



   SUBSCRIBER NETWORK.  The system of cable and related devices necessary
to deliver audio-video television signals to and from subscribers. The
downstream portion of the subscriber network provided herein is that portion
of the electromagnetic spectrum capable of transmitting audio-video
television signals and other signals to subscribers from the operator's
headend. The upstream portion of the subscriber network provided herein is
that portion of the electromagnetic spectrum which is capable of transmitting
audio-video and other signals from a designated point of origination to the
operator's headend.



   SYSTEM FACILITIES, or FACILITIES.  The cable television system
constructed for use within the city, including without limitation, the
headend, antenna, cables, wires, lines, towers, amplifiers, converters,
equipment or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city
designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving,
amplifying, and distributing by coaxial cable, fiber optics, microwave or
other means, audio and visual radio, television and electronic signals to and
from subscribers in the city and any other equipment or facilities located
within the corporate limits of the city intended for the use of the system.



   TRANSFER.  The disposal by the grantee, directly or indirectly, by
gift, assignment, voluntary sale, assets acquisition, merger, consolidation,
or otherwise, of 50% or more at one time of the ownership or controlling
interest in the system, or 50% cumulatively over the term of the franchise of
such interest to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or
association, or person or group of persons acting in concert.



   TRUNK LINE.  The major distribution cable used in cable
communications, which divides into feeder lines which are tapped for service
to subscribers.



   TWO-WAY, or INTERACTIVE.  The capability of both sending and receiving
audio-video or other electronic signals from the same location. It refers to
the capability of using the upstream and downstream portions of the
subscriber network.



   UPSTREAM SIGNAL.  A signal originating from a subscriber terminal to
another point in the cable television system including video, audio, or
digital signals or any other type of data or information for either programs
or other uses such as security alert services, etc.



   USER.  A person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and
facilities for the purpose of production and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



GRANT OF FRANCHISE



§ 61.010  GRANT.



   (A)   Grant.  In the event that the city shall grant to the grantee
a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a
cable television system within the city, the franchise shall constitute both
a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable television
system as regulated by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. The
franchise shall include by reference those provisions of the grantee's
Application for Franchise that are finally negotiated and accepted by the
city and grantee. Within 25 days after the City Council has taken final
action to approve the granting of a franchise, the grantee shall file a
written acceptance with the City Manager. Concurrently with the filing of the
written acceptance, grantee shall file with the City Manager the bond and
insurance policy in accordance with §§ 61.055 - 61.057 of this chapter. By
acceptance of the franchise, the grantee agrees to abide by all regulations
thereof, herein, and as may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Event of Conflict.  The franchise shall be granted under the
terms and conditions contained herein, consistent with and subject to all
applicable statutory requirements. In the event of conflict between the terms
and conditions of this chapter, the franchise, or the terms and conditions on
which the city can grant a franchise, statutory requirements shall control.



   (C)   Generally Applicable Ordinances.  Any franchise granted by
the city is hereby made subject to the general ordinance provisions now in
effect and hereafter made effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed
to waive the requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the city
regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 6-7-99)



§ 61.011  FRANCHISE AREA.



   Unless otherwise limited by the franchise agreement, the franchise area
shall include the present corporate limits of the City of Albemarle and any
area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise or any
extension thereof, including territory annexed pursuant to satellite
annexation authority. Neither the franchise agreement nor this chapter shall
affect the rights of any other cable television operator holding a
governmental franchise in an annexed area nor does the city guarantee that no
such franchise operators shall exist in such annexed areas.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.012  USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY.



   Insofar as permitted by law and for the purpose of operating and
maintaining a cable communications system in the city, the grantee may erect,
install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over,
under, upon, across and along the public streets and ways within the city
such wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes,
amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and
equipment as are necessary to the operation of the cable communications
systems, provided, however, that the grantee complies with all design,
construction, safety, and performance provisions contained in this chapter,
the franchise agreement, and other laws and regulations of the state.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.013  USE OF CITY FACILITIES.



   At the city's option, the city may offer a grantee the opportunity to
utilize city-owned conduit or other facilities for any portion of its cable
television system. City conduit or other facilities shall be as stated in the
separate contractual agreement negotiated with the city by the franchisee and
under the terms and conditions as stated in those separate pole attachment
agreements.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.014  USE OF GRANTEE FACILITIES.



   No poles shall be erected by the grantee without prior approval of the
State Department of Transportation or other appropriate governmental unit,
with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent aspect.
However, no location of any pole of the grantee shall be a vested right and
such poles shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense
whenever the state reasonably determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby. The grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduits,
where possible. The city shall have the right, during the life of the
franchise, to install and maintain upon the poles owned by the grantee, any
wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable
system operations of the grantee. The city shall indemnify the grantee for
such use.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.015  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   No cable television system shall be allowed to occupy or use the
streets of the city or be allowed to operate without a franchise.



§ 61.016  TERM OF FRANCHISE.



   The term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
stated in the franchise.



§ 61.017  FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The franchise discussed herein is nonexclusive. The city specifically
reserves the right to grant at any time such additional franchises for a
cable communications system as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable
state and federal law. Any such additional franchises shall be granted on
substantially equivalent terms and conditions as those granted herein and
shall not be in any material provision more favorable or less burdensome than
any other franchise granted hereunder.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.018  TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE.



   Whenever the agreement shall set forth any time for an act to be
performed by or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the
essence and any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted
shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke an appropriate
penalty including possible revocation of the franchise.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.019  LAW GOVERNS.



   In any controversy or dispute under this chapter, the law of the State
of North Carolina shall apply and venue shall be in Stanly County, North
Carolina.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.020  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.



   (A)   Transfer of Franchise. Any franchise granted hereunder cannot
in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including
but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation,
receivership or other means without the prior consent of the city, which
shall not be unreasonably withheld, and then only under such conditions as
the city may establish from time to time, which shall include, at a minimum,
a public hearing.



   (B)   Transfer Threshold. The grantee shall promptly notify the
county of any actual or proposed change in or transfer of, or acquisition by
any other party of, control of the grantee. The word control as used herein
is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in
whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of
control has occurred shall arise upon the disposal by the grantee, directly
or indirectly, by gift, assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or
otherwise, of 50% or more, at one time, of the ownership or controlling
interest in the system, or 50% cumulatively over the term of the franchise of
such interest to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust or
association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. The county
shall exercise its power to approve a transfer of ownership or control in a
manner consistent with § 617 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 537).



   (C)   Process. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of
the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until
the city shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably
withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such
change, transfer, or acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the
legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest
qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the grantee shall
assist the city in any such inquiry. Failure to provide all information
reasonably requested by the city as part of said inquiry may be grounds for
denial of the proposed change, transfer or acquisition of control.



   (D)   Assumption of Control. The city agrees that any financial
institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the
advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise
shall have the right to notify the city that it or its designee satisfactory
to the city will take control and operate the cable television system.
Further, said financial institution shall also submit a plan for such
operation that will insure continued service and compliance with all
franchise obligations during the term the financial institution exercises
control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control
over the system for a period exceeding one year, unless extended by the city
at its discretion. During said period of time it shall have the right to
petition for transfer of the franchise to another grantee. In the event that
the FCC adopts a definition as to control which differs from the definition
herein, the FCC definition shall govern. If the city finds that such
transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical, and
other public interest qualifications of the applicant, is satisfactory, the
city will transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as
in the public interest. The consent of the city to such transfer shall not be
unreasonably withheld.



   (E)   Regulation of Transfer. The consent or approval of the city to
any transfer of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the
rights of the city or the state in and to the streets, rights-of-way, or
pertinent thereto, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly subject
to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise.



   (F)   Construction Requirement. In the absence of extraordinary
circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of the
franchise prior to completion of construction of the proposed system.



   (G)   Signatory Requirement. Any approval by the city of transfer of
ownership or control shall be contingent upon the prospective controlling
party becoming a signatory to the franchise.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.021  FRANCHISE RENEWAL.



   The grantee shall own the cable television system, but shall have no
right to use of public rights of way upon the denial of any renewal and
exhaustion of all appeals. The city shall grant or deny renewal of the
franchise of a grantee in accordance with § 626 of the Communications Act
(47 U.S.C. 546) or other applicable law.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.022  POLICE POWERS.



   (A)   Acknowledgments. In accepting the franchise, the grantee
acknowledges that its rights hereunder are subject to the police power of the
city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and
welfare of the public, and it agrees to comply with all applicable general
laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power.



   (B)   Conflict. Any conflict between the provisions of this chapter
or the franchise and any other present or future lawful exercise of the
city's general police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except
that any such exercise that is not of general application in the jurisdiction
or applies exclusively to grantee or cable television systems which contains
provisions inconsistent with this chapter shall prevail only if, upon such
exercise, the city finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health,
safety, property or general welfare and such exercise is mandated by law.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.023  FRANCHISE FEES.



   (A)   Establishment of Franchise Fee. Because the city finds that
the administration of this chapter or the franchise imposes upon the city
additional regulatory responsibility and expense, a grantee of any franchise
hereunder shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount as designated in
the franchise, but in no event less than five percent of the gross annual
revenues, or upon notification by the city, the maximum amount permitted
under applicable federal, state, or local law, if such maximum is greater
than five percent. This annual franchise payment shall be in addition to any
other fee and shall commence as of the effective date of the franchise. The
city shall be furnished a statement of said payment by a Certified Public
Accountant or the Chief Financial Officer of the division of the operation
system, reflecting the total amounts of annual gross revenues and
computations for the period covered by the payment. The grantee shall provide
an audited statement to the city every year from the date of the grant of
franchise.



   (B)   Franchise Fee in Addition to Other Tax. This payment shall be
in addition to any other tax or payment of general applicability owed by the
grantee to the governments or other taxing jurisdiction. Payment of the
franchise fee made by the grantee to the city shall be in addition to any and
all taxes of general applicability which are now or may be required hereafter
to be paid by any federal, state or local law.



   (C)   Acceptance by the City. No acceptance of any payment by the
city shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any
claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise
fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the
grantee.



   (D)   Failure to Make Required Payment. In the event that any
franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates
specified herein, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an
interest charge, computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the
commercial prime interest rate of the city's primary depository bank during
the period that such unpaid amount is owed.



   (E)   Quarterly Payments. The franchise fee and any other costs,
charges, or damages assessed shall be payable quarterly to the city. The
grantee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross
revenue within the franchise area during the period for which said quarterly
payment is made, and said payment shall be made to the city not later than 45
days after the expiration of each calendar quarter. Quarterly computation
dates are the last day in the months of March, June, September and December.



   (F)   Audits. The city shall have the right to inspect the grantee's
income records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined
to be payable under this chapter. Audits shall be at the expense of the
grantee if the additional amount due is greater than five percent of the
amount paid. Any additional amount due to the city as a result of the audit
shall be paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the
city, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.024  FORFEITURE OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Grounds for Revocation. The city reserves the right to revoke
any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges
associated with the franchise in accordance with the Communications Act and
with the procedures set forth herein in the following circumstances, each of
which shall represent a default and breach under the chapter and the
franchise grant:



      (1)   If the grantee shall default in the performance of any
of the material obligations under this chapter or under such documents,
contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the city
and the grantee.



      (2)   If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full
force and effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the
performance bond as required herein.



      (3)   If the grantee shall violate any orders or rulings of
any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this
chapter or the franchise and after notice thereof, shall continue the
violation and not remedy the same within 60 days.



      (4)   If the grantee practices any fraud or engages in any
unfair or deceptive act or practice with regard to the city or cable
subscribers under the laws of this state.



      (5)   Failure by the grantee to comply with FCC regulations
and properly maintain its FCC approvals and permits.



      (6)   If any construction is to be performed and the grantee's
construction schedule is delayed later than the schedule submitted to the
city by the grantee or beyond an extension granted by the city.



      (7)   The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to
pay its debts or is adjudged bankrupt.



      (8)   Failure to restore service after 132 consecutive hours
of interrupted service, except when written approval of such interruption is
obtained from the city.



      (9)   Material misrepresentation of fact in the application
for or negotiation of the franchise or any extension or renewal thereof.



      (10)   If the grantee ceases to provide services for any
reason that is within the control of the grantee over the cable
communications system.



   (B)   Effect of Circumstances Beyond Control of Grantee. The grantee
shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any
provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any such
provision is prevented for reasons beyond the grantee's control. A fault
shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee's control if committed by a
corporation or other business entity in which the grantee holds a controlling
interest, whether held directly or indirectly.



   (C)   Court Order. Grantor and grantee will abide by the terms of
any stay order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   Procedure Prior to Revocation.



      (1)   The city shall make written demand that the grantee
comply with any such material requirement, limitation, term condition, rule
or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation. If the
failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of 60 days
following the written demand, the city shall place its request for
termination of the franchise upon a regular Council meeting agenda. The city
shall cause to be served upon the grantee at least 14 days prior to the date
of the Council meeting, a written notice of this intent to request
termination and the reason therefore, and the time and place of the meeting,
notice of which shall be published by the Clerk to the City Council at least
once, ten days before such meeting in a newspaper of general circulation with
the city.



      (2)   The Council shall hear any persons interested therein,
and shall determine in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or
neglect by the grantee was with just cause.



      (3)   If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was
with just cause, as reasonably defined by the city, the Council shall direct
the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and
conditions as are reasonable.



      (4)   If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal, or
neglect by the grantee was without just cause, then the Council shall, by
resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated and
bond forfeited unless there be compliance by the grantee within 90 days.



      (5)   Evidence admitted shall be in any reliable form so long
as it is relevant, material, and not unduly repetitious.



   (E)   Disposition of Facilities. In the event a franchise is revoked
or otherwise terminated, the city may, in its sole discretion, do any of the
following:



      (1)   Purchase the system under the procedures set forth in §
61.029.



      (2)   Effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another
party.



      (3)   Order the removal of the system facilities required by
public necessity from the city within a reasonable period of time as
determined by the city or require the original grantee to maintain and
operate its system for a period of six months or until such further time as
is mutually agreed upon.



   (F)   Restoration of Property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that
shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good a
condition as that existing prior to the grantee's removal of its equipment
and appliances without affecting the electrical or telephone cables, wires,
or attachments. The owners shall inspect and approve the condition of the
public ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments, and poles after
removal. The liability, indemnity, insurance and performance bond as provided
herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal
and until the grantee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of
this paragraph, this chapter and the franchise.



   (G)   Restoration by City; Reimbursement of Costs. In the event of a
failure by the grantee to complete any work required by the city by
resolution, law, or ordinance within the time as may be established by the
city and to the satisfaction of the city, the city may, following notice to
the grantee, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the
city the cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of
such costs or the city may, at its option, recover such costs through the
performance bond provided by the grantee. The city shall be permitted to seek
legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section.



   (H)   Extended Operation. Upon either the expiration or revocation
of a franchise, the city may require the grantee to continue to operate the
system for a period of six months from the date of such expiration or
revocation, or until such time beyond six months as is mutually agreed upon.
The grantee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to
operate the cable television system under the terms and conditions of this
chapter and the franchise and provide the regular subscriber service and any
and all of the services that may be provided at the time. The city shall be
permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of
this section.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.025  RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE.



   (A)   Termination by Insolvency. The franchise granted hereunder
shall, at the option of the city, cease and terminate 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee or trustees to take over
and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration
of said 120 days, or unless:



      (1)   Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days
after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the
receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all defaults
under the franchise; and



      (2)   Such receiver, or trustees shall, within 120 days,
execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by
each and every term, provision and condition of the franchise herein granted.



   (B)   Termination by Judicial Action. In the case of a foreclosure
or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee or
any part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the city may serve
notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such
sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the
grantee granted hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of
such notice, unless:



      (1)   The city shall have approved the transfer of the
franchise as provided by this chapter; and



      (2)   Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed
with the city to assume and be bound by every term, provision, and condition
of the franchise herein granted.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.026  EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY.



   (A)   EEO. Equal opportunity employment shall be afforded by all
operators of cable television systems to all qualified persons, and no person
shall be discriminated against in employment because of race, color,
religion, age, national origin, sex, or handicap. The grantee shall comply
with all equal opportunity provisions enacted by federal, state and local
authorities, and in particular § 634 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C.
554), as well as all such provisions contained in this chapter and the
franchise.



   (B)   Local Employment and Procurement Practices. Whenever
reasonably possible, all services, personnel, hardware and supplies for the
construction, maintenance and operation of the system shall be procured
locally.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.027  NOTICES.



   All notices from the grantee to the city pursuant to this chapter and
the franchise shall be to the City Manager or his/her designee. The grantee
shall maintain with the city, throughout the term of the franchise, an
address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall also maintain
within Stanly County and within or in close proximity to the city boundaries,
a local office for the conduct of matters related to the franchise during
normal business hours in addition to a local, to11- free, or collect
telephone number. The grantee shall be required to advise the city of such
address(es) and telephone numbers and any changes thereof.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.028  FAILURE OF CITY TO ENFORCE.



   The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms
and conditions of this chapter or the franchise by any failure of the city
upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any
such terms or conditions.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.029  RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTOR.



   (A)   Right to purchase of the system by the city.



      (1)   Right to Purchase. In the event the grantee forfeits or
the city terminates the franchise, pursuant to provisions of this chapter, or
upon the denial of a renewal, the city shall have the right, directly or as
an intermediary, to purchase the franchised cable communications system.
Purchase price shall be in accordance with § 627 of the Communications Act
(47 U.S.C. 547) and shall be based upon the value of the system determined
pursuant to this section.



      (2)   Date of Valuation. The date of valuation shall be no
earlier than the day following the date of the denial of a renewal and no
later than the date the city makes a fair and reasonable offer for the system
or the date of transfer of ownership, whichever occurs first.



      (3)   System Valuation. Except in connection with purchase,
pursuant to § 61.020, the value of the cable system shall be determined by a
qualified appraiser mutually agreed upon by the grantee and the city. The
appraiser shall determine the current worth of the assets based upon what a
willing buyer would pay a willing seller for the assets involved, not
including the value of the franchise itself and its attendant goodwill value.
Under no circumstances shall the value under this section be less than the
book value of the assets, less accumulated depreciation. If the franchise is
terminated or not renewed, no value shall be assigned to either the franchise
or any right, privilege or expectancy arising to the grantee out of the right
to transact business under the franchise, and particularly no value shall be
allowed for any increase in value arising out of any expectation of cable
communications system's revenues beyond the forfeiture and termination date
or expiration date, whichever is sooner.



      (4)   Intent to Purchase. Except in connection with purchase,
pursuant to § 61.020, upon receipt of notice of the city's intent to
purchase the system at the value established above, the grantee shall have 30
days within which to accept that valuation as the purchase price of the
system. In the event that purchase price is not acceptable, the parties shall
have 120 days from the date of the rejection of the offer in which to
negotiate an acceptable purchase price.



      (5)   Transfer to City. Upon exercise of this option pursuant
to this section, and the payment of the agreed upon sum by the city to the
grantee, the grantee shall immediately transfer to the city possession and
title to all facilities and property, real and personal, of the cable
communication system, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed
to be assumed by the city in lieu of some portion of the purchase price set
forth above; and the grantee shall execute such warranty deeds or other
instruments of conveyance to the city as shall be necessary for this purpose.



      (6)   Arbitration. In the event the city and grantee are
unable to agree upon the value of the cable television system within the time
limits set forth above, either party may require by written notice to the
other that the value of cable television system be submitted to arbitration
in the following manner:



         (a)   The city and the grantee shall each within 15 days
after such written notice select an arbitrator who shall be a disinterested
person with reasonable knowledge and experience relative to the subject to be
arbitrated. The two arbitrators thus selected shall immediately thereafter
select a third arbitrator who shall likewise be a disinterested person having
reasonable knowledge and experience relative to the subject to be arbitrated.



         (b)   Within 30 days after appointment of all
arbitrators and upon ten days written notice to the parties, the panel of
arbitrators shall commence a hearing on the issue of valuation and shall
receive all relevant information from the parties.



         (c)   The hearing shall be recorded and may be
transcribed at the request and expense of either party. All hearing
proceedings, debate and deliberations shall be open to the public and at such
times and places as contained in the notice or as thereafter publicly stated,
except that if two arbitrators agree, debate and deliberations may be held in
closed session as permitted by state open meeting laws.



         (d)   The value of the system as determined by the
arbitration panel shall be the fair market value, determined on the basis of
the cable system valued as a going concern, but with no value allocated to
the franchise itself if terminated or not renewed. Under no circumstances
shall the value established by the arbitration panel be less than the net
book value of the assets nor, in the case of a terminated or revoked
franchise, greater than the current replacement cost of the system as
determined by the appraiser appointed under subsection (3) above.



         (e)   Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the
panel of arbitrators shall prepare findings and decision agreed upon by a
majority of the panel which shall be filed with the City Manager's Office and
served by mail upon the grantee. The decision of the panel regarding the
value of the system shall be final and binding upon the parties. Should there
be no majority decision, the proceedings shall become null and void and shall
be started anew, unless the parties extend by written mutual agreement the
time which the panel of arbitrators has to make a decision.



         (f)   Either party may seek judicial relief in the
following circumstances:



            (i)   A party fails to select an arbitrator;



            (ii)   The arbitrators fail to select a third
arbitrator;



            (iii)   One or more arbitrators is unqualified;



            (iv)   Designated time limits have been exceeded;



            (v)   The panel has not proceeded expeditiously;



            (vi)   The decision was procured by corruption,
fraud or undue means;



            (vii)   There was evident partiality on the part
of one or more of the arbitrators;



            (viii)   The arbitration panel exceeded its
authority hereunder; or



            (ix)   Based upon the record, the panel abused its
discretion.



         (g)   In the event a court of competent jurisdiction
determines that judicial relief is appropriate to the circumstances set forth
above, the court in its discretion may order the arbitration procedure
repeated and issue findings, orders and directions.



         (h)   The expenses of the arbitrators chosen by each
party shall be borne by the party choosing such arbitrators, and the expenses
of the third arbitrator and those expenses incurred by the panel as a whole
shall be borne equally by the parties.



      (7)   Notification. Except in connection with a purchase
pursuant to § 61.020, upon receipt of the decision of the arbitration panel,
the city shall have 30 days in which to notify the grantee of its intent to
exercise its option to purchase the system. The purchase price shall be the
value of the system as determined by the arbitration panel.



      (8)   The county reserves the right to amend any section or
part of this chapter after negotiation and agreement with the grantee, and
upon so doing, will give the grantee reasonable notice of a public hearing.



   (B)   Right of Inspection of Records. Upon reasonable notice, the
city shall have the right to inspect all books, records, reports, maps,
plans, financial statements, and other like materials of the grantee, as they
relate to the operation of the cable system, at any time during normal
business hours.



   (C)   Right of Inspection of Construction. The city shall have the
right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to
the provisions of the franchise and to make such test as it shall find
necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this chapter and all
applicable laws.



   (D)   Right of Inspection of Property. At all reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice, the grantee shall permit examination by any duly
authorized representative of the city of the system facilities, together with
any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city.



   (E)   Right of Intervention. The city shall have the right of
intervention in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is party, and the
grantee shall not oppose such intervention by the city.



   (F)   Right to Require Removal of Property. Upon denial of renewal
of the franchise, or upon its revocation, as provided for herein, the city
shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense,
all portions of the cable television system required by public necessity from
all streets and public ways within the city which removal shall be done and
paid for in accordance with § 61.024, divisions (F) and (G).



   (G)   Right to Amend. The city reserves the right to amend any
section or part of this chapter after negotiation and agreement with grantee.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.030  NO RECOURSE AGAINST THE GRANTOR.



   Except for actions seeking equitable relief, the grantee shall have no
recourse whatsoever against the city or its officials, councils, commissions,
agents, or employees for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any
provision or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement of
this chapter or the franchise, except for unlawful acts of the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee may make application for non-monetary
equitable relief (e.g. injunction or mandamus) to a court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



REGULATION OF FRANCHISE



§ 61.040  REGULATORY AUTHORITY.



   (A)   City Manager or Designee to Administer. The city shall
exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the provisions of this
chapter, the Communications Act, and all applicable law. This authority shall
be vested in the Albemarle City Council and administered through the City
Manager or his/her designee in order to provide day-to-day administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and any franchise granted
hereunder, and to carry out the city's responsibilities with regard to cable
television.



   (B)   Change in Law. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter to the contrary, the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws
and regulations of the local, state and federal government. in the event that
any actions of the state or federal government or any agency thereof, or any
court of competent jurisdiction upon final adjudication, substantially reduce
in any way the power or authority of the city under this chapter or the
franchise, or if in compliance with any local, state, or federal law or
regulation, the grantee finds conflict with the terms of this chapter, the
franchise, or any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible
following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the city of the point
of conflict believed to exist between such law or regulation and the laws or
regulations of the city, this chapter and the franchise. The city or the
grantee may notify the other party that it wishes to renegotiate those
provisions which are affected in any way by such modification in regulations
or other statutory authority. Thereafter, the grantee and the city shall
negotiate in good faith with the city in the development of alternate
provisions which shall fairly restore the city to the maximum level of
authority and power permitted by law. The city shall have the right to modify
any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry
out the full intent and purpose of this chapter and the franchise in
accordance with federal and state law. In the event any such modifications
are made, the city will give the grantee reasonable notice of a public
hearing.



   (C)   Additional Authority of City. The city reserves the right to
exercise the maximum plenary authority, as may at any time be lawfully
permissible, to regulate the cable communications system, the franchise and
the grantee. Should applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory
authorities at any time permit regulation not presently permitted to the
city, the city may, following good faith negotiations, engage in any such
additional regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated
by this chapter or the franchise, including without limitation, regulation
regarding franchise fees, taxes, programming, rates charged to subscribers
and users, consumer protection, or any other similar or dissimilar matter.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.041  SUPERVISION OF THE FRANCHISE.



   (A)   The city shall have the following regulatory responsibility:



      (1)   Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter and any franchise granted hereunder.



      (2)   Award, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise, and other
applicable law.



      (3)   Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise
granted hereunder.



      (4)   Performance evaluation of the grantee.



      (5)   Rate and service regulation, if applicable.



   (B)   The city also reserves the right to perform the following
functions:



      (1)   Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to
the operation of government channels.



      (2)   Approve procedures and standards for public, government
and educational access operations and services, including the use of
dedicated channels and sharing of public facilities.



      (3)   Coordinate plans for expansion, interconnection and
growth of cable services.



      (4)   Analyze the possibility of integrating cable television
with other city, state or regional telecommunications networks.



      (5)   Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications
policy for the city, and determine the city's view of the future
cable-related needs and interests of the community.



      (6)   Provide the administrative effort necessary for the
conduct of performance evaluations, and any other activities required for the
administration of the franchise.



      (7)   Monitor grantee's process for handling citizen
complaints and periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such
complaints, as needed to ensure compliance with this chapter and the
franchise.



      (8)   Receive applications for rate increases, if applicable,
and provide staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto.



      (9)   Monitor grantee's adherence to operational standards,
service requirements and line extension policies, as needed to ensure
compliance with this chapter and the franchise.



      (10)   Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.



      (11)   Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and
performance, as needed to insure compliance with this chapter and the
franchise.



      (12)   Assure continuity in service.



      (13)   Receive for examination all data and reports required
by this chapter.



   (C)   Cable TV Advisory Committee. The city may establish a
citizen's advisory committee entitled the Cable TV Advisory Committee. The
responsibilities of the Committee shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:



      (1)   Monitor and advise the Council and city administration
on the provisions of the city's cable television ordinance and related
ordinances.



      (2)   Serve as an advisory body for the public, educational,
and governmental access channels of cable television and any institutional
programming that may be developed.



      (3)   Advise the city government of objectives to be obtained
in the city's cable television system based upon its continued evaluation of
the city's cable television franchise, cable technology, and the future
cable- related needs and interests of the community.



      (4)   Prepare an annual report to the Council on the cable
system.



      (5)   Cooperate with the city and the grantee in fulfilling
its responsibilities herein.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.042  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Schedule Filings. The grantee shall file with the city
schedules which shall describe all services offered, all regulated rates and
charges of any kind, and all terms and conditions relating thereto. No
regulated rates or charges shall be effective except as they appear on a
schedule so filed. The grantee shall notify subscribers in writing at least
30 days prior to the implementation of any change in services offered, rate
charges, or terms and conditions related thereto.



   (B)   Nondiscriminatory Rates. The grantee shall establish rates
that are nondiscriminatory within the same general class of subscribers which
must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area
for all services. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from
offering discounts to commercial and multiple family dwelling subscribers
billed on a bulk basis; promotional discounts; reduced installation rates for
subscribers who have multiple services; or discounts for senior citizens
and/or low income residents. To the extent required by federal, state, or
local law or regulation, the grantee's charges and rates for all services
shall be itemized on the subscriber's monthly bills.



   (C)   City Regulation. To the extent that federal or state law or
regulation, and in particular § 626 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C.
543) and the regulations of the FCC, may now, or as the same may hereafter be
amended to, authorize the city to regulate the rates for any particular
service tiers, service packages, equipment, or any other services provided by
grantee, the city shall have the right to exercise rate regulation to the
full extent authorized by law, or to refrain from exercising such regulation
for any period of time, at the sole discretion of the city.



   (D)   Rate Regulation of the Basic Tier and Charges. The city will
follow any rate and service regulation ordinance adopted in connection with
this chapter, and FCC Rate Regulations including, but not limited to, Report
and Order, In the Matter of Implementation of Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992: Rate Regulation, MM Docket 92- 226,
FCC 93-177 (released May 3, 1993), or as hereafter amended or altered from
time to time, in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the
grantee. In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties,
and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are
now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to
enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges.



   (E)   Evaluation Criteria. If and when exercising rate regulation
not under criteria established by the FCC, the city shall consider, along
with any other information it deems necessary or appropriate, the following
factors in approving or disapproving initial rates or a rate increase
request: The ability of the grantee to render system services and to derive a
reasonable profit therefrom under the existing rate schedule and under the
proposed rate schedule; the revenues and profits derived from system
services; the efficiency of the grantee; the quality of the services offered
by the grantee, the fair market value of the system less depreciation; a fair
rate of return over the life of the franchise with respect to grantee's
investment; the extent to which grantee has adhered to the terms of this
chapter and the franchise; fairness to city residents, subscribers, and
users. The city shall not consider any valuation based upon the franchise and
the items of value shall neither be amortized as an expense nor shall a
return be paid on them.



   (F)   Ability to Petition. If applicable, the city shall have the
right to petition the FCC or other appropriate agency or organization to
obtain rate regulation authority or to petition the federal body to review or
regulate rates in the city.



   (G)   Free Connections. The grantee shall provide upon request and
free of charge the drops set forth in the franchise. Grantee shall discuss
the location of each connection with the proper officials of each such
institution receiving free connection.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.043  PERFORMANCE EVALUATION.



   (A)   Annual Evaluations. The city and the grantee may, at the
discretion of the city, hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions. All
such evaluation sessions shall be open to the public.



   (B)   Special Evaluations. Special evaluation sessions may be held
at any time during the term of the franchise at the request of the city.



   (C)   Public Notice of Public Hearings on Performance. All
evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper
of general circulation in accordance with public notice, as provided in §
61.107.



   (D)   Items for Review. Topics which may be discussed at any
scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to,
system performance and construction, grantee compliance with this chapter and
the franchise, customer service and complaint response, subscriber privacy,
services provided, programming offered, service rate structures, franchise
fees, penalties, free or discounted services, applications of new
technologies, judicial and FCC filings, and line extensions.



   (E)   Cooperation. During the review and evaluation by the city, the
grantee shall fully cooperate with the city and shall provide such
information and documents as the city may need to reasonably perform its
review.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



BONDS, INSURANCE, AND INDEMNIFICATION



§ 61.055  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   (A)   Performance Bond. Upon the effective date of the franchise,
the grantee shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the franchise
and any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense, and file
with the city, a corporate surety bond in an amount specified in the
franchise to guarantee the faithful performance of the grantee of all its
obligations provided under this chapter and the franchise. Failure to timely
obtain, file and maintain said bond shall constitute a substantial violation
within the meaning of this section.



   (B)   Conditions. The performance bond shall provide the following
conditions:



      (1)   There shall be recoverable by the city jointly and
severally from the principal and surety, any and all fines and liquidated
damages due to the city and any and all damages, losses, costs, and expenses
suffered or incurred by the city resulting from the failure of the grantee
to: faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise,;
comply with all orders, permits and directives of any city agency or body
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults; pay fees due to the city; pay
any claims, liens or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the
construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system. Such
losses, costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, attorney's
fees and other associated expenses.



      (2)   The total amount of the bond shall be forfeited in favor
of the city in the event:



         (a)   The grantee abandons the cable system at any time
during the term of the franchise or any extension thereto; or



         (b)   The grantee assigns the franchise without the
express written consent of the city.



   (C)   Reduction of Bond. Upon written application by the grantee,
the city may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to be reduced
or waive the requirements for a performance bond subject to the following
conditions: Reductions granted or denied upon application by the grantee
shall be without prejudice to the grantee's subsequent applications or to the
city's right to require the full bond at any time thereafter. However, no
application for reduction shall be made by the grantee within one year of any
prior application.



   (D)   Conditions. The city may draw upon the bond if the grantee
fails to: faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter or the
franchise; comply with all orders, permits, and directives of any city agency
or body having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults; pay fees due to the
city; or pay any claims, liens, or taxes due the city which arise by reason
of the construction, operation, maintenance, or repair of the cable system.



   (E)   Use of Performance Bond. Prior to drawing upon the performance
bond or letter of credit for the purposes described in this section, the city
shall notify the grantee in writing by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, that payment is due and the grantee shall have 14 days
from the receipt of such written notice to make a full and complete payment.
If the grantee does not make the payment within 14 days, the city may
withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and penalties, from the
performance bond.



   (F)   Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal from the
performance bond, the city shall send to the grantee, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date and
purpose of such withdrawal.



   (G)   Replenishment of Performance Bond. No later than 30 days after
mailing to the grantee by certified mail notification as described in
division (F) above of a withdrawal pursuant to division (E) above, the
grantee shall replenish the performance bond replenishment of such amount of
the performance bond shall constitute a substantial violation of this chapter.



   (H)   Non-Renewal, Alteration, or Cancellation of Performance Bond.
The performance bond required herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the
city and shall require 30 days written notice of any non-renewal, alteration
or cancellation to both the city and the grantee. The grantee shall, in the
event of any such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file
with the city, written evidence of the issuance of replacement bond or
policies within 30 days following receipt by the city or the grantee of any
notice of cancellation, and failure to do so constitutes a substantial
violation of this chapter.



   (I)   Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation the amounts of
the bond provided for herein, shall be increased by the annual rate of
inflation at the end of every three period of the franchise, applicable to
the next three year period, upon the request of the city.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.056  LIABILITY AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   Letter of Insurance. Prior to commencement of construction,
but in no event later than 60 days after the effective date of the franchise
and thereafter, continuously maintain insurance as defined by this section
and shall throughout the duration of the franchise and any extensions or
renewals thereof, the grantee shall furnish to the city, certificates of
insurance for all types of insurance required under this section. Failure to
furnish said certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Filing. Any insurance certificate thereof obtained by the
grantee in compliance with this section shall be filed and maintained with
the City Manager or his/her designee during the term of the franchise, and
may be changed by the grantee from time to time to reflect changing liability
limits and/or to compensate for inflation. Grantee shall immediately advise
the city of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance.



   (C)   No Limit on Liability. Neither the provisions of this section
nor any damages recovered by the city hereunder, shall be construed to or
limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or
for damages.



   (D)   Enforcement. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to
this chapter or the franchise shall contain the following, or a comparable,
endorsement:



   It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not
be canceled by the insurance company nor the intention not to renew be stated
by the insurance company until 30 days after receipt by the City Manager, by
registered or certified mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel
or not to renew.



   (E)   Hold Harmless Clause. All contractual liability insurance
policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the franchise shall include
the following hold harmless clause:



   The grantee agrees to indemnify, save harmless and defend the city, its
officials, agents, servants, and employees, and each of them against and hold
it and them harmless from any and all lawsuits, claims, demands, liabilities,
losses and expenses, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees,
for or on account of any injury to any person, or any death at any time
resulting from such injury, or any damage to any property, which may arise or
which may be alleged to have arisen out of or in connection with the work
covered by the franchise and performed or caused to be performed. The
foregoing indemnity shall apply except if such injury, death or damage is
caused by the negligence or other fault of the city, its agents, servants, or
employees, or any other person indemnified hereunder.



   (F)   State Institution. All insurance policies provided under the
provisions of this chapter or the franchise shall be written by companies
authorized to do business in the state, and approved by the State's
Commissioner of Insurance.



   (G)   Named Insured. At any time during the term of the franchise,
the city may request and the grantee shall comply with such request, to name
the city as an additional named insured for all insurance policies written
under the provisions of this chapter or the franchise.



   (H)   Inflation. To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect
changing liability limits, all of the coverages, limits and amounts of the
insurance provided for herein will be increased at the end of every three
year period of the franchise at the annual rate of inflation, applicable to
the next three year period, upon the request of the city.



   (I)   General Liability Insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and
by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agree that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general liability
insurance insuring the grantee in the minimum of:



      (1)   $2,000,000 for property damage per occurrence;



      (2)   $2,000,000 for property damage aggregate;



      (3)   $3,000,000 for personal bodily injury or death to any
one person; and



      (4)   $3,000,000 bodily injury or death aggregate per single
accident or occurrence.



   (J)   Policy Inclusions. Such general liability insurance must
include, at a minimum, coverage for all of the following: comprehensive form,
premises-operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazard,
products/completed operations hazard, contractual insurance, broad form
property damage, and personal injury.



   (K)   Automobile Liability Insurance. The grantee shall maintain,
and by its acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees
that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, automobile
liability insurance for owned, non- owned, or rented vehicles used by
grantee, its, agents, officials, or employees in the minimum amount of:



      (1)   $1,000,000 for bodily injury and consequent death per
occurrence;



      (2)   $ 1,000,000 for bodily injury and consequent death to
any one person; or



      (3)   $500,000 for property damage per occurrence.



   (L)   Worker's Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance. The
grantee shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of
the franchise, Worker's Compensation and employer's liability, valid in the
State, in the minimum amount of:



      (1)   Statutory limit for Worker's Compensation; or



      (2)   $100,000 for employer's liability.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.057  INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify,
and hold harmless the city, its officers, councils and commissions, and city
employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and
judgements for damages due to the actions of the grantee, its employees,
officers or agents arising out of the construction, maintenance, operations
and/or removal of the cable system under this renewal franchise, including,
but not limited to, damage to person or property, both real and personal.
Indemnified expenses shall include without limitation, all out-of-pocket
expenses, such as attorney's fees.



   (B)   The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following:



   The city shall give grantee prompt notice of the making of any claim or
the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the
provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the
city from cooperating with grantee and participating in the defense of any
litigation by its own counsel at its sole cost and expense, as needed to
ensure compliance with this chapter or the franchise. No recovery by the city
of any sum by reason of the liquidated damages required by this chapter shall
be subject to litigation by the Company, except that any sum so received by
the city shall be deducted from any recovery which the city might have
against the Company under the terms of this section.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION PROVISIONS



§ 61.065  AUTHORITY TO CONSTRUCT.



   (A)   Authorization to Commence Construction and Application
Procedures. Upon grant of a franchise or at any time during the duration of
the franchise where upon the grantee determines to construct additions or
improvements to the system, the following schedule shall apply. Within 30
days of the acceptance by the grantee of a franchise the grantee shall apply
for any needed contracts for use of poles. Within 30 days after completion of
the make-ready survey identifying the routes of the system facility, the
grantee shall apply for all additional licenses from the state, city, or
other necessary parties, such as the railroads for crossing under or over
their property. In any event, all necessary applications for permits,
licenses, certificates and authorizations shall be applied for in a timely
fashion so that such filing and processing shall not interfere with or cause
delay with the construction scheduled as outlined in the franchise. Failure
to make such timely application and timely filing shall constitute a
substantial violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Power to Contract. Upon grant of the franchise, or at any time
during the franchise term where grantee decides to engage in additional
construction, in order to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in
the city, the grantee may enter into contracts with any public utility
companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles or underground areas
located within the city, obtain right- of-way permits from appropriate city,
state, and federal officials necessary to cross or otherwise use highways or
roads under their respective jurisdiction; obtain permission from the Federal
Aviation Administration to erect and maintain antennas; and obtain whatever
other permits a city, state or federal agency may require.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.066  CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Compliance with Construction and Technical Standards. The
grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner
consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental
requirements, FCC technical standards, and detailed technical standards
submitted by grantee as part of its application, which standards are and
shall be incorporated by reference herein. The grantee, throughout the
system, shall provide uniform, strong signals which are free from any
significant distortion and interference. The system shall be designed,
constructed, operated and maintained for 24-hours-a-day continuous operation.
The system shall produce, for reception on subscribers' receivers which are
in good working order, either monochrome or color pictures (providing the
receiver is color capable) which are free from any significant interference
or distortion which would cause any material degradation of video or audio
quality.



   (B)   State of the Art. The grantee shall construct, install,
operate and maintain its system in accordance with the highest standards of
the art of cable communications taking into account the size and needs of the
community as well as the costs and benefits to the residents, such standards
to include but not be limited to the following:



      (1)   The system will be spaced to permit a minimum of 550 MHz
operation and will be capable of utilizing state- of-the-art converters and
be compatible with cable ready television sets.



      (2)   The system will utilize converters which will make the
system adaptable for the development of future services.



      (3)   The grantee shall maintain its system facilities in a
manner which will continue to enable it to add new services and associated
equipment as they are developed, available, and proved marketable to
subscribers. The new services and associated equipment will be added to the
system facilities when they are determined by industry standards to be
technically reliable, available from two or more vendors, and adaptable to
the system at a cost to the subscriber that is acceptable in the marketplace.



   (C)   Poles. Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits,
the grantee shall first submit to the city and other designated parties for
approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or
installed, including engineering drawings, if required, together with a map
and plans indicating the proposed location of all such facilities.



   (D)   Contractor Qualifications. Any contractor or subcontractor
proposed for work of construction, installation, operation, maintenance, and
repair of system equipment must be properly licensed under laws of the State,
and all local ordinances.



   (E)   System Equipment. The grantee's system and associated
equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other
public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets,
alleys or other public ways and places. No pole or other fixtures placed in
any public ways by the grantee shall be placed in such a manner as to
interfere with normal travel on such public way.



   (F)   Maps. The city does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps
showing the horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In
public rights-of-way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by
excavation.



   (G)   Quality of Construction. Construction, installation,
operation, and maintenance of the cable television system shall be performed
in an orderly and workmanlike manner, in accordance with then current
technological standards. All cables and wires shall be installed, where
possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable
configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for
engineering considerations.



   (H)   Construction Standards. Grantee shall at all times comply
with: (1) National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); (2)
National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); (3)
applicable FCC or other Federal, State and local regulations, and standards
as set forth in the franchise.



   (I)   Non-interference. In any event, the system shall not endanger
or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or
other areas where the grantee may have equipment located.



   (J)   Antennas.  Any antenna structure used in the cable system
shall comply with construction, marking, and lighting of antenna structure
standards as required by federal and state law or regulation.



   (K)   OSHA.   All worker facilities, conditions, and procedures
that are used during construction, installation, operation, and maintenance
of the cable system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration.



   (1)   RF. FCC Rules and Regulations shall govern. In no event shall
grantee be required to exceed FCC standards with regard to RF leakage.



   (M)   Standby Power. The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of
providing standby power for a minimum of eight hours for the headend.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.067  SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.



   The franchise shall specify the construction schedule. In any event, in
the case of any construction of a new system, grantee shall commence
construction and installation of the Cable Television System within 90 days
after obtaining all necessary permits and authorization which are required in
the conduct of its business, including but not limited to, any utility joint
use attachment agreements. Within one year after obtaining all necessary
permits and authorization, grantee shall proceed to render services to
subscribers in at least 40 percent of the franchise area, and the completion
of the system shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter with
extension of service to the remaining franchise area within the next
succeeding year.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.068  EXTENSION OF SERVICE.



   The grantee shall provide service to all areas within the corporate
limits of the city including those territories, either contiguous or
satellite, which may be annexed during the term of the franchise, where there
are an average of 18 homes per cable mile or one and four-fifths (1.8) homes
per one-tenth (1/10) of a cable mile, measured from the closest point of
existing cable service. Where residential density does not meet the
requirement, consideration will be made for line extensions based on FCC
rules and regulations. The grantee may not otherwise discriminate against low
income or low density areas. The grantee may request a reasonable extension
of time to provide service to such areas.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.069  USE OF STREETS.



   (A)   Underground Installation. All installations shall be
underground in those areas of the city where public utilities providing
telephone and electric service are underground at the time of installation.
In areas of the city where either telephone or electric utility facilities
are above ground at the time of installation, grantee may install its service
above ground, provided that at such time as those facilities are required to
be placed underground by the state or are placed underground, the grantee
shall likewise place its services underground without direct additional cost
to the city. If the county compensates any utility for such underground
construction, the county shall also compensate the grantee where not
otherwise required to be placed underground by this chapter or the franchise,
the grantee's system shall be located underground at the request of the
adjacent property owner, provided that the excess cost over aerial location
shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable passing
under the roadway shall be installed in conduit.



   (B)   Approvals. Prior to construction or alteration, however, the
grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate city agencies,
complete use agreements with the utility companies, obtain all construction
permits and receive written approval of the city before proceeding, which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (C)   Interference with Persons, Improvements, Public and Private
Property and Utilities. The grantee's system and facilities, including poles,
lines, equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and
maintained so that such facilities shall:



      (1)   Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or
lives or persons;



      (2)   Not interfere with any improvements the city, county or
state may deem proper to make;



      (3)   Not interfere with the free and proper use of public
streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property,
except to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or repair;



      (4)   Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience
of private property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during
actual construction or repair; and



      (5)   Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas,
electric, water or telephone facilities, easements, property rights, or other
utilities facilities' easements located within the city.



   (D)   Restoration to Prior Condition. In case of any disturbance of
pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its
own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping, or surface of any street
or alley disturbed, consistent with the practices of local utilities. Such
restoration shall be undertaken and shall be completed as soon as possible
thereafter. Such closing shall be at the expense of the grantee.



   (E)   Private Property. The grantee shall be subject to all laws,
ordinances or regulations regarding private property or regulations regarding
private property in the course of constructing, installing, operating or
maintaining the Cable Television System in the city. Grantee shall promptly
repair or replace all private property, both real and personal, damaged or
destroyed as a result of the construction, installation, operating, or
maintenance of the Cable Television System at its sole cost and expense.



   (F)   Relocation of the Facilities. In the event that at any time
during the period of the franchise, the state shall lawfully elect to alter,
or change, the grade of any street, alley or other public ways, the grantee,
upon reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or relocate as
necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
fixtures at its own cost and expense. If the county compensates any utility
for such changes, the county shall also compensate the grantee.



   (G)   Cooperation with Building Movers. The grantee shall, on the
request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city,
temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings. The
expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid
by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority
to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than
15 working days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.



   (H)   Tree Trimming. The grantee shall comply with all state laws
and regulations regarding tree removal and trimming in public rights-of-way.



   (I)   Easements. All necessary easements over and under private
property shall be arranged for by the grantee.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.070  ERECTION, REMOVAL AND COMMON USE OF POLES.



   Approval of New Poles. No poles shall be erected by the grantee without
prior approval of the state or city with regard to location, height, types
and any other pertinent aspect. However, no locating of any pole of the
grantee shall give rise to a vested interest and such poles shall be removed
or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the state or city
reasonably determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby.
If the county compensates any utility for such changes, the county shall also
compensate the grantee.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.071  CONSTRUCTION REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Progress Report. Within 30 days of the granting of an initial
franchise pursuant to this chapter, the grantee shall provide the city with a
written progress report detailing work completed to date. Such report shall
include a description of the progress in applying for any necessary
agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other information the City
Manager may deem necessary. The content and format of the report will be
determined by the City Manager and may be modified at his/her discretion.



   (B)   Time Frame for Reports. Such written progress reports shall be
submitted to the City Manager's office on a monthly basis throughout the
entire construction process. The City Manager or his/her designee may require
more frequent reporting, if he/she determines it is necessary to better
monitor the grantee's progress.



   (C)   Subscriber Information. Prior to the commencement of any
system construction, the grantee shall produce an informational document to
be distributed to all residents of the area to be under construction, which
shall describe the activity that will be taking place. The informational
document shall be provided to the City Manager or his/her designee prior to
its distribution.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.072  TESTS AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING.



   (A)   Tests. At the time of annual FCC Proof of Performance testing,
the grantee shall conduct technical performance tests to demonstrate full
compliance with all technical standards contained in this chapter, the
franchise, and the technical standards and guidelines of the FCC.



   (B)   Report. Such tests shall be performed by, or under the
supervision of a qualified registered professional engineer or an engineer
with proper training and experience. Upon request, a copy of the report shall
be submitted to the city, describing test results, instrumentation,
calibration, and test procedures, and the qualification of the engineer
responsible for the tests.



   (C)   Test Points. System monitor test points shall be established
as required by the FCC. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points
as shall be required by the FCC and/or the franchise.



   (D)   FCC Reports. In addition to the performance test reports
required herein, a copy of any performance test reports required by the FCC
shall be submitted to the city upon request within 60 days of completion.



   (E)   Complaints. Whenever there have been similar complaints made
or when there exists other evidence, which, in the reasonable judgment of the
city, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee's system, the
city shall have the right and authority to compel the grantee to test,
analyze, and report on the performance of its system. The city may require
additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or
tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal. Reports on such tests shall
be delivered to the county no later than 21 days after the city formally
notifies the grantee and shall include the following information: the nature
of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system component
was tested; the equipment used, and procedures employed in said testing; the
results of such tests; and methods by which said complaints were resolved.
Said tests and analyses shall be supervised by a professional engineer who
shall sign all records of the special tests and forward same to the city with
a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending what actions
should be taken by the city.



   (F)   Consultants. The city shall have the right, at its expense, to
employ or contract with qualified consultants and attorneys if necessary or
desirable, to assist in the administration of this, or any other section of
this chapter or the franchise.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



SERVICE PROVISIONS



§ 61.080  SERVICE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General Service Standards. The city reserves the right to
enforce all relevant service rules and regulations as set forth by federal,
state, and local governments. These rules and regulations include, but are
not limited to, FCC Customer Service Regulations, as hereafter amended by the
FCC, and the city's Rate and Service Regulation Ordinance, as hereafter
amended by the city from time to time.



   (B)   State of the Art Service. As the grantee continues to develop
new and innovative services for its customers, grantee will modernize and
upgrade services provided to the city so that the services provided to the
city reflect the highest standards of service the grantor is able to provide,
taking into account the size and needs of the community as well as the costs
and benefits to the residents.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.081  SERVICES TO SUBSCRIBERS AND USERS.



   (A)   Service. Concurrently with the activation of the cable
communications system in the city, the grantee shall provide all services to
subscribers as described herein and in the franchise at rates detailed in the
rate schedule.



      (1)   The system shall carry the broad categories of
programming and services listed in the franchise. Should the grantee desire
to change the selection of programs or services offered on any of its tiers,
it shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services provided over the
system. Any such change in programs or services offered shall comply with the
conditions and procedures contained in the franchise, and shall be reported
to the city at least 30 days prior to the proposed implementation. The
grantee shall use its best efforts to ensure diversity of programming.



      (2)   A basic service tier shall be offered to subscribers
throughout the term of this chapter and the franchise.



      (3)   The grantee shall provide and maintain, as designated in
the franchise, the following access channels whose purposes are outlined
below:



         (a)   Government Access Channel which shall be a
specifically designated channel for local governmental use and shall be
managed, scheduled and programmed exclusively by the city.



         (b)   Educational Channel which shall be a specifically
designated channel for use by local school authorities, and shall be managed,
scheduled and programmed exclusively by them.



         (c)   A Public Access Channel, which will be a
specifically designated channel available on a non- discriminatory basis. At
the option of the city as may be provided in the Franchise Agreement these
functions may be combined on one channel. The grantee may also, as may be
provided in the Franchise Agreement, fulfill the obligations of this
provision by providing the channels to the city to be used jointly with other
localities located within Stanly County. The grantee shall provide, at a
minimum the services, facilities and equipment for public, educational and
government access that are indicated in the franchise.



      (4)   The grantee shall make available Leased Access channels,
as required by federal law.



   (B)   Emergency Override. The grantee shall, without charge,
provide, service and maintain public emergency transmission facilities to the
city or its designees, as described in the franchise.



   (C)   Service to City Buildings. The grantee will provide basic
service to city buildings at the request of the city and as indicated in the
franchise agreement.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.082  INSTALLATIONS, CONNECTIONS, AND OTHER GRANTEE SERVICES.



   (A)   Deposits. Any deposit required by grantee shall bear interest
at a rate consistent with other service providers that require deposits.



   (B)   Antennas and Antenna Switches. The grantee shall not, as a
condition to providing cable service, require any subscriber or potential
subscriber, to remove any existing antenna structures for the receipt of
over-the-air television signals. The grantee shall install, upon the request
of the subscriber, an RF or antenna switch where required for the provision
of services provided by the grantee as required by federal law.



   (C)   Lockout Devices. The grantee shall provide to the potential
subscriber, as part of its promotional literature, information concerning the
availability of a lockout device for use by a subscriber. The grantee may to
require a reasonable deposit or purchase price for the use of this device, as
set forth in the rate schedule. The lockout device described herein shall be
made available to all subscribers requesting it beginning on the first day
that any cable service is provided.



   (D)   Reconnection. The grantee shall restore service to customers
wishing restoration of service provided customer shall first satisfy any
previous obligations owed.



   (E)   Free Disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have
cable service disconnected without charge. Such disconnection shall be made
as soon as practicable and in no case later than 15 days following receipt of
notice to grantee of same. A refund of unused service charges shall be paid
to the customer within 30 days from the date of termination of service.



   (F)   Delinquent Accounts. Grantee shall use its best efforts to
collect on delinquent subscriber accounts. In all cases, the grantee shall
provide the customer with at least ten working days written notice prior to
disconnection.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.083  SERVICE CALLS AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Maintenance of Local Office. The grantee shall maintain at
least one office within Stanly County, North Carolina, for the purposes of
handling subscriber complaints and providing prompt maintenance service. The
grantee shall have a listed, local, to11-free, or collect telephone number
for service calls and such telephone service shall be available 24 hours a
day, seven days a week according to FCC guidelines. Said number shall be made
available to subscribers and the general public.



   (B)   Response to Complaints. The grantee shall respond to and
resolve subscribers' complaints or requests for service in connection with
repairs and maintenance and malfunctions of system facilities. The grantee
shall respond as quickly as possible to such complaints and requests, but
shall in any case respond within 24 hours. Complaints or requests which may
pose a potential health and safety hazard will be responded to immediately.
In connection with billing complaints, the grantee shall respond within seven
business days.



   (C)   Rules and Regulations. The grantee shall prepare and file with
the city copies of all of its rules and regulations in connection with the
handling of inquiries, requests and complaints. The grantee shall, by
appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning
the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name,
address and local telephone number of the office where such inquiries or
complaints are to be addressed, and furnish information concerning the city
office responsible for the administration of the franchise, including, but
not limited to, the address and telephone number of said office. The grantee
shall clearly explain, as a part of the information and materials grantee
provides to subscribers, that although questions and complaints regarding
cable rates should be directed to the city, all service inquiries and
requests are to be reported directly to the grantee.



   (D)   Maintenance of Records. The grantee shall keep full records in
connection with all inquiries, complaints and requests in connection with the
system. Such records shall identify the person contacting the grantee, and
the person responding on behalf of the grantee, the subject matter of the
contact, the date and time it was received, the resolution of the matter in
question or the action taken by the grantee in connection with the contact,
and the date and time thereof, and such other information as may be deemed
pertinent by the grantee. These records shall be made available for periodic
inspection by the city.



   (E)   Replacement of Equipment. The grantee shall service or replace
without charge all equipment provided by it to the subscriber, provided,
however, that the grantee may charge a subscriber for service to or
replacement of any equipment damaged due to negligence of such subscriber or
lost or stolen from the subscriber's residence or place of business.



   (F)   Review of Complaints. The city may review and monitor
unresolved customer complaints.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.084  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.



   (A)   Right to Continuous Service. It shall be the right of all
subscribers to receive continuous, uninterrupted service insofar as their
financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored.



   (B)   Right to Services During Transition. In the event that the
grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the city gives
notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew its franchise, the grantee
shall cooperate with the city or new grantee or operator in maintaining
continuity of service to all subscribers for a period of six months or such
other time as mutually agreed upon. During such period, grantee shall be
entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system,
and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for the services when it no longer
operates the system.



   (C)   Failure to Provide Continuity. In the event the grantee fails
to operate the system for seven consecutive days without prior approval of
the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the
system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service
under conditions acceptable to the city or a permanent operator is selected.
If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, the
grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages incurred
by the city as a the result of the grantee's failure to perform.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.085  PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY MANDATORY.



   Grantee shall at all times protect the privacy of subscribers, as
provided in this chapter and other applicable federal, state, and local laws,
and in particular, § 631 of the Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 551).



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.086  RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   Nondiscrimination Required. Grantee shall not deny service,
deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or
general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age,
sex, or handicap, provided the Subscriber shall pay all applicable fees for
the service desired. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, and all executive
and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are hereby
incorporated and made part of this chapter by reference.



   (B)   Fairness of Accessibility. The entire system of the grantee
shall be operated in a manner consistent with the principles of fairness and
equal accessibility of its facilities.



   (C)   Information Accessibility.



      (1)   Each individual shall have the right to information
concerning the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
formulated pursuant to it by the Commission, the grantee, agent or entity
created hereunder or pursuant to this chapter. The location and hours of
operation for the delivery of such information shall be published in the
newspaper of the greatest circulation within the city and in such other media
as the Commission may determine and at its expense.



      (2)   Each individual subscribing to the services of the cable
television system shall be provided with information covering rates and
charges, billing procedures, delinquency policy, subscriber privacy notice,
lock-out procedures, A/B switch policy, and an itemized channel line-up.



      (3)   To the extent required by federal or state law or
regulation, such information as may herein be prescribed will be made
available to the public and individual subscribers in such form required for
understanding, including the deaf and blind.



      (4)   Each document required to be maintained, prepared, filed
or submitted under the provisions of this chapter or pursuant to it, except
those required and designated confidential by the Federal Communications
Commission is a public document, available for public inspection and copying
at the requestor's expense, at the office of the grantee or the City
Manager's office during normal business hours. The charge for such copying
shall approximate the cost of mechanical reproduction and shall not include a
charge for labor.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



BOOKS, RECORDS, AND REPORTS



§ 61.095  BOOKS AND RECORDS AVAILABLE TO THE GRANTOR.



   (A)   The grantee shall maintain an office within Stanly County, and
manage all of its operations in accordance with a policy of open books and
records to the City Manager or his/her designee. Upon reasonable notice, the
city shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business
hours, all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial
statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like
materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the franchise.
Access to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on
the basis that said records contain proprietary information.



   (B)   Upon reasonable notice, the grantee shall permit any duly
authorized representative of the city to examine and copy or transcribe any
and all maps and other records kept or maintained by Grantee or under its
control concerning the operations, finances, affairs, transactions or
property of grantee which relates to the operation of the franchise. If any
of such maps or records are not kept in the State of North Carolina, or upon
reasonable request made available in the city, and if the city shall
determine that an examination of such maps or records is necessary or
appropriate to the performance of any of their duties, then all travel and
maintenance expenses necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be
paid by the grantee.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.096  REPORTS REQUIRED.



   The grantee shall file with the city upon written request:



   (A)   Regulatory Communications. All reports required by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) including, but not limited to annual proof of
performance tests and results, and Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)
reports, and all petitions, applications and communications of all types
submitted by grantee to the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC),
or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency, having
jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of grantee's system shall be
submitted simultaneously to the city by delivery to the Clerk to the City
Council who shall advise interested city departments of such filing.



   (B)   Facilities Report. An annual report setting forth the physical
miles of plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year
shall be submitted to the city. Such report shall also contain any revisions
to the system as built maps filed with the city.



   (C)   Construction Reports. Construction reports shall be sent to
the city 30 days after the franchise is awarded and monthly thereafter until
construction is completed as specified in § 61.071 (A) and (B) of this
chapter.



   (D)   Proof of Performance Tests. Proof of performance test results
shall be supplied to the city when sections of the system are rebuilt and
annually as required in § 61.072 of this chapter.



   (E)   Test Required by City for New Construction or Rebuild. Tests
required by city as specified in § 61.072 of this chapter shall be submitted
within 14 days of notification.



   (F)   Change in Service. A report on any change in programming or
service shall be provided to the city 30 days prior to implementation.



   (G)   Grantee Rules. The grantee's schedule of charges, contract or
application forms of regular subscribers, service policy regarding the
processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and
reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the
grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers shall be filed with the
city and conspicuously posted in the grantee's local office. All such terms
and conditions, including schedule of charges, must have been filed with the
city prior in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to their
becoming effective. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not
be in conflict with the provisions hereof or applicable state and federal
laws, rules or regulations.



   (H)   Proof of Bonds and Insurance. Grantee shall submit to the city
the required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and written
evidence of payment of required premium, and all policies of insurance
required by this chapter, or certified copies thereof, and written notice of
payment of required premium under the terms and conditions described in §
61.002 of this chapter.



   (I)   Financial and Ownership Reports. Upon written request, the
following financial reports for the franchise area shall be submitted
annually to the city:



      (1)   An annual ownership report from the corporation.



      (2)   A fully-audited statement of gross annual revenues
verifying all revenues from the City of Albemarle franchise as specified
within this chapter and the franchise agreement.



   (J)   Operational Reports. Upon written request, the following
system and operational reports shall be submitted annually to the city:



      (1)   A report on the system's technical tests and
measurements as set forth herein and in the franchise.



      (2)   A report on programs and services offered by Grantee,
including public, educational, government, and leased access.



      (3)   An annual summary of complaints received and handled in
addition to any reports required in the franchise.



   (K)   Additional Reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to
the city, upon written request, at the times and in the form prescribed, such
additional reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or
property, as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance
of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city in connection with this
chapter or the franchise.



   (L)   Maps. The grantee shall, upon written request by the city,
file a map with the city at the close of each franchise year, showing the
areas and location of the city being served by the Cable Television System.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



61.097  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Mandatory Records. The grantee shall at all times maintain:



      (1)   A record of all complaints received and interruptions or
degradation of service experience for the preceding period prior to a
performance evaluation.



      (2)   A full and complete set of plans, records and as built
maps showing the exact location of all cable communication system equipment
installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops.



      (3)   To the extent required by federal or state law or
regulation, a comprehensive record of all personnel transactions and
utilization of contractors, subcontractors, vendors and suppliers by race and
sex.



   (B)   Other Records. The city may, from time to time, impose
reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 61.105  CAPTIONS.



   The captions to sections throughout this proposal are intended solely
to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this
proposal. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of
this proposal.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.106  FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Initial applicants for a franchise shall submit to the city
written applications utilizing the standard format provided by the city, in
duplicate, to the City Manager or his/her designee at the time and place
designated by the city for accepting applications. The application shall
include such information as the city may reasonably require to ensure a FCC-
compliant, state-of-the-art system.



   (B)   In awarding a franchise, the city shall allow the applicant's
cable system a reasonable period of time to become capable of providing cable
service to all households in the franchise area as specified in § 61.068,
division (A). The city may require adequate assurance that the cable operator
will provide adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel
capacity, facilities, financial support, or qualifications to provide cable
service.



   (C)   An application fee in the amount of $6000 shall be paid by
each franchise applicant at the time of application for initial franchise
which fee shall be in the form of cash, certified check, or money order to
defer the cost of studying, investigating, and otherwise processing such
application and which shall be in consideration thereof and not refundable or
returnable in whole or in part. To offset the effects of inflation, the
amount of the application fee provided for herein, is subject to reasonable
increase in accord with the annual rate of inflation.



   (D)   Upon consideration of any such initial application, the City
Council shall determine the applicant's qualifications to construct, operate
and maintain a CATV system and to provide a CATV service in accordance with
the provisions of this Article. If the City Council determines that the
applicant is not so qualified, it may refuse to grant the requested
franchise. If the City Council determines that the applicant is so qualified,
it may, by ordinance, grant a franchise to such applicant, to be effective as
provided in §§ 61.040 - 61.043, provided, however, no provision of this
Article may be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a franchise
when the City Council determines that to do so would no be in the public
interest. Any franchise granted shall include the following condition: The
CATV system and service herein franchised shall be used and operated solely
and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by ordinance of the City
of Albemarle and no other purpose whatsoever. [Provision of current City of
Albemarle Cable Ordinance.]



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.107  PUBLIC NOTICE.



   Public notice of any public meeting relating to this chapter or the
franchise shall be in compliance with the city's public notice requirements.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



§ 61.108  PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   Whenever a public hearing is required by this chapter and related cable
television ordinances, the public hearing must be advertised in a newspaper
with general circulation within the city at least ten calendar days before
the hearing, the hearing shall be open to the public and provide for public
comment and any reliable, relevant evidence that is not unduly repetitive
shall be admissible.



(Ord. 99-38, passed 7-6-99)



CHAPTER 62:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   62.01   Sunday sales



§ 62.01  SUNDAY SALES.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by S.L. 2017-87 any establishment
located in the corporate limits of the City of Albemarle and holding an ABC
permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages
allowed by its permit beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.



(Ord. 17-26, passed - -17)



___________________



Cross-reference:



   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property, § 65.17



   Public consumption of malt beverages or unfortified wines prohibited,
§ 82.22



CHAPTER 63:  MASSAGE PARLORS AND RELATED BUSINESSES



Section



   63.01   Purpose



   63.02   Definitions



   63.03   Licensing of massage business operators



   63.04   Licensing of massagists



   63.05   Employer to use only licensed employees



   63.06   Posting of license



   63.07   Notice and hearing



   63.08   Hours of operation



   63.09   Patronage of massage by minors and employment of minors



   63.10   Privilege license annual



   63.11   Separability



§ 63.01  PURPOSE.



   To protect public health, safety, welfare, and morals, the following
privilege license provisions and regulations are ordained for the privilege
of carrying on the business, trade, or profession of massagist and for the
operation or carrying on of the businesses, trades, or professions commonly
known as massage parlors, health salons, physical culture studios, or similar
establishments wherein massage or physical manipulation of the human body is
carried on or practiced.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   A regularly established and licensed hospital, sanitarium,
nursing home;



   (B)   An office or clinic operated and regularly used by a
duly-qualified and licensed medical practitioner, osteopath, or chiropractor
in connection with the practice of medicine, chiropractic, or osteopathy;



   (C)   Physical fitness programs directly controlled by and conducted
on the premise of a governmental agency on the Young Men's Christian
Association;



   (D)   Persons who have graduated from a school or institute of
massage therapy which offers a minimum curriculum of 500 hours of classroom
instruction, and is licensed by the North Carolina State Board of Community
Colleges.



(`58 Code, § 15-30)  (Am. Ord. 91-7, passed 2-18-91; Am. Ord. 91-25, passed
10-21-91)



§ 63.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS OR PROFESSION OF MASSAGE.  Includes the massage or treatment
of any person for a fee or in expectation of a gratuity from the person
massaged.



   MASSAGE.  The manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, or tapping, by hand or mechanical device.



   MASSAGE BUSINESS.  Any establishment or business wherein massage is
practiced, including establishments commonly known as health clubs, physical
culture studios, and massage studios.



   MASSAGIST.  Any person engaged in the business or profession of
massage.



(`58 Code, § 15-31)



§ 63.03  LICENSING OF MASSAGE BUSINESS OPERATORS.



   (A)   No person, partnership, corporation, or association shall
operate a massage business as defined in § 63.02 unless the person,
partnership, corporation, or association shall have first applied for and
received the privilege license provided by this section. Every application
for the privilege license prescribed herein shall be on a form approved by
the City Manager and shall be filed with the City Clerk.  Every application
shall be made under oath and shall contain the following information.



      (1)   If the applicant is a person, the name and residence
address of the person.  If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or
association, the name and residence address of all persons having any legal
or beneficial interest in the applicant.



      (2)   The address of the premises where the massage business
shall be located.



      (3)   A complete statement of all convictions of any person
whose name is required to be given by division (A) (1) above for any felony,
prostitution, or any violation of any law relative to prostitution.



      (4)   A complete statement of any revocation by any
governmental unit of any license to operate a massage business or to engage
in the business or profession of massage held by any person whose name is
required to be given by division (A) (1) above.



      (5)   A complete statement of any conviction of any person
whose name is required to be given by division (A) (1) above, for violation
of any statute, law, ordinance, or regulation of any government concerning
the operation of a massage business or the business or profession of massage.



      (6)   The name and address of any massage business or other
establishment owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be
given by division (A) (1) above wherein the business or profession of massage
is carried on.



      (7)   A description of any other business to be operated on
the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant.



      The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the
Police Department for an investigative report; to the Building Inspector to
determine compliance with all zoning and building regulations and ordinances;
and to the Fire Department to determine compliance with any law relating to
fire protection.  The Police and Fire Departments and the Building Inspector
shall, within a reasonable time and not to exceed 30 days, report the results
of their examinations to the City Clerk.



   (C)   An application in proper form, accompanied by all reports
required by this section, shall be submitted to the City Council, which shall
approve the application if it determines the following.



      (1)   The application contains no misstatement of fact.



      (2)   The applicant, or any person having any legal or
beneficial ownership interest in the applicant, has not been convicted of any
crime involving sexual misconduct, including but not limited to G.S. 14-177
through 14-202.1 (Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency), and G.S.
14-203 through 14-208 (Prostitution), or of § 84.21 of this code, or of any
federal statute relating to prostitution, or of any violation of any law or
ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or
profession of massage.



      (3)   The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable
zoning, building, and fire prevention codes.



      (4)   The applicant or any person having a legal or beneficial
ownership interest in the applicant has not, for the three-year period
preceding the application, had a previously-issued license for engaging in
the business or profession of massage revoked.



   (D)   Upon approval of the application by the city Council, and upon
receipt of a $100 license fee, the Tax Collector shall issue a privilege
license to the applicant.



   (E)   A license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by
action of the City Council if the Council determines the following.



      (1)   The licensee has violated any provision of this chapter.



      (2)   The licensee, or any agent of the licensee, employs or
permits to be on the premises of the applicant's massage business any person
practicing the business or profession of massage who has not been issued the
privilege license, or whose license has been revoked.



      (3)   The licensee, or the legal or beneficial owner of any
interest in the licensee is convicted of any crime involving sexual
misconduct, including but not limited to G.S. 14-177 through 14-202.1
(Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency) and G.S. 14-203 through 14-208
(Prostitution).



      (4)   Any employee of the licensee is convicted of any felony
in connection with his employment, or is convicted of any crime involving
sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to G.S. 14-177 through 14-202.1
(Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency) and G.S. 14-203 through 14-208
(Prostitution), or of § 84.21 of this code.



      (5)   The licensee violates any Zoning, building, or fire
prevention ordinance.



   (F)   A license issued pursuant to this chapter is void if the
licensee moves or ceases operating a massage parlor at the location stated in
the application for the license.



('58 Code, §15-32)



§ 63.04  LICENSING OF MASSAGISTS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business or profession of
massage unless the person shall have first applied for and received the
privilege license provided by this section.  The application for the license
required shall be on a form approved by the City Manager and shall be filed
with the City Clerk.  The application shall be given under oath and shall
contain the following information.



      (1)    The name, age, and residence address of the applicant.



      (2)    A complete statement of the previous business or
occupation of the applicant for the two years immediately preceding the date
of application, including any massage establishment experience.



      (3)    A complete statement of all convictions of the
applicant for any felony or misdemeanor or violation of a local ordinance.



      (4)    A complete statement of any revocation of any license
granted by any government unit to the applicant to engage in the business or
profession of massage.



      (5)    The date and place of applicant's birth, the name of
applicant's parents, and the residence address or addresses of the applicant
for the five years immediately preceding the date of application.



   (B)   The applicant shall submit, as part of the application
required in division (A) above, the following information.  The information
required by this division shall be provided at the applicant's expense.



      (1)   Fingerprints of the applicant taken by the Police
Department.



      (2)   Two recent photographs of the applicant's head and
shoulders, of a size and quality prescribed by the City Manager.



      (3)   A medical certificate signed by a physician, licensed to
practice in North Carolina, within seven days of the date of the
application.  The certificate shall state that the applicant was examined by
the certifying physician and that the applicant is free of communicable
disease.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the application to the
Police Department for an investigative report. The Police Department shall,
within a reasonable time and not to exceed 30 days, report the results of its
investigation to the City Clerk.



   (D)   An application in proper form shall be submitted to the City
Council together with all reports required by this section.  The Council
shall approve the application if it determines the following.



      (1)   That the applicant is at least 18 years of age.



      (2)   The application contains no misstatement of fact.



      (3)   The applicant has not been convicted of any crime
involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to G.S. 14-177
through 14-202.l (Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency), and G.S.
14-203 through 14-208 (Prostitution), or of § 84.21 of this code, or of any
federal statute relating to prostitution, or for violation of any law or
ordinance of any governmental unit concerning or related to the business or
profession of massage.



      (4)   The applicant has not, for the three-year period
preceding the application, had a previously- issued license for engaging in
the business or profession of massage revoked.



      (5)   The applicant is free from communicable disease as
evidenced by the medical certificate required by division (B) (3) above.



      (6)   The applicant has not been previously convicted of any
violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (E)    Upon approval of the application by the City Council, and
upon receipt of a $50 license fee, the Tax Collector shall issue a privilege
license to the applicant.



   (F)    The City Council shall have authority to direct that any
person licensed under this section submit to a medical examination by a
licensed physician approved by the Council. This authority shall be exercised
only when the Council has reason to believe that the person has contracted a
communicable disease. Refusal to submit to the examination shall be grounds
for revocation of the license as provided in division (G) below.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, every person licensed under
this section shall file and continue to file with the City Clerk a new
medical certificate with each application for renewal of the license
prescribed by this section. Failure to file the updated certificates shall be
grounds for revocation of the license as provided in division (G) below.



   (G)    A license issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by
action of the City Council if the Council determines the following.



      (1)    The licensee has violated any provisions of this
chapter.



      (2)    The licensee is afflicted with a communicable disease.



      (3)    The licensee has failed to be examined by a licensed
physician when required by the City Council pursuant to division (F) above,
or has failed to file any medical certificate required by division (F).



      (4)    The licensee has been convicted of a felony, or any
crime involving sexual misconduct, including, but not limited to G.S. 14-177
through 14-202.1 (Offenses Against Public Morality and Decency), and G.S.
14-203 through 14-208 (Prostitution), or of § 84.21 of this code, or under
any federal statute relating to prostitution, or for violation of any law or
ordinance of any governmental unit related to the business or profession of
massage.
('58 Code, § 15-33)



§ 63.05  EMPLOYER TO USE ONLY LICENSED EMPLOYEES.



   No person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed under §
63.03 shall allow or permit any person to massage or treat any person on the
premises operated by the licensee unless the person giving the massage or
treatment has complied with all requirements of licensing under § 63.04,
including periodic medical examinations by a licensed physician. Violation of
this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued to the
violator pursuant to this chapter.



('58 Code, § 15-34)



§ 63.06  POSTING OF LICENSE.



   Every massagist shall post the license required by this chapter in his
work area. Every person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed
under this chapter shall display the license in a prominent place.



('58 Code, § 15-35) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 63.07  NOTICE AND HEARING.



   Before the City Council revokes a license issued pursuant to this
chapter, or if the Council determines reasonable grounds exist to deny an
application for a license, it shall cause a written notice to be sent by
certified mail to the licensee affected or applicant affected, at the address
stated in the license or application. The notice shall advise the affected
party of a right to appear before the Council, with or without legal counsel,
at a stated time and place, for the purpose of presenting any evidence
relevant to the revocation or denial, and for the purpose of hearing all
evidence submitted, and examining or cross-examining any person providing the
evidence.



('58 Code, § 15-36)



§ 63.08 HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)    No person licensed as a massagist under § 63.04 shall
massage or treat any person, or engage in the business or profession of
massage, before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.



   (B)    No person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed
under § 63.03 shall admit customers or prospective customers, or remain open
for business, or allow, permit, or condone any massage or treatment of any
person on the premises before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m., prevailing time.



   (C)    No person in charge of managing a massage business on the
premises shall allow, permit, or condone any massage or treatment of any
person before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. prevailing time.



('58 Code, § 15-37)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 63.09  PATRONAGE OF MASSAGE, BUSINESS BY MINORS AND EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS.



   (A)    No person licensed as a massagist under § 63.04 shall
massage or treat any person under the age of 18 on the licensed premises,
except on written order by a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, or
registered physicial therapist, the order being dated and in the possession
of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. A violation of this shall
be grounds for revocation of any license issued to the violator pursuant to
this chapter.



   (B)    No person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed
under § 63.03 shall allow, permit, or condone the massage or treatment of
any person under the age of 18 upon the licensed premises, except on written
order by a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, or registered
physical therapist, the order being dated, and a true copy of the order being
in the possession of the licensee before administration of any massage or
treatment. A violation of this shall be grounds for revocation of any license
issued to the violator pursuant to this article.



   (C)    No person, corporation, partnership, or association licensed
under § 63.03 shall employ any person under the age of 18 years in the
operation of a massage business.



('58 Code, § 15-38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 63.10  PRIVILEGE LICENSE ANNUAL.



   The licenses required under this chapter are annual privilege
licenses.  The licenses shall be due and payable in the same manner as
prescribed for other privilege licenses issued by the city pursuant to the
privilege license tax ordinance of the city.



('58 Code, § 15-39)



§ 63.11 SEPARABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of
this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, the portion shall be deemed aseparate, distinct,
and independent provision and the holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions thereof.



('58 Code, § 15-41)



CHAPTER 64:  PEDDLERS



Section



   64.01   Definitions



   64.02   Registration



   64.03   Prohibition of sales



§ 64.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER.  Any person who transports goods from place to place and
sells or offers for sale those goods, or who, without traveling from place to
place, sells or offers for sale any goods from any vehicle or device.  Any
person who separates the acts of sale and delivery for the purpose of evading
the provisions of this section shall be deemed a PEDDLER.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person who travels from place to place taking or
offering to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for
personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are
displayed or money is collected in advance, and any person who uses or
occupies any building or premises for the sole purpose of taking or offering
to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal
services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed
or money is collected in advance.



   TRANSIENT VENDOR.  Any person who engages in a temporary business of
selling and delivering goods and who, for this purpose, uses or occupies any
building or premises; provided, that no person shall be relieved from
complying with the provisions of this section merely by conducting a
transient business in association with any permanently established merchant.



('58 Code, §10-20.1(a))



§ 64.02  REGISTRATION.



   Every person doing business in the city as a peddler, solicitor, or
transient vendor shall file with the City Clerk, on a form to be provided for
the purpose, a statement setting forth the following information.



   (A)   Name and address of individual filing statement.



   (B)   Name and address of principal or employer if individual is an
agent or employee.



   (C)   Credentials showing relationship of agent or employee.



   (D)   Description of individual filing statement including height,
weight, sex, age, color, and distinguishing characteristics, if any.



   (E)   The goods to be sold or offered for sale, or the type of
service to be rendered.



   (F)   The period of time during which the business will be carried
on in the city.



   (G)   Description of automobile or other vehicle to be used in the
business, including the make, model, body style, color, and license number.



('58 Code, §10-20.1(b))



§ 64.03  PROHIBITION OF SALES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who has been issued a permit as
provided in § 64.02 to sell or offer for sale the goods or type of services
to be rendered for which the permit was issued during the hours of 9:00 p.m.
to 6:00 a.m. of the standard of time then in effect upon any portion of a
street, sidewalk or alley in the city; provided however, that sales or offers
of sales from a vehicle, cart, or portable stand on a street, sidewalk or
alley of streets located in CBD/Central Business District under the city
zoning ordinance for more than two hours and on all other streets, sidewalks
and alley for more than one hour during a calendar day (12:01 a.m. to 12:00
midnight) are prohibited excepting on the day of the annual Christmas parade
and other parades for which a permit under § 65.02 has been issued; and upon
those sections of streets, sidewalks and alleys that are closed temporarily
by City Council for special events.



(Ord. 02-14, passed 4-25-02)



CHAPTER 65:  STREET AND SIDEWALK USE AND REGULATION



Section



Parades and Demonstrations



   65.01   Definitions



   65.02   Permit required



   65.03   Requirements and issuance of permits



   65.04   Standards



   65.05   Certain activities prohibited



   65.06   Revocation of permit



   65.07   Interference prohibited



   65.08   Additional regulations applicable to picketing



   65.09   Exceptions



Miscellaneous Regulations



   65.15   Awnings, required height



   65.16   Display of merchandise



   65.17   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property



PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS



§ 65.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK.  That portion of any street lying between its intersections
with other streets.



   GROUP DEMONSTRATION.  Any assembly together or concert of action
between or among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter
or of making known any position or promotion of the persons, or of or on
behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of
attracting attention of the assembly.



   PARADE.  Any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or
operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, or procession
of any kind in or on the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other
public grounds or places.



   PICKET LINE.  Any two or more persons formed together for the purpose
of making known any position or promotion of the persons, or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons.



§ 65.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct, or
participate in any parade, picket line, or group demonstration in or on any
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place within the city unless a
permit therefor has been issued by the city in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 65.03  REQUIREMENTS AND ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   The Chief of Police or his designee shall issue permits as required in
§65.02, and in the issuance thereof he shall do the following.



      (1)   Require a written application for the permit to be filed
not less than 24 hours in advance of the parade, picket line, or group
demonstration, which shall specify the time and place for the commencement of
any picket line, and the time, place, route, and duration of any parade or
group demonstration, and any other information which the Chief of Police
deems necessary.



      (2)   Require that the application for a permit specify
whether or not minors below the age of 18 years will be permitted to
participate.



      (3)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify
and the permit shall designate the person in charge of the activity.  The
person shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line, or group
demonstration and shall carry the permit with him at that time.  The permit
shall not be valid in the possession of any other person.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 65.04  STANDARDS.



   The Chief of Police shall not issue a permit for the proposed parade if
he finds:



   (A)   The parades, picket lines, or group demonstrations are to
commence before 6:00 a.m. or terminate after 8:00 p.m.



   (B)   The parades or group demonstrations are to be held at the same
time and place as those designated in a permit issued pursuant to a written
application previously received by the Chief of Police or his designee.



   (C)   The conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.



   (D)   The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement of the parade and of contiguous areas so that adequate police
protection cannot be provided the remainder of the city.



   (E)   The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so
great a number of ambulances so that adequate ambulance service to portions
of the city not occupied by the parade and contiguous areas will be prevented.



   (F)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade will substantially interfere with adequate fire
and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the
assembly areas.



   (G)   The conduct of the parade is reasonably likely to result in
violence to persons or property causing serious harm to the public.



   (H)   The parade is to be held for the primary purposes of
advertising a product, good, or event, and is designed to be held primarily
for private profit.



   (I)   The conduct of the parade will interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment to such an extent that adequate fire protection cannot
be provided to the city.



§ 65.05  CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of, any parade, picket line, or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful.



      (1)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm, or any
weapon or article, including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks, or
flashlights which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon.



      (2)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious
animal, whether leashed or unleashed.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 65.06  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade,
picket line, or group demonstration for the violation by any participant of
§ 65.05, or the failure of any participant to comply with the terms and
conditions of the permit.



§ 65.07  INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any parade,
picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a
permit duly issued by the Chief of Police.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 65.08  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PICKETING.



   Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional
regulations.



      (1)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks
reserved for pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of
a street used primarily for vehicular traffic.



      (2)   Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective
shall be permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block
at any one time.



      (3)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs
not exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the
objective for which the picketing is done; provided, the words used are not
derogatory or defamatory in nature.



      (4)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and
must not march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 65.09  EXCEPTIONS.



   This subchapter shall not apply to funeral processions; governmental
agencies acting within the scope of their functions; or students going to and
from classes or participating in educational activities under the immediate
supervision of the proper school authority.



MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS



§ 65.15  AWNINGS, REQUIRED HEIGHT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain over the
sidewalk of the city any awning that comes lower than seven feet from the
sidewalks.



('58 Code, §13-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 65.16  DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any of the streets,
sidewalks, or alleys by displaying or placing fruit, vegetables, or other
merchandise on any portion of the streets, sidewalks, or alleys.



('58 Code, §13-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 65.17  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   Malt beverages and/or unfortified wine can be possessed, consumed,
sold, or distributed at special events held partially or wholly at city-owned
or city-controlled property or facilities,  but only on/at the following
locations: public sidewalks, parks, alleys, streets, and rights-of-way, E.E.
Waddell Center, Niven Center, and the Central School Auditorium and Lobby
(under control by the City per lease agreement) and upon the issuance of a
special event alcohol permit as set forth in this section. Fortified wine and
mixed beverages are not permissible at any city owned or operated facility.



   (A)   Special event alcohol permits shall be issued in conjunction
with a special event permit as defined in section 65.03-04 of the City Code
and only after applicant has obtained and provided to the City all
appropriate State and Local permits allowing the possession, consumption,
sale and distribution of alcohol.



      (1)   Special event alcohol permits may only be issued to a
non-profit corporation duly incorporated in the state and having received its
status as a tax-exempt organization under section 501(c) of the Internal
Revenue Service.



      (2)   Applicants receiving a special event alcohol permit may
allow vendors to sell or distribute malt beverages and/or unfortified wine
without such vendors obtaining a separate permit provided that the applicant
receiving the special event alcohol permit shall be responsible for such
vendor having all state and local permits necessary to sell or distribute
such alcoholic beverages and the required insurance in place for the event.



      (3)   Malt beverages and/or unfortified wine as provided in
this section can only be possessed, consumed, sold, or distributed in such
area as approved by City Council or designee which must be identified and
approved by City Council as part of the special event application.



      (4)   The event organizer must provide identification devices
to be used by the bearer to purchase malt beverages and/or unfortified wine.
Identification devices are not transferable and can only be worn and used by
the person to whom the identification device was issued by the event
organizer. If the event is a multi-day event, new identification markers must
be issued on succeeding days of the event. Before issuing the identification
markers, the event organizer is responsible for determining the person to be
issued the identification device is of legal age to possess malt beverages
and/or unfortified wine. It is unlawful for a person authorized to purchase a
malt beverage and/or unfortified wine to pass on to any other person not
wearing an authorized identification device.



      (5)   It is unlawful for a person to possess or consume a malt
beverages and/or unfortified wine except as set out herein in that he/she is
wearing the appropriate identification device designated for the day of the
event.



      (6)   The possession, consumption, sell, and/or delivery of
alcoholic beverages not obtained or acquired as set out in this section are
not permitted and are considered a violation of this article.



      (7)   City Council or designee may require the event organizer
to hire an off-duty police officer(s) to oversee alcohol sales at the event
and may place other reasonable conditions on a special event alcohol permit.



      (8)   No special event alcohol permit may be issued without
the applicant obtaining an insurance policy in the amount of $1,000,000
displaying general liability and liquor liability and which names the "City
of Albemarle" as an additional-insured. Said policy shall remain in effect
for the entire period of the event.



      (9)   Permits issued in accordance with this article will only
be in effect for the time and period of the event as specified on the
application as approved by City  Council. Permits issued under this article
and approved by City Council shall not be transferrable.



   (B)   Denial of revocation of special event alcohol permits: City 
Council or designee may deny or revoke a special event alcohol permit if it
is deemed granting the permit would not be in the public's interest or it is
found the applicant or vendor has conducted one of the following:



      (1)   Made a deliberate misrepresentation or provided false
information on the application;



      (2)   Operating in such as manner as to create a public
nuisance or constitute a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare;



      (3)   Failed to keep the sidewalk, park, street, or
right-of-way clean and free of refuse;



      (4)   Failed to maintain and health, business, or other permit
or license as required by law;



      (5)   Failure to obtain or maintain the amount and type(s) of
insurance required herein; or



      (6)   Violating any terms of this section.



(Ord. 17-30, passed 9-5-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 66:  PAWNBROKERS



Section



   66.01   License and bond required



   66.02   Records



   66.03   Inspection of stock



   66.04   Regulations concerning minors



   66.05   Loans on separate parts of articles



   66.06   Article to be kept sixty days



   66.07   Compliance required



§ 66.01  LICENSE AND BOND REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do business as a pawnbroker as
defined in North Carolina General Statute 91-1 in the city without first
having obtained a license therefor; and every such person, before license is
granted to carry on such business, shall, in addition to the license tax
annually imposed by Privilege License Ordinance of the city, be required to
enter into bond to the city in the sum of $1,000, conditioned for the due
observance of the provisions of this chapter at any time during the
continuance of such license.



(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-19-83)



§ 66.02  RECORDS.



   (A)   All pawnbrokers doing business in the city shall keep and
preserve a daily record on forms approved by the Chief of Police, at their
several places of business, fairly and legibly written in English, showing a
full, detailed, and complete list of every article taken in pawn by them or
bought by them and giving full description of the same, including the
material, maker, engraved marks, manner, brand, monogram, and letters of
every kind on such article, showing also from whom such articles are received
and to whom sold or disposed of.  Such records shall, at all times during
business hours and all other reasonable times, be open for the examination
and inspection of the Chief of Police, or any policeman or other lawful
officer.



   (B)   Every pawnbroker shall furnish to the Chief of Police upon
request, in plain and legible handwriting, a true and correct copy of the
record herein required to be kept, covering his transactions for the
preceding 48 hours.



(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-19-83)



§ 66.03  INSPECTION OF STOCK.



   Every pawnbroker shall have his goods so arranged in stock as to enable
any lawful officer, as prescribed in § 66.02 to readily inspect the same.



(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-19-83)



§ 66.04  REGULATIONS CONCERNING MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to, directly or indirectly,
knowingly buy or receive in pawn any article from any minor, without the
written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor.  The written consent
shall be carefully preserved by the pawnbroker as evidence of his right to
buy or receive in pawn the article from the minor.  The written consent
shall be subject to inspection by the police or other lawful officers of the
city.



(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-19-83)



§ 66.05  LOANS ON SEPARATE PARTS OF ARTICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to make any loans on the
separate or divided part of any article.



(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-19-83)



§ 66.06  ARTICLE TO BE KEPT SIXTY DAYS.



   No article received in pawn or bought by a pawnbroker, within the city,
shall be disposed of or removed from his place of business within 60 days
from the time the same was received.



(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-19-83)



§ 66.07  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   Any licensed pawnbroker or person in control of any pawnshop who shall
violate or refuse to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition thereto, the license issued therefor
shall be declared forfeited by the City Council.



(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-19-83)



CHAPTER 67:  MUNICIPAL SMOKING RESTRICTIONS



Section



   67.01   Definition



   67.02   Smoking regulated in municipal buildings



   67.03   Smoking prohibited in municipal vehicles



   67.04   Posting of signs



   67.05   Exemptions



   67.06   Smoking and use of other tobacco products on grounds in the
city’s parks system prohibited



   67.99   Penalty



§ 67.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SMOKING.  The inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying of a lighted
pipe, cigar, cigarette, or other combustible tobacco product.



(Ord. 93-34, passed 9-20-93)



§ 67.02  SMOKING REGULATED IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any building or
facility or portion of a building or facility now or hereafter owned, leased,
operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the city, except in specially
designated smoking areas. The City Manager shall have the authority to
designate smoking areas within or near each city building or facility. An
area within any building or facility may be designated as a smoking area only
if the ventilation of such area is sufficient, any adverse impact on
municipal employees and members of the public is minimal, and no fire or
other safety hazard will be created by smoking in such area.



(Ord. 93-34, passed 9-20-93)  Penalty, see § 67.99



§ 67.03  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN MUNICIPAL VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle now or
hereafter owned or leased by the city unless all occupants or passengers use
smoking materials and all consent.



(Ord. 93-34, passed 9-20-93)  Penalty, see § 67.99



§ 67.04  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   The City Manager shall cause each building to be posted with
appropriate signs indicating that smoking is prohibited. Such signs shall be
posted in a conspicuous place designed to give notice to the public as well
as to employees.



(Ord. 93-34, passed 9-20-93)



§ 67.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   Individual dwelling units in public housing;



   (B)   In city-owned buildings or facilities leased to and occupied
by others; and



   (C)   In open air sheds or similar facilities where Smoking
Permitted signs have been placed.



(Ord. 93-34, passed 9-20-93)



§ 67.06  SMOKING AND USE OF OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS ON GROUNDS IN THE
CITY’S PARKS SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Authority.  This section is enacted pursuant to G.S. §
130A-498 and § 160A-174(a).



   (B)   Definitions.  The following definitions are applicable to
this section.



      (1)   "CITY BUILDING."  A building owned, leased as lessor,
or the area leased as lessee and occupied by the city.



      (2)   "EMPLOYEE."  A person who is employed by the City of
Albemarle, or who contracts with the city or a third person to perform
services for the city, or who otherwise performs services for the city with
or without compensation.



      (3)   "GROUNDS."  An unenclosed area owned, leased, or
occupied by the city.



      (4)   "LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT." The District Health
Department, Public Health Authority, or County Health Department, the
jurisdiction of which includes the city.



      (5)   "PARKS SYSTEM."  Any tract of land or body of water
comprising part of the city's parks, playgrounds, natural areas, recreation
areas, trails and greenways, and streams or other bodies of water.



      (6)   "UNIVERSAL 'NO SMOKING AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
PROHIBITED' SYMBOL."  Symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a
burning cigarette and a tobacco product enclosed in a  red circle with a red
bar across it.



      (7)   "SMOKING."  The use or possession of a lighted
cigarette, lighted cigar, lighted pipe, or any other lighted tobacco product.



      (8)   "TOBACCO PRODUCT."  Any product containing, made, or
derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any
other means, or any component part or accessory of a tobacco product,
including but not limited to cigarettes; cigars; little cigar; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulate, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other
smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour, Cavendish; plug and twist tobacco;
fine-cut and other chewing tobacco; shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cutting
and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco.  A tobacco
product excludes any product that has been approved by the Unties States Food
and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and
sold solely for such an approved purpose.



   (C)   Areas in which smoking and tobacco products are prohibited.



      (1)   Smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited:



         (a)   On city grounds of the city's parks system.



         (b)   In city buildings located in the city's parks
system.



      (2)   Smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited
on grounds of the city's parks system and in buildings located in the city's
parks system being used for private events.



   (D)   Implementation requirements.



      (1)   The city shall post signs that meet all the requirements
in division (E) of this seciton.



      (2)   The city shall remove all ashtrays and other smoking
receptacles from the grounds of city's parks system and the buildings located
in the city's park systems.



      (3)   The person in charge of the grounds of the city's parks
system or the buildings located in the city's parks system, or his or her
designee, shall direct a person who is smoking or using a tobacco product in
a prohibited are to cease and, if the person does not comply, shall contact
the city Police Department.



   (E)   Signage.  The signs required by division (D) must:



      (1)   State in English that smoking and the use of tobacco
products are prohibited and include the universal "No Smoking and Use of
Tobacco Products Prohibited" symbol.



      (2)   Be of sufficient size to be clearly legible to a person
of normal vision, and be conspicuously posted.



      (3)   Be posted at each entrance of the buildings located in
the city's parks system and in other locations within the buildings
reasonable calculated to inform employees and the public of the prohibition.



      (4)   Be posted on the grounds of the city's parks system in
locations and at intervals reasonably calculated to inform employees and the
public of the prohibition.



   (F)   Enforcement and penalties.



      (1)   Penalty for violation.  Following oral or written
notice by the person in charge of an area described in division (C), or his
or her designee, failure to cease smoking or using tobacco products
constitutes an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $50.  A
citation may be issued by a sworn law enforcement officer.  Conviction of an
infraction under this section has no consequence other than payment of a
penalty, and no court costs may be assessed.



      (2)   Additional sanctions for employees. In addition to any
penalty under division (F)(1), employees of the city who violate this seciton
shall be subject to disciplinary action consistent with the city's human
resources policy.



   (G)   Public education.  The City of Albemarle shall engage in an
ongoing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this
section to employees and citizens affected by it, and to guide operators and
managers in their compliance with it.  In doing so, the City of Albemarle
may rely upon materials and information provided by the local health
department.



   (H)   Severability; conflict of laws and numbering.  If this
section or application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or application of the
ordinance that can be given separate effect and to that end the provisions of
this section are declared to be severable.  All ordinances or parts of
ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed.



(Ord. 12-26, passed 8-6-12)



§ 67.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. 93-34, passed 9-20-93)



CHAPTER 68:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   68.01   Definitions



   68.02   Classification



   68.03   License required



   68.04   Issuance of license



   68.05   Appeal



   68.06   Fees



   68.07   Inspection



   68.08   Expiration of license



   68.09   Suspension



   68.10   Revocation



   68.11   Denial



   68.12   Transfer of license



   68.13   Hours of operation



   68.14   Additional regulations for escort agencies



   68.15   Additional regulations for adult theaters, adult cabarets,
adult motion picture theaters



   68.16   Additional regulations for adult motels



   68.17   Additional regulations for all sexually oriented businesses



   68.18   Regulations pertaining to sexually oriented businesses with
viewing or other rooms



   68.99   Penalty



§ 68.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE or PEEP SHOW.  Any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so displayed depict or
describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A commercial establishment
which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for
any form of consideration any one or more of the following:



   (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or



   (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial
establishment that regularly features, exhibits, or displays as one of its
principal business purposes:



   (1)   Persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or



   (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or



   (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that:



   (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that depict or describe specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as one of its principal business purposes; or



   (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is
less than 10 hours; or



   (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the
room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown as one of its
principal business purposes that depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features, exhibits, or displays, as
one of its principal business purposes, persons who appear in a state of
nudity or semi-nude, or live performances that expose or depict specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



   APPLICANT.  The person who will operate the sexually oriented
business, and shall include each of the following persons associated with
that business:



   (1)   The owner of a sole proprietorship;



   (2)   Each member of a firm, association, or general partnership;



   (3)   Each general partner in a limited partnership;



   (4)   Each officer, director, and owner of more than 10 percent of
the stock of a corporation;



   (5)   The manager of an establishment operated by a corporation;



   (6)   Any manager who has been empowered as attorney-in-fact for a
nonresident individual or partnership.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the City of Albemarle or the
designated agent of the Chief of Police.



   CITY CLERK.  The Albemarle City Clerk.



   EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE, and EMPLOYMENT  describe and pertain to any person
who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a
fulltime, parttime, or contract basis, whether or not the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise.
Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.



   ESCORT.  A person who, for tips or any other form of consideration,
agrees or offers to act as a date for another person, or who agrees or offers
to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business that furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its principal business
purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



   ESTABLISHMENT  means and includes any of the following:



   (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business
as a new business; or



   (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or



   (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or



   (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE.  Person(s) in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in
a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas is provided to
be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.  NUDE
MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of
North Carolina or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely
or in part by public taxation; a private college or university supported
entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which
maintains and operates education programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or in a structure:



   (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is
available for viewing; and



   (2)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and



   (3)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



   OPERATES or CAUSES TO BE OPERATED.  To cause to function or to put or
keep in operation.  A person may be found to be operating or causing to be
operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner,
part owner, or licensee of the business.



   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY.



   (1)   The appearance of a human anus, male genitals, or female
genitals; or



   (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus,
male genitals, or female genitals.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   SEMI-NUDE.  A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial enterprise that, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration
physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the
opposite sex, or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of
the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult
video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or any
combination of the foregoing.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Human genitals in a state of sexual
arousal.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES means and includes any of the following:



   (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or



   (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or



   (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or



   (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of
the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL of a sexually oriented business means
and includes any of the following:



   (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



   (2)   Persons other than those named as applicants for a license
becoming associated with the business, as provided in the definition of
applicant; except that a mere substitution of a person as manager of an
establishment shall only require filing with the City Clerk as provided in §
68.06;



   (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal
device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97)



§ 68.02  CLASSIFICATION.



   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (1)   Adult arcades;



   (2)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores;



   (3)   Adult cabarets;



   (4)   Adult motels;



   (5)   Adult motion picture theaters;



   (6)   Adult theaters;



   (7)   Escort agencies;



   (8)   Nude model studios;



   (9)   Sexual encounter centers.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97)



§ 68.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented
business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the
City Clerk pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form prescribed
by the Chief of Police.  An application must be accompanied by a sketch or
diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of
total floor space occupied by the business.  The sketch or diagram need not
be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises.



      (1)   The applicant and the applicant's spouse shall provide
to the Chief of Police fingerprints and/or any other necessary identification
information which may be required by the Chief of Police.



      (2)   The Chief of Police shall check the state repository for
criminal history to determine if an applicant and/or an applicant's spouse
has been convicted of a crime involving any offense described in Articles 7A,
26, 26A, 27, 37, or 39 of Chapter 14 of the North Carolina General Statutes;
or, any similar offenses to those described herein under the criminal or
penal code of North Carolina, other states, Albemarle, other cities, other
countries, or facilitation, attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any
of the foregoing offenses for which:



         (a)   Less than two years have lapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



         (b)   Less than five years have lapsed since the date of
conviction;



         (c)   Less than five years have lapsed since the date of
the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24 month period.



   (C)   The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information as to enable the Chief of Police and the City Clerk to
determine whether each applicant meets the qualifications established in this
chapter.



   (D)   Each applicant must be qualified under § 68.03 and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.04  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed application, the
City Clerk will approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant for
a sexually oriented business license.  The City Clerk will approve the
issuance of a license to an applicant unless the Chief of Police finds one or
more of the following to be true:



      (1)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.



      (2)   The application and investigation fee or the license fee
required by this chapter have not been paid.



      (3)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or
imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a
sexually oriented business.



      (4)   An applicant has failed to provide information required
in order to determine the qualifications of the applicant under this chapter
for issuance of the license, or has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form.



      (5)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with this chapter or other provisions of
the Code of Ordinance of the City of Albemarle.



      (6)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted
of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of
operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years
immediately preceding the application.  The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect.



      (7)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted
of a crime involving:



         (a)   Any offense described in Articles 7A, 26, 26A, 27,
37, or 39 of Chapter 14 of the North Carolina General Statutes; or any
similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of
North Carolina, other states, Albemarle, other cities, or other countries; or
facilitation, attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the
foregoing offenses; for which:



            (i)   less than two years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



            (ii)   less than five years have elapsed since the
date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or



            (iii)   less than five years have elapsed since
the date of the least conviction or the date of release from confinement for
the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses
occurring within any 24-month period.



         (b)   Reserved.



   (B)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse.



   (C)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been
convicted of an offense listed above may qualify for a sexually oriented
business license only when the time period required by this section has
lapsed.



   (D)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the classification of sexually
oriented business for which it is granted, the expiration date, and the
address of the sexually oriented business.  Licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that they may be easily read at any time.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.05  APPEAL.



   An applicant whose application is denied, suspended, or revoked by the
City Clerk may appeal such action in writing within 30 days to the City
Council, which shall decide either to uphold the action or to issue the
license no later than the second regular City Council meeting after receipt
of the appeal.  The applicant or licensee shall have the right to present
evidence before the City Council.  The decision to uphold the action of the
City Clerk or issue the license shall be based solely on the criteria
established herein for the action by the City Clerk.  A suspension or
revocation shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal to the City
Council.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.06  FEES.



   (A)   Every application for a sexually oriented business license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by a $500 non-refundable application and investigation fee.



   (B)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required
above, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the City Clerk an annual non-refundable privilege
license fee of $500 upon license issuance or renewal.



   (C)   A substitution of a manager of the business which occurs
during the license year shall be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days of
its occurrence and a $100 investigation fee paid.



   (D)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the
City Clerk.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.07  INSPECTION.



   (A)   A business license applicant or licensee shall permit
representatives of the Police Department or any other city, county, state, or
federal department, division, or agency that enforces codes, regulations, or
statutes relating to human health, safety or welfare, or structural safety to
inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for
business.



   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his
agent or employee commits an offense if such person refuses to permit a
lawful inspection of the premises by persons designated above.



   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by the customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.08  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   All licenses shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 68.03 above. 
Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.09  SUSPENSION.



   The City Clerk is authorized to, and will, suspend a sexually oriented
business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the Chief of Police
determines that a business licensee has:



   (A)   violated or is not in compliance with this chapter or with any
other requirements of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Albemarle,
including those relating to buildings, electricity,  plumbing, fire safety,
and mechanical equipment; or



   (B)   refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises; or



   (C)   permitted illegal gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented business premises; or



   (D)   demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually
oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating
action by law enforcement officers.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.10  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Clerk is authorized to, and will, revoke a license if
a



cause for suspension in § 68.09 occurs and the license has been suspended
within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The City Clerk is authorized to, and will, revoke a sexually
oriented business license if the Chief of Police determines that a business
licensee:



      (1)   gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the city during the application process; or



      (2)   has allowed the possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises; or



      (3)   has allowed prostitution on the premises; or



      (4)   has operated or worked in the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; or



      (5)   has been convicted of an offense named in §
68.04(A)(7)(a) for which the time period required in § 68.04(A)(7)(a) has
not lapsed; or



      (6)   on two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime named in § 68.04 for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented
business at the time the offenses were committed; or



      (7)   has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
oral copulation, or sodomy to occur in or on the licensed premises; or



      (8)   is delinquent in payment to the city of ad valorem
taxes, sales taxes, or the annual license fee, or any other fee or tax
related to the sexually oriented business or other business of the licensee.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.



   (D)   Subsection (B)(7) of this section does not apply to adult
motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the business licensee or
employee allowed the act of sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral
copulation, sodomy, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within
public view.



   (E)   When the City Clerk revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business for one year from the date revocation became effective. 
If, subsequent to revocation, the City Clerk finds that the basis for the
revocation has been corrected or abated, the licensee may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became
effective.  If the license was revoked under § 68.04(A), an applicant may
not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required
under that subsection have elapsed.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.11  DENIAL.



   If the city denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a
license, or denies an appeal, the city will send to the applicant, or
licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the
action.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.12  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   Unless a new application for a license is made, a licensee shall not
transfer a license to another, nor shall a business licensee operate a
different classification of a sexually oriented business than that designated
in the application, or transfer ownership or control to another person(s), or
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.  No sexually
oriented business shall be operated under any name or conducted under any
designation or classification not specified in the license for that business.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.13  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain
open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays, except to the extent
allowed by North Carolina law and regulations pertaining to the sale of
alcoholic beverages by the business if the sexually oriented business has a
state ABC permit.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.14  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.



   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees
to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.15  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS, ADULT CABARETS, ADULT
MOTION PICTURE THEATERS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state
of nudity in an adult cabaret, adult theater, or adult motion picture
theater, or adult arcade.



   (B)   A licensee or employee commits an offense if the licensee or
employee allows a person to appear in a state of nudity in an adult cabaret,
adult theater, or adult motion picture theater, or adult arcade.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.16  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttal presumption that
the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that
does not have a sexually oriented business license, such person rents or
subrents a sleeping room to another and, within 10 hours from the time the
room is rented, such person rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



   (C)   For purposes of subsection (B) of this section, the terms rent
or subrent mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.17  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   A person commits an offense if the person allows another person under
the age of 18 years to enter or remain on or in the enclosed portion of a
sexually oriented business; or for a person under the age of 18 years to
enter or remain on or in the enclosed portion of a sexually oriented business.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.18  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES WITH
VIEWING OR OTHER ROOMS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which either: exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space a
film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or has a room or booth
(excluding restrooms) of less than 150 square feet to which patrons are
admitted for any reason, shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business
license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's
stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.  A
manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.  The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously
posted, if granted.  A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each
diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions
sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the
interior of the premises.  The Chief of Police may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant(s).



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the Chief of
Police or his designee.



      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the
premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises and the
employees who are present to ensure that no more than one person occupies a
room or booth at anytime, and that all other entrances to rooms, booths, or
viewing areas (and to the aisles, walkways and hallways leading to rooms,
booths or viewing areas) are maintained free of any obstruction such as a
door, curtain, panel, board, slat, ribbon, cord, rope, chain, or other device.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
excluding restroom.  Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment.  If the premises have two or more manager's stations designated,
the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there
is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations.  The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it
shall also be the duty of all employees present in the premises to ensure
that the line of sight and view area specified in § 68.18(A)(5) remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which
has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to § 68.18(A)(1).



      (7)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as
measured at the floor level.



      (8)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it
shall also be the duty of all employees present on the premises to ensure
that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any
patron is present in the premises.



      (9)   No operator, owner, or employee shall allow openings of
any kind to exist between rooms or booths.



      (10)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of
any kind between rooms or booths.



      (11)   The operator or owner shall, during each business day,
regularly inspect the walls between the rooms or booths to determine if any
openings or holes exist.



      (12)   The owner or operator shall cause all floor coverings
in rooms, booths, and viewing areas to be non-porous, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



      (13)   The owner or operator shall cause all wall surfaces and
seating surfaces in rooms, booths, and viewing areas to be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, non-porous, easily cleanable material.  No wood,
plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.



   (B)   A person having a duty under §§ 68.18(A)(1)-(13) above
commits an offense if the person fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97) Penalty, see § 68.99



§ 68.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of
$500, or imprisonment, or both.



   (B)   Any person who violates this chapter is subject to a civil
suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations and
liability for licensing sanctions such as suspension or revocation.



   (C)   A licensee of a sexually oriented business is jointly and
individually liable for violations of and offenses under this chapter by the
employees of the sexually oriented business, and for all civil and criminal
sanctions or remedies for such violations and offenses, including but not
limited to license suspension or revocation, prescribed herein.



(Ord. 97-09, passed 3-17-97)



TITLE VII:  MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC-CONRTOL DEVICES



      72.   TRAFFIC RULES



      73.   STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



      74.   TRUCKS; RAILROADS



      75.   PEDESTIANS



      76.   BICYCLES



      77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Compliance with title



   70.03   Application of title



   70.04   Drivers of government-owned vehicles



   70.05   Authority of Police and Fire Department officials



   70.06   Obedience to Police and Fire Department officials



   70.07   Authorized emergency vehicles



   70.08   Approach of Police or Fire Department vehicles.



§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ALLEY."A service way providing a secondary means of public access to
abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.



   "AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE." Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles, and any ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments
or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief
of Police.



   "BICYCLE." Every device propelled by human power on which any person
may ride, usually having two tandem wheels either of which is 16 inches in
diameter or larger.



   "BLOCK."A portion of any street located between any two intersections
of any two streets, next adjacent to each other.



   "COMMERCIAL VEHICLE." Every vehicle designed, maintained, or used
primarily for the transportation of property.



   "CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY." Every highway, street, or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from, except at those points only
and in the manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street, or roadway.



   "CROSSWALK." That portion of any street or roadway ordinarily included
within the prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at
intersections. Any portion of a roadway or street distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface of the street
or roadway.



   "DRIVER." Every person who shall drive or who shall be in actual
physical control of the operation of any vehicle.



   "FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE."A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.



   "INTERSECTION." The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of
the roadways of the two highways which join one another at or approximately
at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling on different
highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a highway
includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each
roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded
as a separate intersection. In the event the intersecting highway also
includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two
roadways of the highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



   "LANED ROADWAY."A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   "MO-PED."A motorized bicycle capable of being propelled by either human
power or small motor or engine.



   "MOTOR VEHICLE."Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle
designed to run on the streets which is pulled by a self-propelled vehicle.



   "MOTORCYCLE." Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor.



   "OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD." Whenever certain hours are named herein they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
the city.



   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE." Any sign, signal, marking, or
device, not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of
the governing body, for the purpose of regulating, warning, prohibiting, or
guiding traffic on the streets and thoroughfares of the city.



   "OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS."Any device, whether manually, electrically,
or mechanically operated, whereby traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed, or to turn, or to proceed with caution.



   "PARK." The stationary positioning of a vehicle while not in use or
with the intention of leaving the vehicle unattended by a licensed driver.



   "PARKING LANE."  That portion of the paved roadway normally used for
the parking of vehicles.  The parking lane is separated from the traffic
lane by a solid white line on the roadway.



   "PEDESTRIAN.," Any person afoot.



   "POLICE OFFICER." Every peace officer of the city, including every
employee of the city authorized and empowered to regulate traffic and to make
arrests for any violations of the provisions of this title.



   "PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY."  Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. The function is
to provide traffic access within group developments. Right-of-way
improvements remain private property and the city is not responsible for
maintenance.



   "PUBLIC CONVEYANCE." Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train
for transporting persons for a fare.



   "RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT." Various area in the city where the exclusive
use and zoning of property is residential, whether single-family, duplex, or
apartments. The intent of this definition is to exclude areas in which
residents exist in areas zoned for business, office, or industrial uses.



   "ROADWAY." That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In
the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, "ROADWAY" as used
herein shall refer to any roadways separately but not to all the roadways
collectively.



   "SAFETY ZONE." The area or space officially set apart within any
roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which shall be so protected,
marked, or indicated by visible and adequate markers or signs as shall be
visible at all times while so set apart as a safety zone for pedestrians.



   "SIDEWALK STANDING." The brief stopping of a vehicle for the immediate
loading or unloading of passengers with the intent to disrupt traffic.



   "SIDEWALK."  That portion of a street off the roadway behind the curb
or ditch line, constructed primarily for the use of pedestrians.



   "STOP."  When required, the complete cessation of movement of any
vehicle.



   "STOP" or "STOPPING." When prohibited, any stopping of any vehicle,
except when the stopping means that it shall be necessary to stop the vehicle
to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the direction of
any peace officer of the city, by reason of any traffic-control sign or
signal, or by reason of any emergency.



   "STREET" and "HIGHWAY." The entire width between property lines of
every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic.



   "STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY." The legal boundaries of the street adjacent to
or crossing private and public properties.



   "THROUGH HIGHWAY." Every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop before entering or crossing it, and when stop signs
are erected as provided in this title.



   "TRAFFIC." Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles of all
kinds, conveyances, tractors, bicycles, motorcycles, and the like, either
singly or together, while using any street or alleyway for travel, including
the operation of, the loading or unloading of, or the parking of any vehicle
on any of the public streets of the city.



   "TRAFFIC DIVISION." The traffic division of the Police Department of
the city, or in the event a traffic division is not established, then the
term whenever used herein shall be deemed to refer to the Police Department
of the city.



   "TRAFFIC LANE." That portion of the paved roadway normally used for the
movement of traffic.



   "VEHICLE." Every device used in, on, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn on any street within the corporate limits,
and for the purposes of this title, any bicycle shall be deemed a vehicle.



   "VEHICULAR RIGHT-OF-WAY" or "PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY." The privilege of
the immediate use of the street or roadway.



('58 Code, § 16-1)



§ 70.02  COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden in this
title or to fail to perform any tractor, trailer, bicycle, buggy, cart, or
other type of machine or conveyance, or any person riding or driving or
leading any animal on any of the public streets of the city shall be subject
to the provisions of this title, except those provisions of this title which
by their very nature can have no application.



('58 Code, § 16-7)



§ 70.03 APPLICATION OF TITLE.



   Every person operating, riding, propelling, or driving any pushcart,
tractor, trailer, bicycle, buggy, cart, or other type of machine or
conveyance, or any person riding or driving or leading any animal on any of
the public streets of the city shall be subject to the provisions of this
title, except those provisions of this title which by their very nature can
have no application.



('58 Code, § 16-7)



§ 70.04  DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT-OWNED VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of vehicles on
streets shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States government, this state, any other state, or any
county or city. It shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any provisions
of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by state
statute.



('58 Code, § 16-5) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.05  AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department
or those officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all
street traffic laws and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic. Officers of the Police Department or those officers as are assigned
by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. in the event of a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



   (B)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



§ 70.06  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.



('58 Code, § 16-3) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.07  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding
to an emergency call, when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm,
may exercise the privileges set forth below, but will be subject to the
conditions herein stated. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may
do the following.



      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this
title.



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.



      (3)   Exceed, the prima facie speed limits so long as he does
not endanger life or property.



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.



   (B)   The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any emergency vehicle while in
motion sounds audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one
lighted lamp displaying a light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle. An authorized
emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or
display a light visible from in front of the vehicle.



   (C)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons; nor shall the provisions protect the driver from the
consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. It is not
the intent or purpose of this section to hamper or interfere with the powers
and duties of the Fire Department or Police Department in the exercise of
their several functions, or to render the city in any respect liable for any
damages of or injuries to persons or property occasioned in the exercise of
these functions by the city.



('58 Code, § 16-6)



§ 70.08  APPROACH OF POLICE OR FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES.



   (A)   Upon the approach of any Police or Fire Department vehicle
giving audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle, the driver of every
other vehicle shall immediately drive his vehicle to a position as near as
possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb, clear of any
intersection or highway, and shall stop and remain in that position, unless
otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer, until the Police or Fire
Department vehicle shall have passed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle other than
one on official business to follow any fire apparatus traveling in response
to a fire alarm closer than one block, or to drive into or park the vehicle
within one block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire
alarm.



('58 Code, § 16-68) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



Section



   71.01   Powers and duties of Director of Public Works



   71.02   Obedience to signs



   71.03   Signs as prerequisite enforcement



   71.04   Specifications for traffic-control devices



   71.05   Traffic-control signal legend



   71.06   Pedestrian-control signal legend



   71.07   Flashing signals



   71.08   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings



   71.09   Interference with official traffic-control devices, signs,
or signals



§ 71.01  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works, whenever
authorized and directed by an order of the City Council, to do the following.



      (1)   Erect and place or cause to be erected and placed proper
signs and markers or other traffic-warning devices or traffic-control devices
of any kind indicating limited or prohibited parking, angle parkcing, parking
of official vehicles, parking of public service vehicles, one-way streets,
restricted speed areas, yield right-of-way intersections, through or arterial
streets, stop intersections, U turns, hazardous intersections, turning at
intersections, safety zones, play streets, school zones, hospital zones,
loading and unloading zones, quiet zones, traffic-control signals exhibiting
colored lights or the words "go," "caution," or "stop," and other signs,
markers, or devices indicating the place and manner of operating or parking
vehicles within the corporate limits of the city.



      (2)   Mark off or cause to be marked off bus stops, and to
erect or cause to be erected signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles in the
bus stops.



      (3)   Erect or cause to be erected signs indicating truck
routes and the parking of vehicles of various weights and sizes.



      (4)   Mark off or cause to be marked off traffic lanes and
parts of streets indicating the direction and flow of traffic thereon.



      (5)   Erect or place or cause to be erected or placed signs,
markers, or devices indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic.



      (6)   Erect or cause to be erected all other signs, markers,
or devices on any street in the town indicating the manner in which vehicles
shall be operated or parked.



   (B)   The existence of the signs, markers, or devices at any place
within the corporate limits shall be prima facie evidence that the signs,
markers, or devices were erected or placed by authority of the City Council,
and in accordance with the provisions of this section.



§ 71.02  OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS.



   Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated
on any sign, marker, or device for the control or direction of traffic
erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter when so
placed or erected shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not be
construed to apply when the driver of a vehicle is otherwise directed by a
police officer or when an exception is granted to the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle under § 70.07.



('58 Code, § 16-16(a)) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  SIGNS AS PREREQUISITE TO ENFORCEMENT.



   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever any particular section in
this chapter does not state that signs are required, the section shall be
effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof.



('58 Code, § 16-16(b))



§ 71.04  SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to state
regulations. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location. All
traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions
of state law or this title shall be official traffic-control devices.



§ 71.05  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
the words, "go," "caution," or "stop," or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall
be used and the terms and light shall indicate and apply to drivers of
vehicles and pedestrians as follows.



   (A)   Green alone or "go."



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits either
turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within
the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   Yellow alone or "caution" when shown following the green or
"go" signal.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if the stop cannot be
made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
However, this provision shall not be construed as a license to a driver of a
motor vehicle approaching an intersection at an unlawful rate of speed to
proceed through the intersection.  Any driver of a motor vehicle driving the
vehicle at an unlawful rate of speed at the time of his approach to an
intersection shall forfeit all rights lawfully to enter and proceed into and
across the intersection under the "caution" signal as provided.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
until the green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a
pedestrian "walk" signal.



   (C)   Red alone or "stop."



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or
"go" is shown alone. However, if a sign is not erected prohibiting turns on
red lights, the vehicles may turn right on red lights after coming to a
complete stop. Streets on which right turns on red are prohibited are set out
in Traffic Schedule XIX.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
unless the green or "go" is shown alone or unless authorized to do so by a
pedestrian "walk" signal.



   (D)   Red with green arrow.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter
the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow but shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to
other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
until the green or "go" is shown alone unless authorized to do so by a
pedestrian "walk" signal.



   (E)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.



('58 Code, § 16-22) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever special pedestriancontrol signals exhibiting the words "walk"
or "don't walk" are in place the signals shall indicate as follows.



   (A)   "Walk." Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by
the drivers of all vehicles.



   (B)   "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the highway
in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the "walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or
safety island while the "don't walk" signal is showing.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall come to a complete stop
before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line
when marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. In no event shall the vehicle
be driven into the crosswalk unless and until the entry can be made with
safety to other persons and property at the place.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or operators of vehicles
may proceed through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.



('58 Code, § 16-23) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.08  DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, OR MARKINGS.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display on or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports
to be, is in imitation of, or resembles, an official traffic-control device,
sign, or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or
which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device, sign, or signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit on any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.



   (C)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection on
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



   (D)   Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the
highway is hereby empowered to remove it or cause it to be removed without
notice.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.09  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNS, OR
SIGNALS.



   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device,
sign, or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other
part thereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Funeral processions



   72.02   Limitations on backing



   72.03   Driving on sidewalks



   72.04   Moving parked cars from curb



   72.05   Driving on barricaded street



   72.06   Riding on motorcycles



   72.07   Controlled-access highways



   72.08   Headlights to be dimmed on lighted streets



   72.09   Following fire apparatus



   72.10   Driving over fire hose; blocking equipment



   72.11   Driving machinery over paved streets



   72.12   Driving within lanes



   72.13   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle



   72.14   Riding on certain parts of vehicle prohibited



   72.15   Riding in or on vehicle without consent



   72.16   Allowing parts of body to protrude from vehicle



   72.17   Clinging to vehicles



   72.18   Number of passengers in front seat



One-Way Streets and Alleys



   72.25   Authority to erect signs



   72.26   Movement of traffic



Speed Regulations



   72.35   General speed regulations



   72.36   Speed regulations on certain streets



   72.37   Duty of driver to decrease speed



Stop or Yield Regulations



   72.45   Through streets



   72.46   Stop intersections



   72.47   Vehicles to stop at stop signs



   72.48   Emerging from alley, driveway, or building



   72.49   Stop required when traffic obstructed



   72.50   Yield intersections



Quiet Zones; Play Streets



   72.55   Signs indicating quiet zones



   72.56   Establishment of play streets



   72.57   Unmuffled engine compression brakes



Turninq Movements



   72.65   Required position method of turning intersections



   72.66   Turning markers



   72.67   Authority to place restricted turn signs



   72.68   Obedience to no-turn signs



   72.69   Limitations on turning around



   72.70   Turning right on red signal



 



   72.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   No funeral procession containing 50 or more vehicles shall
occupy or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued
by the Chief of Police and any other regulations as are set forth herein.



   (B)   Every vehicle in a funeral procession must have its headlights
turned on for identification purposes. The procession shall travel as close
together as possible in line, using the far right lane on laned highways. The
funeral procession shall be routed along the safest direct route to the place
of burial.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break through a funeral
procession or try to enter into the procession by passing from the rear of
the procession, or otherwise interfering with the continuity of the
procession. Cautious and respectful passing of the procession is not
prohibited when two or more lanes are provided for travel in the same
direction. However, it is prohibited when there is only one lane.



   (D)   Vehicles approaching a funeral procession from the opposite
direction should cautiously and respectfully continue.



('58 Code, § 16-28) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.02  LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to back the vehicle
into any intersection or over a crosswalk and, in any event or at any place,
to back the vehicle unless the movement can be made in safety and unless the
driver shall have given ample warning, either by hand, horn, or other signal,
to those who may be behind.



('58 Code, § 16-32) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.03  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.



It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive the vehicle within
any sidewalk area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway.



('58 Code, § 16-34) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  MOVING PARKED CARS FROM CURB.



   The driver of a vehicle parked on a street, when moving the vehicle
from the curb, shall move the vehicle out from the curb in the direction in
which the vehicle is headed; or, if the vehicle is parked at an angle with
the curb, he shall back the vehicle out at that angle until he has cleared
other parked vehicles, at which time he may proceed in the desired direction.



('58 Code, § 16-42)



§ 72.05  DRIVING ON BARRICADED STREET.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle into or on any
alley or street when the street or alley has been barricaded by an employee
of the city.



('58 Code, § 13-12) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.



   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only on the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto. The operator shall not carry any other person
nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is
designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
on the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or on another
seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator.



('58 Code, §§ 16-39 and 16-40) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.07  CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAYS.



   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access
roadway except at the entrances and exits as are established by public
authority.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  HEADLIGHTS TO BE DIMMED ON LIGHTED STREETS.



   When any motor vehicle is operated on any of the lighted streets within
the city in the nighttime, the headlights on the motor vehicle shall be
operated on dim lights.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on
official business, to follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a
fire alarm closer than 500 feet, or to drive or park the vehicle within the
block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.



('58 Code, § 16-48) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.10  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE; BLOCKING EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive an engine, train, or any
motor vehicle over the fire hose or any other equipment of the city or any
other Fire Department at any time, or to block a fire fighting apparatus or
other equipment from its source of supply regardless of its distance from the
fire.



('58 Code, § 16-48) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.11  DRIVING MACHINERY OVER PAVED STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive over any hard-surfaced
asphalt-paved street, any agricultural machinery, such as harrows or like
equipment, with sharp blades, discs, or spikes that will drag on the
pavement; or any traction engine with caterpillar wheels, or any heavy piece
of machinery that will in any way damage or injure the paving.



('58 Code, § 16-15) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.12  DRIVING WITHIN LANES.



   All vehicles driving on a roadway which has been clearly marked with
traffic lanes shall be driven, as nearly as practicable, entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved out of the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.



('58 Code, § 16-47)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.13  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any motor
vehicle while the motor vehicle is in motion.



('58 Code, § 16-8) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.14  RIDING ON CERTAIN PARTS OF, VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion of a motor
vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision
shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of duty of
his employment or to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces intended
for freight or merchandise.



('58 Code, § 16-9) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.15  RIDING IN OR ON VEHICLE WITHOUT CONSENT.



   It shall be unlawful for. any person to enter, jump on, or ride on any
vehicle without the consent of the owner or driver thereof.



('58 Code, § 16-10)



§ 72.16  ALLOWING PARTS OF BODY TO PROTRUDE FROM VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person riding in a motor vehicle to allow
any part of his body to protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he
is riding, except when necessary to give signals as are required by law.



('58 Code, § 16-11) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.17  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hang on to any moving vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person riding on any bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle, to attach a bicycle,
motorcycle, coaster, sled, toy vehicle, or himself to any moving vehicle on
any roadway.



('58 Code, § 16-38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.18  NUMBER OF PASSENGERS IN FRONT SEAT.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any
motor vehicle to permit more than three persons, including the driver, to
ride in the front or driver's seat.



('58 Code, § 16-12) Penalty, see § 10.99



ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS



§ 72.25  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS.



   Whenever any ordinance designates any one-way street or alley there
shall be signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be
effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of
lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement
of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.



§ 72.26  MOVEMENT OF TRAFFIC.



   On those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described in
Traffic Schedule XX, hereby made a part hereof, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of
traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in
the opposite direction is prohibited.



('58 Code, §§ 16-26 and 16-27) Penalty, see § 10.99



SPEED REGULATIONS



§ 72.35  GENERAL SPEED REGULATIONS.



   No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
Except as otherwise provided in § 72.36, it shall be unlawful to operate a
vehicle in excess of 35 miles per hour inside the corporate limits.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.36  SPEED REGULATIONS ON CERTAINSTREETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the
speeds listed below on the streets or portions of streets of the state
highway system listed in each designated Traffic Schedule hereby made a part
hereof.



      (1)   Twenty miles per hour, Schedule I.



      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour, Schedule II.



      (3)   Thirty miles per hour, Schedule III.



      (4)   Forty miles per hour, Schedule IV.



      (5)   Forty-five miles per hour, Schedule V.



      (6)   Fifty miles per hour, Schedule VI.



      (7)   Fifty-five miles per hour, Schedule VII.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the
speeds listed below on the streets or portions of streets, not a part of the
state highway system, listed in each designated schedule, hereby made a part
hereof.



      (1)   Twenty miles per hour, Schedule VIII.



      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour, Schedule IX.



      (3)   Thirty miles per hour, Schedule X.



      (4)   Forty miles per hour, Schedule XI.



      (5)   Forty-five miles per hour, Schedule XII.



      (6)   Fifty miles per hour, Schedule XIII.



      (7)   Fifty-five miles per hour, Schedule XIV.



§ 72.37  DUTY OF DRIVER TO DECREASE SPEED.



   The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the limits set out
in the Traffic Schedules shall not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when
approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when
traveling on any narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic, or by reason of weather or
highway conditions. Speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid
colliding with any other person, vehicle, or other conveyance on or entering
the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons
to use due care.



('58 Code, § 16-43) Penalty, see § 10.99



STOP OR YIELD REGULATIONS



§ 72.45  THROUGH STREETS.



   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets described in Traffic
Schedule XXI, hereby made a part hereof, are declared to be through streets
for the purpose of this subchapter.



('58 Code, § 16-24(a))



   (B)   Whenever any ordinance designates and describes a through
street, there shall be a stop or yield right-of-way sign on each street
intersecting the through street or intersecting a portion thereof described
and designated as a through street by any ordinance, unless traffic at the
intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals. However,
at the intersection of two through streets or at the intersection of a
through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, or at the
intersection of two other streets neither of which is designated a through
street, signs shall be erected at the approaches of either of the streets.



§ 72.46  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The City Council may determine and designate intersections where
particular hazards exist on other than through streets, and may determine
whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to the stop
intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every place where a stop is
required. These places are specified in Traffic Schedule XXII, hereby made a
part hereof.



§ 72.47  VEHICLES TO STOP AT STOP SIGNS.



   When stop signs are erected as herein authorized at or near the
entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or in the event
there is no crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line. If there is
no stop line, the driver shall stop at a point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, except when directed
to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal.



('58 Code, § 16-24(b)) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.48  EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING.



   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district
emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop the vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-way to any
pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision. Upon entering the roadway,
the driver shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.



('58 Code, § 16-33) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.49  STOP REQUIRED WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.



('58 Code, § 16-25) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.50  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   Those streets and parts of streets described in Traffic Schedule XXIII
are hereby declared to be through streets for the purpose of this section.
When yield right-of-way signs are placed, erected, or installed on streets,
roads, or highways intersecting a through street at the entrance thereto, or
at the entrance of any intersection, every driver of a motor vehicle shall,
in obedience to the sign, slow down and yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
in movement on the main-traveled or through street which is approaching so as
to arrive at the intersection at approximately the same time as the vehicle
entering the through street.



('58 Code, § 16-24.1) Penalty, see § 10.99



QUIET ZONES; PLAY STREETS



§ 72.55  SIGNS INDICATING QUIET ZONES.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed or installed indicating a zone of
quiet, no person operating any vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn
or other warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency.



('58 Code, § 16-19) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.57  UNMUFFLED ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      “UNMUFFLED ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKE.” A motor vehicle brake
which is activated or worked by the compression of the engine of a motor
vehicle, and which is not effectively muffled to prevent excessive noise.



   (B)   Prohibition.



      (1)   No person shall use an engine braking system within the
corporate limits of the City of Albemarle which is in any way activated or
operated by the compression of the engine of any such motor vehicle or any
such unit or part thereof, except in cases of emergency or necessary for the
protection of persons and/or property. Such braking is commonly referred to
as compression braking or a “jake brake.”



      (2)   The City of Albemarle will identify the areas in which
engine braking is prohibited and signs shall be conspicuously posted in such
areas stating: “No engine braking” or its equivalent.



   (C)   Emergency vehicle exemption. All emergency vehicles are exempt
from this order.



(Ord. 13-42, passed 10-7-13)



§ 72.56  ESTABLISHMENT OF PLAY STREETS.



   The City Council may declare any street or part thereof a play street
and shall place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway. Whenever
authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play
street, barricades are placed, and the street is closed to all traffic; no
person shall drive a vehicle on the street or portion thereof except drivers
of vehicles having business or whose residences are within the closed area,
and then any driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving on the street
or portion thereof.



('58 Code, § 16-20) Penalty, see § 10.99



TURNING MOVEMENTS



§ 72.65  REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.



   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows.



   (A)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right
turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of
the roadway.



   (B)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of
the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing
to the right of the center line where it enters the intersection. After
entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered.
All vehicles shall pass beyond the center of the intersection before
attempting a left turn.



   (C)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways,
the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at the intersection shall
approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to
traffic moving in that direction on the roadway being entered.



('58 Code, § 16-29) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.66  TURNING MARKERS.



   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indicators are placed within
an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
indicators.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.67  AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.



   The City Council shall determine those intersections at which drivers
of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper
signs at the intersections. The making of the turns may be prohibited between
certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event it
shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when the turns
are permitted. When signs are so placed, it shall be unlawful to make a
turning movement in violation thereof at the intersections described in
Traffic Schedules XV, XVI, XVII, and XVIII, hereby incorporated herein.



('58 Code, §§ 16-30 and 16-31)



§ 72.68  OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left,
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of any sign.



('58 Code, § 16-17) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.69  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction on any street in a business district, and shall not
on any other street so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be made in
safety and without interfering with other traffic.



('58 Code, § 16-31) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.70  TURNING RIGHT ON RED SIGNAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to make a right turn while the
traffic light is emitting a red light for the traffic moving on the street in
the direction that the approaching vehicle is traveling at the street
intersections designated in Traffic Schedule XIX.



('58 Code, § 16-100) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of § 72.57 shall constitute a traffic infraction, and shall
be punished by a penalty of $250 per violation.



(Ord. 13-42, passed 10-7-13)



CHAPTER 73:  STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING



Section



Parking Regulations



   73.01   Parking within parking space



   73.02   Standing or parking close to curb



   73.03   Angle parking



   73.04   Lights on parked vehicles



   73.05   Stopping in street



   73.06   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited



   73.07   Parking parallel to curb



   73.08   Parking in alleys



   73.09   Displaying, washing, repairing, or storing vehicle



   73.10   Standing or parking on one-way roadways



   73.11   Hazardous or congested places



   73.12   Moving vehicle of another to prohibited place



   73.13   Prohibited parking at all times on certain streets



   73.14   Prohibited parking at certain times on certain streets



   73.15   Limited parking on certain streets



   73.16   Parking by handicapped persons



   73.17   Parking of oversized vehicles



   73.18   Parking vehicles with attached trailer



Loading and Unloading



   73.20   Permits for loading or unloading at angle to curb



   73.21   Loading and unloading zones



   73.22   School loading zones



   73.23   Commercial loading zones



Public Carriers



   73.30   Public carrier stops and stands



   73.31   Stopping, standing, and parking of busses and taxicabs



   73.32   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands



Administration and Enforcement



   73.40   Parking signs required



   73.41   Notice of illegal parking; duty of police



   73.42   Operator to comply with chapter; effect of proof of ownership



   73.43   Impoundment



   73.99   Penalty



PARKING REGULATIONS



§ 73.01  PARKING WITHIN PARKING SPACE.



   All vehicles shall be parked completely inside marked spaces and shall
not extend over the parking lane into the traffic lane, or extend the front
or rear of the vehicle beyond the starting or ending marks of the space into
the adjacent parking space or maneuvering space.



('58 Code, § 16-63)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 12
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



('58 Code, §§ 16-60 and 16-62)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  ANGLE PARKING.



   Upon those streets described in Traffic Schedule XXVII, which have been
marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than
at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by the signs or
markings.



('58 Code, § 16-59)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   Any lighted headlamps on a parked vehicle shall be depressed, dimmed,
or turned off.  The Displaying of lights on a vehicle, when lawfully parked
at night on a street, shall not be required when there is sufficient light to
reveal any person within a distance of 200 feet from the street.



('58 Code, § 16-69)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.05  STOPPING IN STREET.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop the vehicle
in or on any street, except for the purpose of parking as provided in this
chapter, unless the stop is made necessary by the approach of fire apparatus,
by the stopping of a public conveyance, by the reason of traffic signals, in
the exercise of the rights of turning at an intersection or upon entering an
intersection, by the passing of another vehicle, for a pedestrian, by reason
of any emergency, or by order of a police officer.



('58 Code, 16-52)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.06  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law
or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of
the following places.



      (1)   On a sidewalk.



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway.



      (3)   Within an intersection.



      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.



      (5)   On a crosswalk.



      (6)   Within 12 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection unless
signs or markings indicate a lesser distance.



      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway.



      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within
30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless signs or markings indicate a different length.



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing.  However, where permanent structures are located closer than 50
feet, parking is permitted in front of the structures unless otherwise
prohibited and if the parked vehicle will not block the view in either
direction of a locomotive or train.



      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within 75 feet of the entrance.



      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.



      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street.



      (13)   On any bridge or other elevated structure on a highway
or within a highway tunnel.



      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.



      (15)   On any part of the paved portion of any street, the
width of the paved portion of which is 18 feet or less.



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control
into any prohibited area or away from a curb the distance as is unlawful.



('58 Code, § 16-66)  (Ord. 78-6, passed 5-8-78)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.07  PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB.



   In residential areas and other areas where parking spaces are not
marked on the pavement and not designated as no parking zones, all vehicles
shall be parked parallel to the curb or the edge of the pavement and as far
to the right of the center line as possible, leaving at least 22 feet of
clear unobstructed roadway for the safe passage of other vehicles.  At no
time may a vehicle be parked directly across the street from another vehicle
unless there will be 22 feet of roadway open between the two vehicles.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.08  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic.  No person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley, in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.09  DISPLAYING, WASHING, REPAIRING, OR STORING VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a vehicle on any
street for the principal purposes of the following.



   (A)   Displaying for sale.



   (B)   Weighing, greasing, or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
made necessary by a bona-fide emergency.



   (C)   Storing by garages, dealers, or other persons when the storing
is not incident to the bona-fide use and operation of the automobile or other
vehicle.



   (D)   Storing of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit
has been disconnected.



   (E)   Transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to
another.



   (F)   Advertising.



('58 Code, § 16-64) Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.10  STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.



   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction on either roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless
signs are erected to permit the standing or parking.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.11  HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES.



   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, no
person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in the designated place.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.12  MOVING VEHICLE OF ANOTHER TO PROHIBITED PLACE.



   No person shall move a vehicle not owned or controlled by that person
into any prohibited area, or sufficiently away from a curb to make the
parking unlawful.



('58 Code, § 16-67)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.13  PROHIBITED PARKING AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time on any of the streets described in Traffic Schedule XXXI,
hereby made a part hereof.



('58 Code, § 16-53) Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.14  PROHIBITED PARKING AT CERTAIN TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person Shall park a
vehicle during prohibited times on any of the streets described in Traffic
Schedules XXXII through XXXIV-A, hereby made a part hereof.



(Ord. 90-25, passed 8-15-90) Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.15  LIMITED PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle for longer than the times specified within the district or on any of
the streets described in Traffic Schedules XXXII through XXXVII, hereby made
a part hereof.



('58 Code, §§ 16-54 through 16- 56)  (Am. Ord. 93-14, passed 4-5-93; Am.
Ord. 97-37, passed 7-7-97)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.16  PARKING BY HANDICAPPED PERSONS.



   (A)   When signs are erected giving notice of a handicapped person
parking space, all persons other than those handicapped as defined in G.S.
20-37.5 are prohibited from parking a vehicle in any parking space Monday
through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., as described in Traffic Schedule
XXXX hereby made a part hereof.



   (B)   When signs are erected giving notice of a handicapped person
parking space, all persons other than those persons handicapped as defined in
G.S. 20-37.5 are prohibited from parking a vehicle in any parking space
described in Traffic Schedule XXXIX, hereby made a part hereof.



(Ord. 83-32, passed 9-19-83; Am. Ord. 84-5, passed 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 03-03,
passed 3-17-03)



§ 73.17  PARKING OF OVERSIZED VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicles in excess of
80 inches in width or in excess of 30 feet in length, or any trailer, on the
streets within the corporate limits of the city at any time except when
engaged in loading and unloading, for emergency services or for temporary use
at construction sites during the period of active construction.



   (B)   Subsection (A) does not apply to industrial, commercial, and
business districts established under the City Zoning Ordinance during the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during the standard of time then in effect.



(Ord. 97-49, passed 9-2-97)



§ 73.18  PARKING VEHICLES WITH ATTACHED TRAILER.



   Any vehicle with an attached trailer that is in compliance with all
sections of Chapter 73 of the Code of Ordinances of the city shall be
permitted to park on the street provided the vehicle has a warning cone,
conforming to the appearance criteria of the manual on “Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways” published by the United States
Department of Transportation and any supplement to that manual adopted by the
North Carolina Department of Transportation, placed at the front corner of
the vehicle and at the rear corner of the trailer nearest the travel lane to
warn motorists of a potential danger.



(Ord. 08-04, passed 2-4-08)



LOADING AND UNLOADING



§ 73.20  PERMITS FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB.



   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue special permits to permit
the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or materials subject to the term and conditions of the permit.
The permit may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to
the owner of the vehicle, and shall grant to the person the privilege as
therein stated and authorized herein. It shall be unlawful for any permittee
or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of the
permit.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.21  LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.



    Whenever vehicle loading and unloading zones are designated and
described by this chapter, and when signs are placed, erected, or installed,
giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or
park any vehicle for any purpose or period of time except in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.22  SCHOOL LOADING ZONES.



   The streets, or parts thereof, described in Traffic Schedule XXVIII
hereby made a part hereof, are hereby designated as school loading and
unloading zones. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle therein for
any purpose other than the expeditious loading or unloading of school
passengers, and then only for a period not to exceed ten minutes.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.23 COMMERCIAL LOADING ZONES.



   The streets, or parts thereof, described in Traffic Schedule XXIX,
hereby made a part hereof, are hereby designated as commercial loading and
unloading zones. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle therein
during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays or holidays,
for any purpose other than the expeditious unloading and delivery, or pickup
and loading, of materials and goods, and then only for a period not to exceed
15 minutes.



('58 Code §§ 16-69.1 and 16-69.2)  Penalty, see § 73.99



PUBLIC CARRIERS



§ 73.30 PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS.



   Bus stands, taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common-
carrier motor vehicles, designated by appropriate signs, shall be as
specified in Traffic Schedule XXX, hereby made a part hereof.



('58 Code, § 16.57)



§ 73.31  STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING OF BUSSES AND TAXICABS.



   (A)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park the vehicle on
any street at any place other than at a bus stand so designated as provided
in Traffic Schedule XXX. The operator of a bus shall not stop the vehicle on
any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone
so designated, except in case of an emergency. The operator of a bus shall
enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in
such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or
baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of the vehicle not
farther than 12 inches from the curb, and the bus approximately parallel to
the curb, so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.



   (B)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle
on any street at any place other than a taxi stand so designated as provided
in Traffic Schedule XXX. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.32  RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when the stop has been
officially designated and appropriately signed. However, the driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the, purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when the stopping does
not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the
zone.



Penalty, see § 73.99



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 73.40  PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED.



   Whenever by this or any other chapter any parking time limit is imposed
or parking is prohibited in designated streets, there shall be appropriate
signs giving notice thereof.  No parking regulations shall be effective
unless the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.



§ 73.41  NOTICE OF ILLEGAL PARKING; DUTY OF POLICE.



   If any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or
other police officers of the city to attach to the vehicle a notice to the
owner or operator thereof, if the owner or operator is absent, or to deliver
to the owner or operator, if he is present, a notice to the effect that the
vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this chapter and
directing the owner or operator to report to the city office in regard to the
violation.



§ 73.42  OPERATOR TO COMPLY WITH CHAPTER; EFFECT OF PROOF OWNERSHIP.



   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the
vehicle at the time that the vehicle is parked shall be charged with the duty
of complying with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that proof of
ownership of any vehicle found. parked in violation of this chapter shall be
prima-facie evidence that the owner parked the vehicle.



§ 73.43  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Police officers are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from
a street or highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a
garage designated or maintained by the Police Department or otherwise
maintained by this city, under the circumstances enumerated below.



      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended on any bridge,
viaduct, or causeway, or in any other place where the vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic.



      (2)   When a vehicle on a highway is 50 disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent
as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.



      (3)   When any parked vehicle is left unattended on a street
and is parked illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic.



      Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized
in division (A) above, and the officer knows or is able to ascertain from the
registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner
thereof, the officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice to
the owner of the fact of the removal and the reasons therefor and of the
place to which the vehicle has been removed.



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned and junked motor vehicles, see Chapter 80



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   An owner or operator of a vehicle may, within 48 hours from the time
the notice referred to in § 73.41 was attached to the vehicle or delivered
to the owner or operator, pay to the city, as a civil penalty for the offense
indicated in the notice, the sum of $5; provided, that for violations of
limited parking prescribed in § 73.15, the civil penalty shall be $5. 
Failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to appear and pay the penalty
within 48 hours shall subject the owner or operator to the penalties provided
in § 10.99.



(Am. Ord. 95-38, passed 10-16-95)



CHAPTER 74:  TRUCKS; RAILROADS



Section



Trucks



   74.01   Truck routes



   74.02   Tractor-trailer units; stops



   74.03   Vehicle weights



Railroads



   74.10   Flagman required for switching operation



   74.11   Speed; obstruction of streets



TRUCKS



§ 74.01 TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   All trucks and trailers of greater capacity than one and one
half tons entering the city destined to any point outside of the city and not
taking on or discharging any goods, wares, or merchandise within the city
limits, shall travel exclusively on the routes designated as truck routes,
and over those truck routes as shall constitute the shortest and most direct
route from the point of entrance into the city and to the point of departure
from the city. The streets hereby designated as truck routes are those listed
in Traffic Schedule XXIV, made a part hereof.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall cause to be erected and
maintained at points where through truck routes enter the city and at all
junction points and turns where necessary, and at all approaches to the parts
of streets on which trucks are prohibited, signs of the dimensions and at the
locations as shall be approved by him, directing truck traffic in accordance
with this section.



('58 Code, §§ 16-49 and 16-50) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.02  TRACTOR-TRAILER UNITS; STOPS.



   All tractor-trailer units are prohibited from stopping for purposes of
loading or unloading or for any other purpose, except in order to obey
traffic signals, on the streets or portions of streets described in Traffic
Schedule XXV, hereby made a part hereof.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.03  VEHICLE WEIGHTS.



   Vehicles having a gross vehicle weight in excess of one-half ton are
prohibited from driving over or on any of the streets or parts of streets or
alleys described in Traffic Schedule XXVI, hereby made a part hereof.



('58 Code, § 16-51) Penalty, see § 10.99



RAILROADS



§ 74.10  FLAGMAN REQUIRED FOR SWITCHING OPERATION.



   All switch or shifting movements of the Yadkin Railroad or
Winston-Salem Southbound Railroad at Main Street shall be protected by the
flagman or other agent of the company.



('58 Code, 5 16-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.11 SPEED; OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS.



   No person may run an engine or train within or through the city at a
rate of speed greater than 30 miles per hour, or obstruct the passage of any
of the public street crossings more than five minutes at a time, or run an
engine through the city without a headlight.



('58 Code, § 16-14) Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 75:  PEDESTRIANS



   75.01   Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals



   75.02   Safety zones



   75.03   Pedestrians' right-of-way in crosswalk



   75.04   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk



   75.05   Prohibited crossings



   75.06   Crossing at right angles



   75.07   When pedestrian shall yield



   75.08   Walking along roadway



   75.09   Soliciting rides or business



   75.10   Drivers to exercise due care



§ 75.01  PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO, TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore
declared in §§ 71.05 and 71.06, but at all other places pedestrians shall
be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this
chapter.



§ 75.02  SAFETY ZONES.



   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish safety zones of
kind and character and at the places as he may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.



('58 Code, § 16-18)



§ 75.03  PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK.



   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in
operation, and at marked crosswalks established at locations other than
intersections and described in Traffic Schedule XXXVIII, and when appropriate
signs have been erected, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is on
the half of the roadway on which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger; but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place
of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that
it is impossible for the driver to yield. A pedestrians's right-of-way in a
crosswalk is modified under the condition and as stated in § 75.07.



   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.



('58 Code, § 16-24.2) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.04 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, on the right half of
crosswalks.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.05  PROHIBITED CROSSINGS.



   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, no pedestrian shall cross at any place other than in a crosswalk.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in the central
business district.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.06 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route
at right angles to the curb, or by the shortest route to the opposite curb
except in a crosswalk.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.07  WHEN PEDESTRIAN SHALL YIELD.



   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles on the roadway. Any pedestrian
crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles on the roadway.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.08  WALKING ALONG ROADWAY.



   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to
walk along and on an adjacent roadway. Where sidewalks are not provided, any
pedestrian walking along and on a highway shall when practicable, walk only
on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder, facing traffic which may
approach from the opposite direction.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.09  SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.



   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle. No person
shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of
soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to
be parked on a street or highway.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.10  DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver
of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
on any roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and
shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person on a roadway.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 76:  BICYCLES



Section



   76.01   Effect of regulations



   76.02   Traffic laws applicable



   76.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   76.04   Riding on bicycles



   76.05   Riding on roadways bicycle paths



   76.06   Speed



   76.07   Emerging from alley or driveway



   76.08   Carrying articles



   76.09   Parking



   76.10   Riding on sidewalks



   76.11   Lamps and other equipment



   76.12   Registration



§ 76.01  EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.



   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter. These regulations applicable to bicycles shall
apply whenever a bicycle is operated on any street or on any public path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated
in this chapter.



§ 76.02  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLICABLE.



   Every person riding a bicycle on a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of
a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by this title applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to
special regulations in this chapter, and except as to those provisions of
laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.



§ 76.03  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. Whenever authorized
signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U-turn is permitted, no
person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of the sign, except
where the person dismounts from the bicycle to make the turn, in which event
the person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.04  RIDING ON BICYCLES.



   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a bicycle, when on any
street, to carry any person on the handlebars or frame of the bicycle; and it
shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any bicycle in this manner.



('58 Code, §§ 16-39 and 16-40) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.05  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   Every person operating a bicycle on a roadway shall ride as near to the
right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. Persons
riding bicycles on a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on
paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.06  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



('58 Code, § 16-85) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.07  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall, on approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the
sidewalk or sidewalk area; and on entering the and roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.08  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand on the
handlebars.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.09  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle on a street other than on the roadway
against the curb, or on the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or
against a building, or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.10  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk within the
central business district.



   (B)   The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any
roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when the
signs are in place no person shall disobey them.



   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle on a sidewalk, that
person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible
signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.11  LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light -,visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a
type which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to
the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.



   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a
bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at
least 100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall
any person use on a bicycle, any siren or whistle.



   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.12  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a
bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power on any of the streets,
alleys, or public highways of the city without first obtaining a certificate
of registration from the Chief of Police and having attached to the bicycle a
registration number.



   (B)   The city shall provide registration seals together with
registration cards, the registration seals and registration cards to be
numbered in numerical order beginning with number one, the design and
identification lettering thereon to be approved by the Chief of Police. It
shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to attach one of the registration
seals to the frame of each bicycle and to issue the corresponding
registration card to the owner of the bicycle on the payment of the
registration fee required. The registration seal shall remain attached to the
bicycle for which it was issued during the period for which it is registered.
The Chief of Police shall keep a permanent register in which shall be entered
the name, address, and age of the owner of each registered bicycle, the date
of registration, and sufficient information to identify the bicycle.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or transfer
ownership of any bicycle without reporting to the Chief of Police within 48
hours from the time thereof, full and complete information relative to the
transfer so that the bicycle may be registered in the name of the transferee.
The purchaser or transferee of any bicycle shall apply for a transfer of
registration therefor within five days from the time the bicycle is acquired
by him.



   (D)   All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand
bicycles are hereby required to report to the Chief of Police within 48 hours
after acquiring any secondhand bicycle or parts thereof, the report to
include the registration number of the bicycle, a description of each bicycle
acquired, the frame number thereof, together with the name and address of the
person from whom it was acquired. In the case of the purchase of any part of
a bicycle, the report shall describe each part and give the name and address
of the person from whom it was acquired. All dealers in new bicycles in the
city shall report their sales to the Chief of Police on blanks furnished for
that purpose, within 48 hours thereafter, giving all the information required
herein for secondhand bicycles.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously
remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the number of any bicycle frame
registered pursuant to this section. It shall also be unlawful for any person
to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter any
registration plate or registration card is -



   (F)   Any bicycle operated by the owner or other person lawfully
having custody thereof, in violation of this section, may be impounded by the
Chief of Police for a period not exceeding 30 days.



('58 Code, §                              ) Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 77:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES




     I   Twenty mile per hour speed limit, state highway system





   II   Twenty-five mile per hour speed limit, state highway system





   III   Thirty mile per hour speed limit, state highway system





   IV   Forty mile per hour speed limit, state highway system





   V   Forty-five mile per hour speed limit, state highway system





   VI   Fifty mile per speed limit, state highway system





   VII   Fifty-five mile per hour speed limit, state highway system





   VIII   Twenty mile per hour speed limit, city streets





   IX   Twenty-five mile per hour speed limit, city streets





   X   Thirty mile per hour speed limit, city streets





   XI   Forty mile per hour speed limit, city streets





   XII   Forty-five mile per hour speed limit, city streets





   XIII   Fifty mile per hour speed limit, city streets





   XIV   Fifty-five mile per hour speed limit, city streets





   XIV-A   Naming of city streets





   XV   Left turns to be made left of center





   XVI   No left turns





   XVII   No right turn





   XVIII   No U-turns





   XIX   Right turn on red signal prohibited





   XX   One-way streets and alleys





   XXI   Through streets





   XXII   Stop intersections





   XXIII   Yield right-of-way intersections





   XXIV   Truck routes





   XXV   Tractor-trailer units prohibited





   XXVI   Vehicles with gross weight greater than one-half ton
prohibited





   XXVII   Angle parking





   XXVIII   School loading zones





   XXIX   Commercial freight loading zones





   XXX   Passenger loading zones





   XXXI   Parking prohibited at all times





   XXXII   No parking between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.





   XXXII-A   Thirty-minute parking





   XXXII-B   Weekend parking





   XXXIII   No parking between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.





   XXXIII-A   Parking prohibited between hours of 2:30 p.m. and 6:00
p.m.





   XXXIII-B   Police vehicle parking





   XXXIV   Two hour parking





   XXXIV-A   Parking between 7:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m.





   XXXV   Two hour parking between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.





   XXXVI   One hour parking between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.





   XXXVII   Fifteen minute parking





   XXXVIII   Crosswalks





   XXXIX   Handicapped parking





   XXXX   Handicapped parking - Monday through Friday between 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m.




SCHEDULE I:  TWENTY MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 20
miles per hour.



 

Street
 
Portion


East Main Street Road 1625)
 
From First (State Street (U.S. 52-73) to a point 200 feet east of Fourth
Street


North First Street (U.S. 52)
 
From Main Street (N.C. 73) to North Street


South First Street
 
From Main Street (N.C. 73) to Old (U.S. 52-73) Charlotte Road


West Main Street
 
From First (U.S. 52-N.C. 73) (N.C. 73) to Broome Street


 
 
 



 



SCHEDULE II:  TWENTY-FIVE MILES PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 25
miles per hour.



 



 
 

Time



Street
 
Portion
 
Regular School Session
 
Summer School Session


East Main Street (State Road #1597)
 
From Boggan Avenue to a point 550 feet east of Berry Avenue
 
From 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. on days East
Albemarle Elementary School is in session
 
From 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 11:30 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. on days during
summer school at East Albemarle Elementary School


Park Ridge Road (State Road #1535)
 
From a point 0.10 miles north of Second Street (S.R. 1573) to a point
approximately 0.40 miles north of S.R. 1573 (Albemarle Senior High School
Zone).
 
From 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. on days Albemarle
Senior High School is in session.
 
 


Badin Road
 
From East Main Street to the Northeast Connector (Albemarle Middle School
Zone).
 
From 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. on days Albemarle
Middle School is in session.
 
 



 



(Ord. 84-4, passed 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 84-6, passed 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 87-36,
passed 12-10-87; Am. Ord. 00-46, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 15-28, passed
10-5-15)



SCHEDULE III:  THIRTY MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 30
miles per hour.



SCHEDULE IV:  FORTY MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 40
miles per hour.



SCHEDULE V:  FORTY-FIVE MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 45
miles per hour.



 


Street

 

Portion





Aquadale Road (Highway 138)
 

From Morgan Road southwardly to the corporate limits




Badin Road (N.C. 740)

 

From N.C. 740 to the eastern corporate limit, at Mountain Creek




Concord Road (N.C. 73)

 

From the western corporate limit, at Long Creek, to a point 10 mile west of
Rock Springs Road




East Main Street (N.C. 24-27-73)

 

From the Albemarle Bypass (N.C. 740) to the eastern corporate limit at Sweet
Home Church Road (S.R. 1731)




Morgan Road

 

From NC 138 (Aquadale Road) westerly to Coble Avenue




North Carolina Highway No. 24-27 bypass

 

From Long Creek to East Main Street




North Carolina 24-27-73

 

From South First Street (U.S. 52) to East Main Street (State Road 1957)




North Carolina 24-27 Bypass

 

From the western corporate limit, approximately 0.24 miles west of S.R. 1963
to South First Street




N.C. 740 Bypass

 

From East Main Street to Badin Road




Northeast Connector (S.R. 1650)  (the section thereof lying within  the
corporate limits of the city)

 

(i)   S.R. 1650, from U.S. 52  eastward to the eastern corporate limit of
Albemarle, a point 0.04 mile east of S.R. 1535;




(ii)   S.R. 1650, from the western corporate limit of Albemarle, a point
0.04 mile west of S.R. 1542 (Ridge Road) eastward to a point 0.29 mile west
of N.C. 740, eastward to N.C. 740




U.S. Highway 52

 

U.S. 52 from a point 0.65 mile south of SR 1650 (Northeast Connector)
northward to a point 0.08 mile south of SR 1523 (Carter Road), the northern
limits of Albemarle




U.S. Highway 52 Bypass

 

From West Main Street (N.C. 73) to North First Street




West Main Street

 

From Long Creek westerly to the corporate limits










(Am. Ord. 83-20, passed 7-5-83; Am. Ord. 84-2, passed 2-20-84; Am. Ord.
88-11, passed 4-4-88; Am. Ord. 88-31, passed 11-21-88; Am. Ord. 90-8, passed
4-18-90; Am. Ord. 94-31, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 98-33, passed 7-20-98; Am.
Ord. 99-52, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 02-39, passed 9-3-02; Am. Ord. 04-03,
passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 04-08, passed 7-14-04)



SCHEDULE VI: FIFTY MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 50
miles per hour.



SCHEDULE VII: FIFTY-FIVE MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 55
miles per hour.



SCHEDULE VIII:  TWENTY MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, CITY STREETS.



   The speed limit on the following city streets is 20 miles per hour.



 


Street

 

Portion




Aquadale Road

 

From South Second Street to Henning Drive




North Second Street

 

From Main Street to North Street




South Second Street

 

From Main Street to South Street




King Avenue

 

From South Second to South First Street




Penny Street

 

Between North Second Street and Shankle Street









(Am. Ord. 86-20, passed 9-2-86; Am. Ord. 98-13, passed 3-16-98)



SCHEDULE IX:  TWENTY-FIVE MILE PER HOUR SPEEDLIMIT, CITY STREETS.



   The speed limit on the following city streets is 25 miles per hour.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Time






Anderson Ridge Drive

 

All portions located in Anderson Ridge Subdivision

 

All times




Anesbury Court

 

All portions locate in Grandview Subdivision

 

All times




Arey Avenue

 

From Pee Dee Avenue south to the end thereof

 

All times




Badin Road

 

From East Main Street to Northeast Connector

 

Regular school session from 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:15
p.m. on days Albemarle Middle School or East Albemarle Elementary School is
in session




Summer school session - from 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 11:30 a.m. to
12:15 p.m. on days during summer school at Albemarle Middle School or East
Albemarle Elementary School




Bell Avenue

 

From Amherst Street to Inger Street

 

All times




Buckboard Lane

 

All portions located in Anderson Ridge Subdivision

 

All times




Carolina Street

 

From Corbin Street to Salisbury Avenue

 

Regular school session - from 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to
3:15 p.m. on days North Albemarle Elementary School is in session




Summer school session - from 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 11:30 a.m. to
12:15 p.m. on days during summer school at North Albemarle Elementary School




Coventry Drive

 

All portions locate in Grandview Subdivision

 

All times




Davis Street

 

From East South Street, southwardly for 551

 

From 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m. on the days
Stanly  County Head Start is in session




Douglas Court

 

All portions located in Anderson Ridge Subdivision

 

All times




Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive

 

From Heath Street to Colston Street

 

All times




Foster Lane

 

All portions located in Anderson Ridge Subdivision

 

All times




Greenwood Park Circle

 

Entire length

 

All times




Grigg Street

 

From Bell Avenue to Inger Street

 

All times




Homestead Lane

 

All portions located in Anderson Ridge Subdivision

 

All times




Inger Street

 

From Leonard Avenue eastwardly to the cul-de-sac

 

All times




Lexington Drive

 

All portions locate in Grandview Subdivision

 

All times




North Second Street

 

Between North Street and C.B. Crook Drive (formerly Glenn Street)

 

All times




Smokehouse Lane

 

All portions located in Anderson Ridge Subdivision

 

All times




Standford Drive

 

All portions located in Anderson Ridge Subdivision

 

All times




Stonehaven Drive

 

All portions locate in Grandview Subdivision

 

All times




Third Street

 

From North Street to Montgomery Avenue

 

From 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. on days when
Central Elementary or Albemarle Middle School is in session




Wilshire Drive

 

All portions locate in Grandview Subdivision

 

All times




Yorkshire Drive

 

All portions locate in Grandview Subdivision

 

All times










(Am. Ord. 87-35, passed 12-10-87; Am. Ord. 88-15, passed 6-6-88; Am. Ord.
92-3, passed 2-3-92; Am. Ord. 93-1, passed 2-1-93; Am. Ord. 96-24, passed
9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-39, passed 7-7-97; Am. Ord. 03-26, passed 8-4-03; Am.
Ord. 11-16, passed 6-20-11; Am. Ord. 11-22, passed 7-5-11; Am. Ord. 14-18,
passed 5-19-14; Am. Ord. 16-38, passed 10-17-16)



SCHEDULE X: THIRTY MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, CITY STREETS.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 30
miles per hour.



 

Street Name
 
Portion


Smith Street
 
From Montgomery Avenue to Pineview Street



 



SCHEDULE XI: FORTY MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, CITY STREETS.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 40
miles per hour.



SCHEDULE XII: FORTY-FIVE MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, CITY STREETS.



   The speed limit on the following city streets is 45 miles per hour.



 

Street
 
Portion


Snuggs Park Road
 
From Snuggs Street to 1,000 feet south of Crestview Drive


U.S. Highway 52 Bypass
 
From N.C. 24-27 to N.C. 73 (West Main Street)



 



(Am. Ord. 85-21, passed 8-5-85; Am. Ord. 12-25, passed 8-6-12)



SCHEDULE XIII: FIFTY MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, CITY STREETS.



   The speed limit on the following state highway system streets is 50
miles per hour.



SCHEDULE XIV - A:  NAMING OF STREETS.



   The following streets shall be named or renamed the following.



 


Street Name

 

Location





Adelaide Street
 
East from Center Street to South Cotton Avenue.


Alfred Street
 
West from Colston Street to dead end.


Almond Street
 
North from Boyd Street to dead end and south from Boyd Street to dead end.


Amanda Drive
 
East from Mountain Creek Road to cul-de-sac.


Amhurst Street
 
East from Coggins Avenue to Morningside Avenue.


Anderson Grove Church Road
 
North from East Main Street to Badin Road.


Anderson Ridge Drive
 
East from Anderson Grove Church Road to a dead end.


Anderson Road
 
South from East Main Street in a semi-circle to East Main Street.


Apex Drive
 
North from Concord Road to city limit.


Apple Lane
 
Northwesterly from Lee-lynn Drive to dead end.


Aquadale Road
 
South from South Second Street to Henning Drive and south from N.C. 24-27
Bypass to the city limit.


Arbor Way
 
North from Brenda Drive to cul-de-sac and south from Brenda Drive to
cul-de-sac.


Arey Avenue
 
South from Pee Dee Avenue to dead end.


Arlington Avenue
 
North from Coble Avenue to Old Charlotte Road.


Armfield Avenue
 
East from Center Street to South Cotton Avenue.


Ash Street
 
North from U.S. 52 North to Snuggs Street.


Atom Drive
 
South from Sandy Lane to Moss Springs Road.


Austin Street
 
North from West Main Street to Carolina Avenue.


Auten Avenue
 
East from Hamilton Avenue to McCurdy Avenue.


Avondale Avenue
 
East from North Fifth Street to Smith Street.


Azalea Drive
 
East from North Seventh Street to North Ninth Street and west from North
Ninth to North Seventh (both sides of Azalea Park).


Azure Avenue
 
Northward to the cul-de-sac


Badin Road
 
Northeast from East Main Street to city limit.


Bailey Street
 
East from Arey Avenue to Coggins Avenue.


Barbee Lane
 
North from Kingsley Drive to Lowder Street.


Barnard Road
 
North from East Main Street to Hilco Street.


Beale Street
 
East from Arey Avenue to dead end.


North Bell Avenue
 
North from East Main Street to dead end.


South Bell Avenue
 
South from East Main Street to Inger Street.


Bellamy Circle
 
North from Lafayette Drive.


Belmont Circle
 
West from North Depot Street in semi-circle to North Depot Street.


Belvedere Drive
 
North from Avondale Avenue to Calhoun Street.


Berry Avenue
 
North from East Main Street to 500 feet north of Badin Road.


Bethany Road
 
West from U.S. 52 North to city limits.


Biltmore Street
 
North from Snuggs Street to dead end.


Bird Road
 
South from N.C. 24-27 Bypass East to Woodhurst Lane.


Blake Road
 
North from Concord Road (N.C. 73) and continuing west to MacArthur Road.


Blanche Street
 
South from Gray Street to dead end, and north from Gray Street to Northeast
Connector.


Bluff Street
 
West from Concord Road to Third Avenue.


Bogan Avenue
 
North from Amhurst Street to East Main Street.


Bost Street
 
East from Concord Road to North Broome Street.


Boyd Street
 
East from U.S. 52 North to Almond Street.


Boyette Drive
 
East from South Second Street to dead end.


Brenda Drive
 
East from Woodcrest Lane to Arbor Way.


Brevard Drive
 
North from Marlbrook Drive in a semi-circle to Marlbrook Drive.


Brittany Court
 
South from Amanda Drive to cul-de-sac.


Brookmeade Drive
 
South from Bethany Road to Emerald Lane.


Brooks Street
 
North from Old Charlotte Road to West South Street.


Brookwood Avenue
 
North from Cedar Avenue to dead end.


North Broome Street
 
North from West Main Street to cul-de-sac.


South Broome Street
 
North from Old Charlotte Road to West Main Street.


Brown Avenue
 
East from North Fifth Street to Ninth Street.


Brunson Drive
 
East from Calhoun Street to the dead end, and west from Calhoun Street to
dead end.


Buckboard Lane
 
West from Smokehouse Lane to Smokehouse Lane on the west for a distance of
540 linear feet.


Bullock Drive
 
West and north from U.S. 52 North to dead end.


Bunn Street
 
North from Freeman Avenue to Montgomery Avenue.


Burleson Street
 
South from West Main Street to dead end, north from Judy Street to dead end,
and south from Judy Street to Green Acres Drive.


Butler Street
 
North from West Main Street to Edgewood Drive.


C.B. Crook Drive
(formerly Glenn Street)
 
West from North Second Street to dead end west of North Depot Street.


Cagle Street
 
North from Bethany Road to Lisk Street.


Calhoun Street
 
North from Belvedere Drive to Brunson Drive.


Callaway Street
 
North from Russell Road to dead end.


Cameron Drive
 
North from N.C. 24-27 Bypass West to Hazelwood Drive.


East Cannon Avenue
 
East from North Third Street to North Ninth Street; west from Smith Street to
a dead and; east from Smith Street to Moss Springs Road; east from Moss
Springs Road to dead end.


Canterbury Road
 
South from Ellenwood Drive to a dead end west of Ross Drive.


Cardinal Drive
 
West from Ridge Street to Smith Street.


Carolina Avenue
 
North from U.S. 52 North to Salisbury Avenue.


Carolyn Drive
 
West from Moss Springs Road to cul-de-sac.


Carpenter Avenue
 
East from South Second Street to South Fourth Street.


Carter Drive
 
South from Knollwood Circle to dead end.


Catalina Drive
 
Northwest from Badin Road to Monza Drive.


Cedar Avenue
 
West from West Main Street to Brookwood Avenue.


South Center Street
 
North from Thomas Street to dead end, and south from Thomas Street to
Spaulding Street.


Centerview Church Road
 
East from U.S. 52 North to city limits.


Central Avenue
 
North from the N.C. 24-27 Bypass West to Liberty Avenue.


Charter Street
 
North from East Main Street and east to Anderson Grove Church Road.


Chimneys Lane
 
From Moss Springs Road to Chimneys Apartment complex property.


Cherry Street
 
North from Lowder Street to Sunset Avenue.


Cherrywood Lane
 
North from Anderson Road to Woodhurst Lane.


Chestnut Avenue
 
West from North Second Street to North Depot Street.


Church Street
 
North from West Main Street to Efird Street.


Circle Drive
 
West from U.S. 52 North in a semi-circle to U.S. 52 North.


Cleveland Avenue
 
North from Kingsley Drive to Lowder Street.


Clover Fork Circle
 
North from Holt Road in a semi-circle to Prospect Church Road.


Club House Road
 
North from Concord Road to city limits.


Coble Avenue
 
South from West Main Street to end of right-of-way.


Coggins Avenue
 
South from East Main Street to dead end.


College Drive
 
North from West Main Street to Stanly Community College.


Collins Drive
 
North from Brenda Drive to Bethany Road.


Colonial Drive
 
East from Melchor Road to Pineview Street and east from Ridge Street to
Heritage Drive.


Colston Street
 
North from Spaulding Street to East South Street.


Columbus Street
 
North from Greenwood Street to Elm Street.


Commerce Street
 
Southeastwardly from NC 24-27 to Coble Avenue extension.


Concord Road (N.C. 73)
 
Northwest from West Main Street to city limits.


Continental Drive
 
South from Northeast Connector to dead end.


Coventry Drive
 
Westerly 710 linear feet from Anderson Road.


Corbin Street
 
East from Pennington Road to Hill Street, and east from Long Street to
cul-de-sac.


Corvette Street
 
West from Impala Drive to Fleetwood Drive.


North Cotton Avenue
 
North from East Main Street to Pee Dee Avenue.


South Cotton Avenue
 
South from East Main Street to dead end.


Coy Street
 
East from Palmer Street to Coble Avenue.


Crestview Drive
 
Northeast from Snuggs Park Road to dead end.


Crestview Lane
 
North from Crestview Drive to Valleyview Drive.


Cross Street
 
South from East South Street to Glendale Avenue.


Crowell Avenue
 
South from East Main Street to dead end.


Crown Point Drive
 
West from Memory Lane to dead end.


Davis Street
 
North from Summit Avenue to East South Street.


North Depot Street
 
North from West Main Street to Salisbury Avenue.


South Depot Street
 
South from West Main Street to West South Street.


Dick Street
 
North from Eastwood Park Circle to dead end.


Dogwood Lane
 
North from Anderson Road to Woodhurst Lane.


Douglas Court
 
From Smokehouse Lane to the end of cul-de-sac for a distance of 100 linear
feet.


Driftwood Lane
 
East from Impala Drive to dead end.


Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive
 
East from South Fourth Street to Colston Street.


Dunlap Street
 
West from South Morrow Street to end of right-of-way.


East Street
 
East from North Second Street to North Tenth Street.


Eastside Avenue
 
East from Moss Springs Road to dead end.


Eastwood Park Circle
 
North from Badin Road to Dick Street.


Eastwood Drive
 
Northwest from Badin Road to dead end.


Eben Street
 
East from Aquadale Road to dead end.


Edgemont Street
 
East from Salisbury Avenue to dead end.


Edgewood Drive
 
West from Memory Lane to dead end.


Efird Street
 
East from Concord Road (N.C. 73) to U.S. 52 North.


Elaine Drive
 
East from Mountain Creek Road in a semi-circle to Mountain Creek Road.


Elizabeth Avenue
 
East from Heath Street to dead end.


Ellenwood Court
 
West from Ross Drive to cul-de-sac.


Ellenwood Drive
 
East from Ross Drive to dead end.


Ellis Street
 
West from U.S. 52 North to Idlewood Drive.


Elm Street
 
East from Monroe Street to Columbus Street.


Elmer Street
 
East from Pond Street to Dick Street.


Elmwood Avenue
 
North from Gurley Street to Parker Street.


Emerald Lane
 
East from Tanglewood Drive to Collins.


Englewood Avenue
 
East from South Second Street to South Third Street.


Fairfield Court
 
East from Anderson Grove Church Road to the cul-de-sac.


Fairview Street
 
East from Ash Street to dead end.


Fairway Street
 
North from East Main Street to Freeman Avenue.


Fernwood Drive
 
East from Cameron Drive to Sherman Drive.


First Avenue
 
North from Lowder Street to Concord Road.


Flake Street
 
North from Thomas Street to Summit Avenue.


Fleetwood Drive
 
West from Moss Springs Road to dead end.


Flintshire Drive
 
North from Mascot Drive to dead end.


Floral Drive
 
North from Holt Road to Clover Fork Circle.


Forest Avenue
 
North from Cedar Avenue to White Oak Avenue.


Foster Lane
 
West from Smokehouse Lane to Smokehouse Lane on the west for a distance of
530 linear feet.


Fostoria Drive
 
South from Noritake Trail to cul-de-sac.


Fox Run Drive
 
East from Ridge Street to dead end.


Franklin Street
 
East from North Depot Street to North Second Street.


Freedom Drive
 
South from West Main Street to Burleson Street.


Freeman Avenue
 
East from Ridge Street to Fairway Street.


Fulton Street
 
North from Webb Street to North Second Street.


Furr Street
 
West from Rogers Street to Austin Street.


Garfield Avenue
 
North from Kingsley Drive to Lowder Street.


Garrison Drive
 
East from intersection of North Sixth Street and Park Road to Park Road.


Gary Avenue
 
North from Seymore Avenue to dead end.


Gibson Street
 
East from Wall Street to Arey Avenue.


Glendale Avenue
 
East from Cross Street to Lincoln Street.


Goodman Drive
 
North from Knollwood Circle to Knollwood Circle.


Gorham Drive
 
South from Waterford Way to cul-de-sac.


Graham Street
 
East from Salisbury Avenue to Watts Street.


Grant Street
 
South from East Main Street to Elizabeth Avenue.


Gray Street
 
East from U.S. 52 North to Blanche Avenue.


Green Street
 
East from South Fourth Street to South Fifth Street.


Greenwood Park Circle
 
North from Prospect Church Road.


Greenwood Street
 
East from Pennington Road to Carolina Avenue.


Grigg Street
 
North from Inger Street to South Bell Avenue.


Groves Avenue
 
South from East Main Street to Lincolnton Street.


Gurley Street
 
East from Highland Avenue to Stoker Terrace.


Hamilton Avenue
 
North from North Second Street to dead end.


Harris Street
 
North from West Main Street to West North Street.


Harvard Drive
 
West from Arbor Way to cul-de-sac.


Harwood Street
 
South from West Main Street to Old Charlotte Road.


Hastings Drive
 
East from Ross Drive to city limits.


Hathcock Avenue
 
Northeast from Arlington Avenue to Williams Avenue.


Hawthorn Avenue
 
East from North Second Street to Melchor Road.


Hazelwood Drive
 
East from Cameron Drive to Sherman Drive.


Hearne Street
 
East from South Second Street to South Fourth Street.


Heath Street
 
South from East Main Street to East South Street.


Heathwood Drive
 
South from Palmetto Drive to the dead end.


Hemlock Drive
 
South from Crestview Drive to dead end.


Henning Drive
 
North and South from N.C.24-27 Bypass West to Aquadale Road.


Henry Jay Street
 
East from Arey Ave to dead end.


Henson Street
 
South from Groves Avenue to city limit.


Heritage Drive
 
South from Ridge Street to Colonial Drive.


Heritage Court
 
East from Heritage Drive to the cul-de-sac.


Hermitage Drive
 
South from N.C. 24-27 Bypass West to Wesley Heights Drive.


Hickory Avenue
 
West from West Main Street to Brookwood Avenue.


High Street
 
East from Salisbury Avenue to Highland Avenue.


Highland Avenue
 
North from Snuggs Street to High Street.


Hilco Street
 
East from N.C. 740 Bypass to Barnard Road.


Hill Street
 
North from Efird Street to Wood Street, and north from Wood Street to Corbin
Street; north from Greenwood Street to Elm Street.


Hillcrest Avenue
 
West from Freedom Drive to dead end.


Hillside Lane
 
South from Armfield Avenue to Elizabeth Avenue.


Hilltop Street
 
North from Snuggs Street to Morton Street.


Holbrook Court
 
North from Lafayette Drive to the cul-de-sac.


Holly Avenue
 
West from West Main Street to Brookwood Avenue.


Hollywood Terrace
 
North from Edgemont Street to dead end.


Holt Road
 
East from U.S. 52 North to Clover Fork Circle.


Homestead Lane
 
Eastwardly from Smokehouse Lane to a second intersection with Smokehouse Lane.


Honeysuckle Lane
 
East from North Eleventh Street to Smith Street.


Hyman Drive
 
North from Lafayette Drive to the cul-de-sac.


Idlewood Drive
 
South from Bethany Road to dead end.


Impala Drive
 
North from Badin Road (N.C. 740) to Moss Springs Road.


Imperial Way
 
North from Canton Road to cul-de-sac.


Inger Street
 
East from Leonard Avenue to the cul-de-sac.


Ingram Street
 
North from Morgan Road to Reeves Avenue.


Jackson Street
 
South from Short Street to Old Charlotte Road.


James Street
 
North from Spring Street to end of right-of-way.


Jedor Lane
 
West from Ross Drive to dead end.


Jefferies Street
 
North from N.C. 24-27 Bypass West to end of right-of-way.


Jefferson Avenue
 
North from Kingsley Drive to Lowder Street.


Johnson Street
 
South from Gray Street to dead end, and north from Gray Street to Northeast
Connector.


Judy Street
 
West from Burleson Street then south crossing N.C. 24-27 Bypass West then
east to Long Creek Drive.


Kemp Road
 
North from Mountain Creek Road to the city limits.


King Avenue
 
West from South Second Street to South First Street.


Kingsley Drive
 
Southwest from West Main Street to Poplin Grove Church Road.


Knollwood Circle
 
East from U.S. 52 North in a semi-circle to U.S. 52 North.


Knollwood Lane
 
East from Knollwood Circle to dead end.


Lafayette Drive
 
West from Ridge Street to cul-de-sac.


Lakeview Road
 
North from Woodhurst Lane to Wooderoft Lane.


Landis Street
 
South from Carolyn Drive to East Cannon Avenue.


Larkhaven Lane
 
East from Melchor Road to Northridge Drive.


Laton Road
 
North From Badin Road to city limits.


Laura's Lane
 
North from East McGill Street to Cardinal Drive.


Laurel Street
 
North from Concord Road (N.C. 73) to Wiscassett Street.


Lay Street
 
East from Stonewall Street to Palmer Street.


Lee Street
 
South from Summit Avenue to dead end.


Lee-lynn Drive
 
Southeast from Ridge Street to Springhaven Circle.


Lefler Street
 
North from Parker Street to McKee Street.


Lennox Street
 
East from Arey Avenue to Leonard Avenue.


Leonard Avenue
 
Southward from East Main Street to the dead end of N.C. 24/27.


Leslie Street
 
West from Salisbury Avenue (First Street Station entrance) to dead end.


Lexington Drive
 
Westerly 715 linear feet from the cul-de-sac.


Liberty Avenue
 
West from Coble Avenue to Saunders Lane.


Lilly Street
 
North from Badin Road to dead end.


Lincoln Street
 
South from Elizabeth Avenue to dead end.


Lincolnton Street
 
North from Groves Avenue to dead end, and south from Groves Avenue to dead
end.


Linwood Drive
 
East from North Sixth Street in a semi-circle to North Sixth Street.


Lisk Street
 
East from Cagle Street to dead end, and west from Cagle Street to dead end.


Logan Lane
 
East from MacArthur Road to the end of the street for a distance of 486
linear feet.


Lois Lane
 
North from Snuggs Street to dead end.


Long Street
 
North from Efird Street to Corbin Street, and north from Greenwood Street to
Elm Street.


Long Creek Drive
 
South from N.C. 24-27 Bypass West to Judy Street.


Louise Lane
 
South from Amanda Way.


Love Street
 
North from West Main Street to Greenwood Street.


Lowder Road
 
West from U.S. 52 North to city limits.


Lowder Street
 
East from Garfield Avenue to North Broome Street.


Ludlow Street
 
West from North Second Street to North Depot Street.


Lundix Street
 
East from Wall Street to dead end.


Lynway Drive
 
East from U.S. 52 North to Rotary Drive.


Mabry Drive
 
North from Kingsley Drive to dead end.


MacArthur Road
 
North from Concord Road to dead end.


East Main Street
 
East from North Second Street to city limits.


West Main Street
 
West from North Second Street to city limits.


Magnolia Street
 
West from Moss Springs Road to dead end.


Maple Avenue
 
West from West Main Street to Brookwood Avenue.


Marbranch Court
 
West from Ross Drive to the cul-de-sac.


Marlbrook Drive
 
West from Aquadale Road to dead end.


Marshall Street
 
South from West Oakwood Avenue to the cul-de-sac.


Marwood Lane
 
West from Anderson Road to Lakeview Road.


Mascot Drive
 
East from Melchor Road to North Eleventh Street.


East Mason Street
 
East from U.S. 52 North to dead end.


West Mason Street
 
East from Salisbury Avenue to the cul-de-sac.


May Street
 
East from Stonewall Street to Palmer Street.


Maywood Lane
 
South from Ellis Street to dead end.


McAlister Street
 
North from Morgan Road to Reeves Avenue.


McCurdy Avenue
 
North from North Second Street to North Sixth Street.


East McGill Street
 
East from Smith Street to Ridge Street.


McGill Street
 
East from North Third Street to North Fourth Street; east from North Fifth
Street to North Seventh Street; east from North Ninth Street to North Tenth
Street.


McKee Street
 
East from Salisbury Avenue to Lefler Street.


McLaughlin Street
 
East from Wall Street to Colston Street.


Meadow Street
 
East from Palmer Street to Harwood Street.


Meadowrock Drive
 
Northeast from Snuggs Park Road to Collins Drive.


Melchor Road
 
North from Avondale Avenue to Park Ridge Road.


Memory Lane
 
North from West Main Street to Edgewood Drive.


Midwood Drive
 
East from N.C. 740 Bypass to Heathwood Drive.


Mill Street
 
East from Concord Road (N.C. 73) to North Broome Street.


Miller Street
 
Northwest from East Main Street to Pee Dee Avenue.


Milton Drive
 
East from Eastwood Drive to dead end.


Mockingbird Road
 
Southeast from Mountain Creek Road to dead end.


Monroe Street
 
North from Efird Street to West Oakwood Avenue and north from Corbin Street
to Elm Street.


Montgomery Avenue
 
East from North Second Street to Snotherly Street.


Monticello Drive
 
South from N.C. 24-27 Bypass West to Wesley Heights Drive.


Monza Drive
 
West from Impala Drive to dead end.


Moose Street
 
East from Ash Street to dead end.


Morgan Road
 
West from Aquadale Road to Coble Avenue.


Morningside Avenue
 
South from East Main Street to dead end.


North Morrow Avenue
 
North from East Main Street to Pee Dee Avenue.


South Morrow Avenue
 
South from East Main Street to Gibson Street.


Morton Street
 
West from U.S. 52 North to Hilltop Street.


Moss Springs Road
 
North from East Main Street to Speight Road.


Mount Vernon Drive
 
South from N.C. 24-27 Bypass West to Wesley Heights Drive.


Mountain Creek Road
 
North from Park Ridge Road to city limits.


Mountain Place
 
South from Plantation Way to dead end.


Muirfield Drive
 
East and west from cul-de-sac to cul-de-sac.


Murdock Lane
 
West from Mountain Creek Road to Prospect Church Road.


N.C. 24-27 Bypass East
 
East from South Second Street to East Main Street.


N.C. 24-27 Bypass West
 
West from South Second Street to the city limits.


N.C. 740 Bypass
 
Northeast from East Main Street to Badin Road.


New Castle Court
 
North from Concord Road (N.C. Highway 73) to the cul-de-sac.


Noritake Trail
 
Northwest from Imperial Way to cul-de-sac.


Normandy Street
 
West from Poplin Grove Church Road to Royal Avenue.


East North Street
 
East from North Second Street to North Fifth Street.


West North Street
 
West from North Second Street to Harris Street.


Northbrook Drive
 
North from Avondale Avenue to Hawthorn Avenue.


Northcrest Drive
 
North from Colonial Drive to Larkhaven Lane.


Northeast Connector
 
Southeastwardly from U.S. Highway 52 to N.C. Highway 740.


Northridge Drive
 
South from Park Ridge Road to the cul-de-sac.


Oak Street
 
North from U.S. 52 North to dead end.


Oaklawn Court
 
East from Royal Avenue to cul-de-sac, and west from Royal Avenue to
cul-de-sac.


East Oakwood Avenue
 
East from North Fifth Street to North Ninth Street.


West Oakwood Avenue
 
West from U.S. 52 North to dead end.


Old Charlotte Road
 
West from South Second Street to West Main Street.


Old Parker Road
 
North from Concord Road to city limits.


Olivia Drive
 
East from Arey Avenue to dead end.


Overbrook Drive
 
West from Collins Drive to dead end.


Palmer Street
 
South from West Main Street to Old Charlotte Road.


Palmetto Drive
 
East from N.C. 740 Bypass to Heathwood Drive.


East Park Avenue
 
East from South Second Street to South Fifth Street.


West Park Avenue
 
Southwest from Stonewall Street to dead end.


Park Lane
 
North from Cannon Avenue to Azalea Drive.


Park Road
 
Southeast from Park Ridge Road to North Sixth Street.


Park Ridge Road
 
East from North Second Street to Ridge Street.


Parker Street
 
East from Salisbury Avenue to Stoker Terrace.


Parkway Drive
 
South from Badin Road to East Main Street.


Parkwest Drive
 
West 1,540 linear feet from Poplin Grove Church Road.


Patton Avenue
 
West from MacArthur Road to Old Parker Road.


Peachtree Street
 
North from Freeman Avenue to East Cannon Avenue.


Pearl Street
 
North from Elizabeth Avenue to Ruby Street.


Pecan Avenue
 
North from Knollwood Circle to dead end.


Pee Dee Avenue
 
East from North Fourth Street to East Main Street.


Pennington Road
 
Northwest from Wiscassett Street to city limits.


Penny Street
 
Northwest from North Second Street to Shankle Street.


Pickler Street
 
West from Concord Road to dead end.


Pine Street
 
East from Pennington Road to Columbus Street.


Pineview Street
 
North from Colonial Drive to Park Ridge Road.


Plantation Way
 
East from Vickers Store Road to cul-de-sac.


Platinum Drive
 
Northward to the cul-de-sac.


Pond Street
 
North from Eastwood Park Circle to dead end.


Poplar Street
 
West from Rogers Street to Laurel Street.


Poplin Grove Church Road
 
North from West Main Street to city limits.


Post Road
 
West from Anderson Road to end of right-of-way.


Pou Street
 
East from Arey Avenue to Coggins Avenue.


Prestwick Place
 
North from Park Ridge Road to the cul-de-sac.


Prospect Church Road
 
East from U.S. 52 North to city limits.


Railroad Street
 
North from Old Charlotte Road to West Main Street.


Raymond Street
 
East from Burleson Street to Freedom Drive.


Reagan Court
 
West from Ridge Street to cul-de-sac.


Rebel Road
 
West from Northeast Connector to cul-de-sac.


Reeves Avenue
 
West from Aquadale Road to dead end.


Reid Street
 
North from Pine Street to dead end.


Richard Street
 
East from Pond Street to Dick Street.


Richardson Street
 
North from Summit Avenue to East South Street.


Ridge Street
 
North from Pee Dee Avenue to city limits.


Riley Street
 
North from Snuggs Street to Russell Road.


Rock Creek Drive
 
West from U.S. 52 South to Rock Creek Park.


Rock Spring Road
 
North from Concord Road (N.C. 73) to Wiscassett Street.


Rogers Street
 
North from Efird Street to Carolina Avenue.


Ross Drive
 
East from South Hill Avenue to city limits.


Rotary Drive
 
South from Northeast Connector to dead end.


Royal Avenue
 
South from Normandy Street to cul-de-sac, and north from Normandy Street to
Oaklawn Court.


Ruby Road
 
Northward to the end of the pavement.


Ruby Street
 
East from Grant Street to Center Street.


Rush Street
 
East from Colston Street to South Morrow Avenue.


Russell Road
 
West from U.S. 52 North to Riley Street.


St. Martin Road
 
South from West Main Street to city limits.


Salisbury Avenue
 
West from North Second Street to the city limits.


Sandy Lane
 
West from Gary Avenue to Atom Drive.


Sapphire Road
 
From Parkwest Drive northward to the end of the pavement.


Saunders Lane
 
South from Old Charlotte Road to Liberty Avenue.


Second Avenue
 
North from Lowder Street to Bluff Street.


Seventh Avenue
 
North from Kingsley Drive to Lowder Street.


Seymore Avenue
 
East from Atom Drive to Gary Avenue.


Shady Drive
 
East from Mountain Creek Road to Wildwood Drive.


Shankle Street
 
North from North Second Street to Penny Street.


Sharon Road
 
North from Avondale Avenue to Hawthorn Avenue.


Shepherd Road
 
West from U.S. 52 North to dead end.


Sherman Drive
 
North from N.C. 24-27 Bypass West to Hazelwood Drive.


Sherwood Avenue
 
Northeast from Columbus Street to Salisbury Avenue.


Short Street
 
East from West Main Street to Stonewall Street.


Sibley Street
 
Southwest from South First Street to dead end.


Sides Street
 
North from Gibson Street to Rush Street.


Sidney Street
 
East from Arey Avenue to dead end.


Silvers Lane
 
North 500 feet and south 200 feet from Murdock Lane to the ends.


Slack Street
 
North from West Main Street to Edgewood Drive.


Smokehouse Lane
 
North from the end of the pavement in a semi-circle to the end of the
pavement for a distance of 2,040 linear feet.


Smokehouse Lane
 
North from Anderson Ridge Drive circulating eastwardly and southerly to a
second intersection with Anderson Ridge Drive.


South Slack Street
 
Northwest from Freedom Drive to Hillcrest Avenue.


Smith Street
 
North from Montgomery Avenue to Pineview Street.


Snotherly Street
 
North from Freeman Avenue to Montgomery Avenue.


Snuggs Street
 
West from U.S. 52 North to Salisbury Avenue.


Snuggs Park Road
 
Northwest from Snuggs Street to Bethany Road.


East South Street
 
East from South Second Street to South Fourth Street.


West South Street
 
West from South Second Street to Railroad Street.


South Hill Avenue
 
East from U.S. 52 South to Ross Drive.


Spaulding Street
 
Southwest from N.C. 24-27 Bypass East to Colston Street and from Wall Street
to Center Street.


Speight Road
 
Northeast from Badin Road to Laton Road.


Spiral Drive
 
East from Club House Road to Apex Drive.


Spring Street
 
East from North Fifth Street to North Sixth Street.


Springhaven Circle
 
South from Lee-lynn Drive to Sandy Lane.


Spruce Street
 
North from Salisbury Avenue to Edgemont Street.


Sprucewood Street
 
East from Anderson Road to Cherrywood Lane.


Stafford Drive
 
Extending northeasterly 245 feet from the point of intersection of the
centerline of Arbor Way.


Staley Street
 
North from East Main Street to dead end.


Stanford Drive
 
East from Anderson Grove Church Road (SR 1537) to Smokehouse Lane for a
distance of 280 linear feet.


Stanly Street
 
North from West Main Street to Edgewood Drive.


Sterling Drive
 
South from Woodhurst Lane to dead end.


Stoker Terrace
 
Northwest from Snuggs Street to McKee Street.


Stonehaven Drive
 
Southward 1,350 linear feet from Coventry Drive.


Stonewall Street
 
South from West Main Street to dead end.


Summit Avenue
 
East from South Second Street to Wall Street.


Sunset Avenue
 
East from Third Avenue to Concord Road.


Sunview Drive
 
West from Anderson Grove Church Road in a semi-circle to Anderson Grove
Church Road.


Sweet Home Church Road
 
North from East Main Street to the city limits.


Sylvania Avenue
 
East from Northbrook Drive to Melchor Road.


T.E. White, Sr. Drive
 
South from East Main Street to Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive.


Talbert Road
 
East from Mountain Creek Road to Northeast Connector.


Tanglewood Drive
 
South from Bethany Road to Overbrook Drive.


Third Avenue
 
North from Lowder Street to Bluff Street.


Thomas Street
 
West from Wall Street to Flake Street.


Turnberry Court
 
Eastwardly from Prestwick Place to cul-de-sac.


U.S. 52 North
 
North from West Main Street to city limits.


U.S. 52 South
 
South from West Main Street to the N.C. 24-27 Bypass West.


Valleyview Drive
 
Northeast from Snuggs Park Road to Collins Drive.


Vickers Lane
 
West from Laton Road to dead end.


Waddell Drive
 
South from Lundix Street to Spaulding Street.


Wall Street
 
South from East South Street to N.C. 24-27 Bypass East.


Walnut Street
 
West from Long Street to dead end.


Washington Lane
 
South from Lundix Street to Spaulding Street.


Waterford Lane
 
West from Imperial Lane to cul-de-sac.


Watts Street
 
East from Salisbury Avenue to Graham Street.


Waverly Street
 
South from Knollwood Circle to Knollwood Circle.


Webb Street
 
East from Fulton Street to North Fifth Street.


Wendover Avenue
 
West from Moss Springs Road to dead end.


Wesley Heights Drive
 
East from Monticello Drive to Mount Vernon Drive.


West Drive
 
South from Eastover Avenue to Inger Street.


White Oak Avenue
 
West from West Main Street to Forest Avenue.


Wildwood Drive
 
East from Mountain Creek Road and south to dead end.


Williams Avenue
 
Northwest from Coble Avenue to Old Charlotte Road.


Wilson Street
 
East from North Depot Street to North Second Street.


Wiscassett Street
 
East from Rock Spring Road to the cul-de-sac.


Wolfe Avenue
 
Northwest from Park Ridge Road to McCurdy Avenue.


Wood Street
 
East from Laurel Street to Rogers Street.


Woodcrest Lane
 
South and East from Crestview Drive to Hemlock Drive.


Woodcroft Lane
 
West from Anderson Road to Lakeview Road.


Woodhaven Drive
 
East from NC 740 Bypass to the dead end.


Woodhurst Lane
 
West from Anderson Road to Henson Street.


Woodland Street
 
East from Harwood Street to South Broome Street.


Yadkin Street
 
East from North Second Street to North Tenth Street then from North Eleventh
Street East to Ridge Street.


Yorkshire Drive
 
Westerly 167 linear feet from the cul-de-sac.


North First Street
 
North from West Main Street to U.S. 52 N.


South First Street
 
South from West Main Street to South Second Street.


North Second Street
 
North from West Main Street to U.S. 52 North.


South Second Street
 
South from West Main Street to the city limits.


North Third Street
 
West from East Main Street to Yadkin Street.


South Third Street
 
South from East Main Street to East Park Avenue.


North Fourth Street
 
North from East Main Street to Yadkin Street.


South Fourth Street
 
South from East Main Street to South Fifth Street.


North Fifth Street
 
North from Pee Dee Avenue to Hawthorn Avenue.


South Fifth Street
 
South from East Main Street to East South Street then from East Park Avenue
to South Second Street.


North Sixth Street
 
North from East Main Street to Montgomery Avenue and north from McGill Street
to McCurdy Avenue.


North Seventh Street
 
North from East Main Street to East Oakwood Avenue and north from McGill
Street to East Street.


North Eighth Street
 
North from Pee Dee Avenue to Brown Avenue and north from Azalea Drive to East
Street and north from Yadkin Street to Avondale Avenue.


North Ninth Street
 
North from Pee Dee Avenue to Yadkin Street.


North Tenth Street
 
North from Pee Dee Avenue to East Street and north from Yadkin Street to
Avondale Avenue.


North Eleventh Street
 
North from Honeysuckle Lane to dead end.




 



(Ord. 99-53, passed 9-20-99; Am. Ord. 00-38, passed 11-6-00; Am. Ord. 01-12,
passed 3-5-01; Am. Ord. 03-27, passed 8-18-03; Am. Ord. 04-24, passed
6-21-04; Am. Ord. 04-53, passed 11-25-04; Am. Ord. 05-46, passed 11-21-05;
Am. Ord. 08-22, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed 4-20-09; Am. Ord.
09-22, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 11-01, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 11-27, passed
9-6-11; Am. Ord. 16-38, passed 10-17-16)



SCHEDULE XIV: FIFTY-FIVE MILE PER HOUR SPEED LIMIT, CITY STREETS.



   The speed limit on the follow city streets is 55 miles per hour.



SCHEDULE XV: LEFT TURNS TO BE MADE LEFT OF CENTER.



   Left turns shall be made to the left of center at the following
intersections.



 


Street

 

Portion




King Avenue

 

At the first intersection with South First Street









SCHEDULE XVI:  NO LEFT TURNS.



   Left turns are prohibited at the following intersections.



[Reserved]



SCHEDULE XVII:  NO RIGHT TURNS.



   Right turns are prohibited at the following intersections.



SCHEDULE XVIII:  NO U-TURNS.



   U-turns are prohibited at all intersections except



   Intersection



SCHEDULE XIX:  RIGHT TURN ON RED SIGNAL PROHIBITED.



   (A)   A right turn on a red signal is prohibited at the following
intersections.



 


Approach Street 

 

Intersecting Street 

 

Approach Direction
of Flow

 

Direction on Intersecting Street



West Main Street
 
First Street
 
Eastbound
 
Southbound








   (B)   A right turn on a red signal is also prohibited at the
following intersections.



 


Intersection

 

Direction




East Main Street, Fourth Street, and Pee Dee Avenue

 

Any




Main Street and Second Street

 

Any









(Am. Ord. 87-24, passed 8-31-97; Am. Ord. 97-07, passed 3-3-97; Am. Ord. 00-
40, passed 10-16-00; Am. Ord. 03-31, passed 10-6-03)



SCHEDULE XX:  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   (A)   The following streets, or parts thereof, are designated as
one-way streets.



 

Street
 
Portion
 
Time Limit
 
Direction


Austin Street
 
From Carolina Avenue Corbin Street
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday during school sessions
 
Westwardly and Southwardly


King Street
 
From Second Street to South First Street
 
Always
 
Westwardly


North Third Street
 
From North Street to Montgomery Avenue
 
Between 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday when school in session
 
Northwardly


North Fourth Street
 
From Montgomery Avenue to North Street
 
Between 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and between 2:00 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. Monday
through Friday when school in session
 
Southwardly


Parkway Drive
 
Badin Road to East Main Street
 
Between 7:45 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between 1:45 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. Monday
through Friday during school sessions
 
Southeasterly


South Fifth Street
 
From Green Street to East Main street
 
Always
 
Northerly








   (B)   The following alleys, or parts thereof, are designated as
one-way alleys.



 


Alley

 

Portion

 

Time Limit

 

Direction




The public alley on Second street immediately north of the public square at
the intersection of Main Street and Second Street

 

Between the Hill Building property and the Hearne property

 

Always

 

West





 




(Am. Ord. 90-26, passed 8-15-90; Am. Ord. 91-2, passed 1-22-91; Am. Ord.
02-43, 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 03-32, passed 10-6-03; Am. Ord. 08-36, passed
10-6-08)



SCHEDULE XXI:  THROUGH STREETS



   The following streets, or portions thereof, are designated as through
streets.  Every driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way
before entering the intersections of these specified streets.



 


Street

 

Description






Amanda Way

 

At the following:





 

Brittany Court





 

Louise Lane





 





Amhurst Street

 

At the following:





 

Bell Avenue





 

Bogan Avenue





 

Crowell Avenue





 

West Drive





 





Anderson Grove Church Road

 

At the following:





 

    Anderson Ridge Drive





 

Fairfield Court





 

Stanford Drive





 

Sunview Drive





 





Anderson Ridge Drive

 

At the following:





 

    Smokehouse Lane





 





Anderson Road

 

At the following:





 

Coventry Drive





 

Woodhurst Lane





 

Sprucewood Street





 

Cherrywood Lane





 

Dogwood Lane





 

Marwood Lane





 

Woodcroft Lane





 





Apex Drive

 

At the following:





 

Spiral Drive





 





Aquadale Road

 

At the following:





 

Eben Street





 

Henning Drive





 

Marlbrook Drive





 





Arbor Way

 

At the following:





 

Brenda Drive





 

Woodcrest Lane





 

Harvard Drive





 

    Stafford Drive





 





Arey Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Amhurst Street





 

Bailey Street





 

Beale Street





 

Eastover Avenue





 

Gibson Street





 

Lennox Street





 

Lundix Street





 

Pou Street





 





Arlington Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Hathcock Avenue





 

Liberty Avenue





 





Armfield Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Hillside Lane





 





Ash Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where it intersects with Salisbury Avenue and Snuggs Street





 





Atom Drive

 

At the following:





 

Seymore Avenue





 





Austin Street

 

At the following:





 

Bost Street





 

Corbin Street





 

Furr Street





 

Mill Street





 

Poplar Street





 

West Dakwood Avenue





 

Wood Street





 





Avondale Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Belvedere Drive





 

Eighth Street





 

Eleventh Street





 

Melchor Road





 

North Eleventh Street





 

Northbrook Drive





 

Sharon Road





 





Azalea Drive

 

At the following:





 

Eight Street





 

Park Lane





 






 


Street

 

Description






Badin Road

 

At the following:





 

Anderson Grove Church Road





 

Berry Avenue





 

Catalina Drive





 

Eastwood Drive





 

Impala Drive





 

Laton Road





 

Lilly Street





 

Parkway Road





 

Speights Road





 





Bell Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Eastover Avenue





 

Grigg Street





 





Bethany Road

 

At the following:





 

Brookmeade Drive





 

Cagle Street





 

Idlewood Drive





 

Snuggs Park Road





 

Tanglewood Drive





 





Bluff Street

 

At the following:





 

Second Avenue





 





Bogan Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Eastover Avenue





 





Bost Street

 

At the following:





 

Love Street





 





Brookwood Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Holly Avenue





 





Brown Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Eighth Street





 

James Street





 





Brunson Drive

 

At the following:





 

Calhoun Street





 





Burleson Street

 

At the following:





 

Freedom Drive





 

Judy Street





 

Raymond Street




Canton Road

 

At the following:





 

Imperial Way





 





Cardinal Drive

 

At the following:





 

Laura's Lane





 





Carolina Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Austin Street





 

Corbin Street





 

Efird Street





 

Greenwood Street





 

Rogers Street





 

West Oakwood Avenue





 

Wiscassett Street





 





Carolyn Drive

 

At the following:





 

Landis Street





 





Catalina Drive

 

At the following:





 

Milton Drive





 





Cedar Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Forest Avenue





 





Centerview Church Road

 

At the following:





 

Blanche Avenue





 

Johnson Drive





 

Mountain Creek Road





 

Rotary Drive





 





Cherrywood Lane

 

At the following:





 

Sprucewood Street





 





Church Street

 

At the following:





 

Lowder Street





 





Clover Fork Circle

 

At the following:





 

Holt Road





 





Coble Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Arlington Avenue





 

Coy Street





 

Liberty Avenue





 

Meadow Street





 

Williams Avenue





 





Coble Avenue Extension

 

At the following:





 

Commerce Street





 





Coggins Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Amhurst Street





 

Bailey Street





 

Eastover Avenue





 

Lennox Street





 

Pou Street





 





Collins Drive

 

At the following:





 

Crestview Drive





 

Meadowrock Drive





 

Overbrook Drive





 

Valleyview Drive





 





Colonial Drive

 

At the following:





 

Northcrest Street





 





Colston Street

 

At the following:





 

Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Drive





 

McLaughlin Street





 





Columbus Street

 

At the following:





 

Pine Street





 

Sherwood Drive





 





Concord Road (N.C. 73)

 

At the following:





 

Apex Drive





 

Blake Road





 

Bluff Street





 

Bost Street





 

Church Street





 

Efird Street





 

First Avenue





 

Lakeshore Drive





 

Laurel Street





 

Lowder Street





 

MacArthur Road





 

Mill Street





 

New Castle Court





 

Old Parker Road





 

Picler Street





 

Rock Springs Road





 

Sunset Avenue





 





Corbin Street

 

At the following:





 

Love Street





 

Monroe Street





 





Cotton Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Adelaide Street





 

Armfield Avenue





 





Coventry Drive

 

At the following:





 

Stonehaven Drive





 





Crestview Drive

 

At the following:





 

Crestview Lane





 

Woodcrest Lane





 





Crestview Lane

 

At the following:





 

Meadowrock Drive





 





Crown Point Drive

 

At the following:





 

Butler Street





 

Slack Street





 

Stanly Street




Depot Street

 

At the following:





 

Franklin Street





 

Except the following:





 

Where the traffic is controlled by traffic Signals





 

Traffic entering Salisbury Avenue shall stop and give the right-of-way





 

Traffic entering West South Street shall stop and give right-of-way





 





Dick Street

 

At the following:





 

Elmer Street





 

Richard Street





 





Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Drive

 

At the following:





 

Center Street





 

Cross Street





 

Davis Street





 

Heath Street





 

Lincoln Street





 

Richardson Street





 

South Fourth Street





 





Dunlap Street

 

At the following:





 

Rush Street





 





East Street

 

At the following:





 

Eighth Street





 

Fulton Street





 

Seventh Street





 





East Cannon Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Landis Street





 

Park Lane





 

Peachtree Street





 





East Oakwood Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Seventh Street





 





Eastwood Park Circle

 

At Pond Street traffic shall stop and yield the right of way





 





Edgemont Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where it intersects with Salisbury Avenue and Ash Street





 





Edgewood Drive

 

At the following:





 

Butler Street





 

Slack Street





 

Stanly Street





 





Efird Street

 

At the following:





 

Broome Street





 

Church Street





 

Hill Street





 

Long Street





 

Monroe Street





 

Rogers Street





 





Eleventh Street

 

At the following:





 

Mascot Drive





 

Yadkin Street





 





Elizabeth Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Grant Street





 

Hillside Lane





 

Pearl Street





 





Elm Street

 

At the following:





 

Columbus Street





 

Hill Street





 

Long Street




Fifth Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 

Traffic entering East Main Street shall stop and give right-of-way





 

Traffic entering Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Drive shall stop and give
right-of-way





 

Traffic entering Hawthorne Avenue shall stop and give right-of-way





 

Traffic entering Pee Dee Avenue shall stop and give right-of-way





 

Traffic entering South Second Street shall stop and give right-of-way





 





First Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





Fleetwood Drive

 

At the following:





 

Corvette Drive





 





Forest Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Maple Avenue





 





Fourth Street

 

Except the following:





 

At Park Avenue, traffic entering South Fifth Street shall stop and give
right-of-way





 

At Summit Avenue





 





Freedom Drive

 

At the following:





 

Hillcrest Avenue





 

South Slack Street





 





Freeman Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Bunn Street





 

Peachtree Street





 

Southerly Street





 





Gary Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Sandy Lane





 





Gibson Street

 

At the following:





 

Colston Street





 

Sides Street





 

South Morrow Avenue





 





Gorham Drive

 

At the following:





 

Waterford Lane





 





Grant Street

 

At the following:





 

Ruby Street





 





Gray Street

 

At the following:





 

Almond Street





 

Johnson Street





 





Greenwood Street

 

At the following:





 

Columbus Street





 

Hill Street





 

Long Street





 

Love Street





 

Monroe Street





 





Groves Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Henson Street





 





Gurley Street

 

At the following:





 

Elmwood Avenue





 





Hamilton Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Auten Street





 





Harwood Street

 

At the following:





 

Meadow Street





 

Woodland Street




Hawthorn Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Belvedere Drive





 

North Fifth Street





 

Northbrook Drive





 

Sharon Road





 





Heath Street

 

At the following:





 

Elizabeth Avenue





 





Heathwood Drive

 

At the following:





 

Midwood Drive





 

Palmetto Drive





 





Hemlock Drive

 

At the following:





 

Brenda Drive





 





Henning Drive

 

At the following:





 

Eben Street





 





Henson Street

 

At the following





 

Woodhurst Lane





 





Heritage Drive

 

At the following:





 

Heritage Court





 





Hickory Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Brookwood Avenue





 

Forest Avenue





 





Highland Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Gurley Street





 





Hill Street

 

At the following:





 

Poplar Street





 





Hillcrest Avenue

 

At the following:





 

South Slack Street





 





Holly Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Forest Avenue





 





Holt Road

 

At the following:





 

Clover Fork Circle





 





Idlewood Drive

 

At the following:





 

Ellis Street





 





Impala Drive

 

At the following:





 

Corvette Drive





 

Driftwood Lane





 

Milton Drive





 





Imperial Way

 

At the following:





 

Noritake Trail





 

Waterford Lane





 





Inger Street

 

At the following:





 

Bell Avenue





 

Grigg Street





 

West Drive





 





Kingsley Drive

 

At the following:





 

Cleveland Avenue





 

Fourth Avenue





 

Garfield Avenue





 

Jefferson Avenue





 

Nields Street Seventh Avenue





 





Knollwood Circle

 

At the following:





 

Carter Drive





 

Goodman Drive





 

Pecan Avenue





 

Waverly Street





 





Knollwood Circle

 

At the following:




(traffic proceeding northwardly)

 

Knollwood Lane





 





Lafayette Drive

 

At the following:





 

Bellamy Circle





 

Holbrook Court





 

Hyman Drive





 





Lakeshore Drive

 

At the following:





 

Spiral Drive





 





Lakeview Road

 

At the following:





 

Marwood Lane





 





Larkhaven Lane

 

At the following:





 

Northcrest Street





 





Laton Road

 

At the following:





 

Speights Road





 

Vickers Lane





 





Laurel Street

 

At the following:





 

Poplar Street





 

Walnut Street





 





Lee-lynn Road

 

At the following:





 

Apple Lane





 





Leonard Avenue

 

Except the following:





 

Where it intersects with





 

Amhurst St.





 

East Main St.





 

Eastover Avenue





 

Inger St.





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





Liberty Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Central Avenue





 





Lincoln Street

 

At the following:





 

Glendale Avenue





 





Long Street

 

At the following:





 

Poplar Street





 

Walnut Street




Love Street

 

At the following:





 

Bost Street





 

Poplar Street





 





Lowder Street

 

At the following:





 

Cherry Street





 

First Avenue





 

Love Street





 

Second Avenue





 

Third Avenue





 





Lundix Street

 

At the following:





 

Colston Street





 

Waddell Drive





 

Washington Lane





 





Main Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





MacArthur Road

 

At the following:





 

Blake Road





 

Logan Lane





 

Patton Avenue





 





Marlbrook Drive

 

At the following:





 

Brevard Drive





 





Mascot Drive

 

At the following:





 

Flintshire Drive





 





McCurdy Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Auten Street





 

North Sixth Street





 

Wolfe Street




McGill Street

 

At the following:





 

Seventh Street





 

Sixth Street





 

Tenth Street





 





Melchor Road

 

At the following:





 

Colonial Drive





 

Hawthorne Avenue





 

Larkhaven Lane





 

Mascot Drive





 

Sylvania Avenue





 





Memory Lane

 

At the following:





 

Crown Point Drive





 





Mill Street

 

At the following:





 

Love Street





 





Monroe Street

 

At the following:





 

Elm Street





 

Poplar Street





 

Walnut Street





 

Wood Street





 





Montgomery Avenue

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 

Traffic entering Moss Springs Road shall stop and give right-of-way





 





Monza Drive

 

At the following:





 

Catalina Drive





 

Dick Street





 





Morgan Road

 

At the following:





 

Ingram Street





 

McAlister Street





 





Morningside Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Amhurst Street





 





Moss Springs Road

 

At the following:





 

Carolyn Drive





 

Chimneys Lane





 

East Cannon Avenue





 

Eastside Avenue





 

Freeman Avenue





 

Montgomery Avenue





 

Wendover Street





 





Mountain Creek Road

 

At the following:





 

Amanda Way





 

Elaine Drive





 

Mockingbird Road





 

Murdock Lane





 

Prospect Church Road





 

Shady Drive





 

Talbert Road





 

Wildwood Drive





 





Murdock Lane

 

At the following:





 

Silvers Lane




N.C. Highway 24-47

 

At the following:





 

Commerce Street





 





N.C. Highway 24-47 Bypass

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





N.C. Highway 740

 

At the following:





 

Northeast Connector





 





N.C. 740 Bypass

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





Ninth Street

 

At the following:





 

Azalea Drive





 

Brown Avenue





 

East Street





 

East Cannon Street





 

East Oakwood Avenue





 

McGill Street





 





Noritake Trail

 

At the following:





 

Fostoria Place





 





North Depot Street

 

At the following:





 

West North Street





 





North Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





North Broome Street

 

At the following:





 

Bost Street





 

Lowder Street





 

Mill Street





 





North Sixth Street

 

At the following:





 

Garrison Drive





 





Northbrook Drive

 

At the following:





 

Sylvania Avenue





 





Northeast Connector

 

At the following:





 

Blanche Street





 

Johnson Street





 

Lee Lynn Drive





 

Moss Springs Road





 

Mountain Creek Road





 

N.C. Highway 740





 

Rebel Road





 

Ridge Street





 

Rotary Drive





 





Northridge Drive

 

At the following:





 

Larkhaven Lane





 





Oaklawn Court

 

At the following:





 

Royal Avenue




Old Charlotte Road

 

At the following:





 

Arlington Avenue





 

Brooks Street





 

Coble Avenue





 

Harwood Street





 

Huckable Street





 

Jackson Street





 

Palmer Street





 

Railroad Street





 

Saunders Lane





 

South Broome Street





 

William Avenue





 

Willow Street





 





Old Parker Road

 

At the following:





 

Patton Avenue





 





Overbrook Drive

 

At the following:





 

Tanglewood Drive





 





Palmer Street

 

At the following:





 

Coy Street





 

Lay Street





 

May Street





 

Meadow Street





 





Park Road

 

At the following:





 

Garrison Drive





 





Park Ridge Road

 

At the following:





 

Melchor Road





 

Mountain Creek Road





 

North Sixth Street





 

Northridge Drive





 

Park Road





 

Pineview Street





 

Prestwick Place





 

Wolfe Avenue





 





Park Street

 

At the following:





 

S.R. No. 1536 (Old Pennington Ferry Road)





 





Parker Street

 

At the following:





 

Elmwood Avenue





 

Lefler Street





 





Parkwest Drive

 

At the following:





 

Azure Drive





 

Platinum Drive





 

Sapphire Road





 





Pee Dee Avenue

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





Pennington Road

 

At the following:





 

Corbin Street





 

Greenwood Street





 

Pine Street





 

West Oakwood Avenue





 





Pine Street

 

At the following:





 

Hill Street





 

Long Street





 

Monroe Street





 

Reid Street





 





Pineview Street

 

At the following:





 

Smith Street





 





Plantation Way

 

At the following:





 

Mountain Place




Pond Street

 

At the following:





 

Eastwood Drive





 

Elmer Street





 

Richard Street





 





Poplin Grove Church Road

 

At the following:





 

Normandy Street





 

Parkwest Drive





 





Prestwick Place

 

At the following:





 

Muirfield Drive





 

Turnberry Court





 





Prospect Church Road

 

At the following:





 

Clover Fork Circle





 

Greenwood Park Circle





 

Murdock Lane





 





Reeves Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Ingram Street





 

McAlister Street





 





Ridge Street

 

At the following:





 

Cardinal Street





 

East Cannon Avenue





 

East McGill Street





 

Fox Run Drive





 

Freeman Avenue





 

Heritage Drive





 

Lafayette Drive





 

Lee-lynn Drive





 

Montgomery Avenue





 

Park Ridge Road





 

Reagan Court





 

Rebel Road





 

Talbert Road





 

Yadkin Street





 

Riley Street





 





Rogers Street

 

At the following:





 

Furr Street





 

Poplar Street





 

Wood Street





 





Ross Drive

 

At the following:





 

Ellenwood Court





 

Ellenwood Drive





 

Hastings Drive





 

Jedor Lane





 

Marbranch Court





 





Royal Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Normandy Street





 





Ruby Street

 

At the following:





 

Pearl Street





 





Rush Street

 

At the following:





 

Sides Street




Salisbury Avenue

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





Second Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by Traffic signals





 





Seventh Street

 

At the following:





 

Azalea Drive





 

Brown Avenue





 





Shepherd Road

 

At the following:





 

Calloway Street





 





Sherman Drive

 

At the following:





 

Fernwood Drive





 





Silvers Lane

 

At the following:





 

Westerly segment of Silvers  Lane





 





Silvers Lane (section running north and south)

 

At the following:





 

Silvers Lane (section running east and west)





 





Sixth Street

 

At the following:





 

Brown Avenue





 

Hawthorn Avenue





 

North intersections of Garrison Drive and Linwood Drive





 

South intersections of Linwood Drive Park Road





 

Spring Street





 





Smith Street

 

At the following:





 

Avondale Avenue





 

Cardinal Drive





 

Colonial Drive





 

East Cannon Avenue





 

Honeysuckle Lane





 

McGill Street





 

Yadkin Street





 





Smokehouse Lane

 

At the following:





 

Buckboard Lane





 

Douglas Court





 

Foster Lane





 

    Homestead Lane





 

Stanford Court





 





Snuggs Street

 

At the following:





 

Ash Street





 

Biltmore Street





 

Highland Avenue





 

Hilltop Street





 

Riley Street





 

Snuggs Park Road





 

Stoker Terrace





 





Snuggs Park Road

 

At the following:





 

Crestview Drive





 

Meadowrock Drive





 

Valleyview Drive





 





South Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where the traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 





South Broome Street

 

At the following:





 

Woodland Street





 





South Fourth Street

 

At the following:





 

Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive





 

East South Street





 

East Park Avenue





 





South Morrow Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Dunlap Street





 

Rush Street





 





South Third Street

 

At the following:





 

East South Street




Spaulding Street

 

At the following:





 

Waddell Drive





 

Washington Lane





 





Speights Road

 

At the following:





 

Moss Springs Road





 





Spring Street

 

At the following:





 

James Street





 





Springhaven Circle

 

At the following:





 

Lee-lynn Drive





 





Spruce Street

 

Except the following:





 

Where it intersects with Salisbury Avenue and Edgemont Street





 





Stoker Terrace

 

At the following:





 

Gurley Street





 

Parker Street





 





Stonehaven Drive

 

At the following:





 

Lexington Drive





 

Yorkshire Drive





 





Stonewall Street

 

At the following:





 

Lay Street





 

May Street





 

Short Street





 

West Park Avenue





 





Summit Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Davis Street





 

Flake Street





 

Lee Street





 

Richardson Street





 





Sunset Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Cherry Street





 

First Avenue





 

Second Avenue





 





T.E. White, Sr. Drive

 

At the following:





 

    Adelaide Street





 

    Armfield Avenue





 

    Elizabeth Avenue





 

    Ruby Street





 





Tanglewood Drive

 

At the following:





 

Emerald Lane





 





Tenth Street

 

At the following:





 

Avondale Avenue





 

East Street





 





Third Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Sunset Avenue





 

Except the following:





 

Where traffic is controlled by traffic signals





 

Traffic entering East Park Avenue shall stop and give right-of-way





 

Traffic entering North Second Street shall stop and give right-of-way





 





Thomas Street

 

At the following:





 

Center Street





 





Valleyview Drive

 

At the following:





 

Crestview Lane





 





Vicker’s Store Road

 

At the following:





 

Plantation Way





 





Wall Street

 

At the following:





 

Center Street





 

Gibson Street





 

Lundix Street





 

McLaughlin Street





 

Thomas Street





 





Watts Street

 

At the following:





 

Mason Street





 





West Oakwood Avenue

 

At the following:





 

Carolina Avenue





 

Corbin Street





 

Hill Street





 

Long Street





 

Love Street





 





Wesley Heights Drive

 

At the following:





 

Hermitage Drive




Williams Street

 

At the following:





 

Hathcock Avenue





 

Liberty Avenue





 





Wiscassett Street

 

At the following:





 

Hill Street





 

Laurel Street





 

Long Street





 

Love Street





 

Monroe Street





 

Pennington Road





 





Wood Street

 

At the following:





 

Hill Street





 

Laurel Street





 

Long Street





 

Love Street





 





Woodcrest Lane

 

At the following:





 

Brenda Drive





 





Woodhaven Drive

 

At the following:





 

Heathwood Drive





 





Woodhurst Lane

 

At the following:





 

Dogwood Lane





 

Cherrywood Lane





 

Lakeview Drive





 





Yadkin Street

 

Except the following:





 

Eighth Street





 

Fourth Street





 

Laura's Lane





 

Montgomery Avenue





 

Tenth Street





 

Third Street





 











(Am. Ord. 83-35, passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 85-32, passed 12-23-85; Am. Ord.
88- 16, passed 6-20-88; Am. Ord. 89-33, passed 12-4-89; Am. Ord. 97-06,
passed 3-3-97; Am. Ord. 98-10, passed 2-16-98; Am. Ord. 98-11, passed
3-16-98; Am. Ord. 99-07, passed 3-1-99; Am. Ord. 99-19, passed 4-19-99; Am.
Ord. 99-67, passed 1-4-00; Am. Ord. 00-02, passed 1-18-00; Am. Ord. 00-08,
passed 2-21-00; Am. Ord. 00-39, passed 12-4-00; Am. Ord. 01-11, passed
3-5-01; Am. Ord. 03-28, passed 8-18-03; Am. Ord. 03-30, passed 10-6-03; Am.
Ord. 04-19, passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 04-25, passed 6-2-04; Am. Ord. 04-54,
passed 11-25-04; Am. Ord. 05-37, passed 10-3-05; Am. Ord. 05-48, passed
11-21-05; Am. Ord. 08-26, passed 7-7-08; Am. Ord. 09-12, passed 4-20-09; Am.
Ord. 09-21, passed 6-15-09)



SCHEDULE XXII:  STOP INTERSECTIONS



   The following are intersections at which a stop is required before
entering. When two or more vehicles traveling on different streets stop at
the intersection at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on
the left shall yield the right-of-way to the driver of the vehicle on the
right.



 


Intersection

 

Description





Amhurst Street and Groves Avenue
 
Traffic traveling on Amhurst Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Groves Avenue and traffic traveling on Groves Avenue
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Amhurst Street.


Anderson Road and Woodhurst Lane at the westernmost intersection thereof
 
Traffic traveling on Anderson Road shall stop before entering and crossing
the westernmost intersection with Woodhurst Lane; and traffic traveling on
Woodhurst Lane shall stop before entering and crossing the westernmost
intersection with Anderson Road.


Arbor Way and Harvard Drive
 
Traffic traveling on Arbor Way shall stop before entering and crossing the
intersection with Harvard Drive shall stop before entering and crossing the
intersection with Arbor Way.


Austin Street and Lowder Street
 
Traffic traveling on Austin Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Lowder Street; and the traffic traveling on Lowder
Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Austin
Street.


Austin Street and Wiscassett Street
 
Traffic traveling on Austin Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Wiscassett Street; and the traffic traveling on
Wiscassett Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection
with Austin Street.


Austin Street and Wood Street
 
Traffic traveling on Austin Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Wood Street; and the traffic traveling on Wood Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Austin Street.


Brenda Drive and Collins Drive
 
Traffic traveling on Brenda Drive shall stop before entering and crossing the
intersection with Collins Drive; and traffic traveling on Collins Drive shall
stop before entering and crossing the intersection of Brenda Drive.


Church Street and Mill Street
 
Traffic traveling on Church Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Mill Street; and traffic traveling on Mill Street shall
stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Church Street.


Colonial Drive and Smith Street
 
Traffic traveling on Colonial Drive shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Smith Street; and traffic traveling on Smith Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Colonial Drive.


Colston Street and Lundix Street
 
Traffic traveling on Colston Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Lundix Street; and traffic traveling on Lundix Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Colston Street.


Efird Street and Austin Street
 
Traffic traveling on Efird Street shall stop before entering and crossing the
intersection with Austin Streets and traffic traveling on Austin Street shall
stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Efird Street.


Efird Street and Love Street
 
Traffic traveling on Efird Street shall stop before entering and crossing the
intersection with Love Street; and traffic traveling on Love Street shall
stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Efird Street.


Groves Avenue and Amhurst Street
 
Traffic traveling on Groves Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Amhurst Street; and traffic traveling on Amhurst Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Groves Avenue.


Groves Avenue and Henson Street
 
Traffic traveling on Groves Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Henson Street; and traffic traveling on Henson Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Groves Avenue.


Henning Drive and Eben Street
 
Traffic traveling on Henning Drive shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Eben Street; and traffic traveling on Eben Street shall
stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Henning Drive.


Hill Street and Walnut Street
 
Traffic traveling on Will Street shall stop before entering and crossing the
intersection with Walnut street; and traffic traveling on Walnut Street shall
stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Hill Street.


Laurel Street/Pennington Road Wiscassett Street
 
Traffic traveling on Laurel Street/Pennington Road shall stop before entering
and crossing the intersection with Wiscassett Street or Pennington Road, and
traffic traveling on Wiscassett Street or Pennington Road shall stop before
entering and crossing the intersection of Laurel Street/Pennington Road.


Leonard Avenue and Amhurst Street
 
Traffic traveling on Leonard Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Amhurst Street and traffic traveling on Amhurst Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Leonard Avenue.


Leonard Avenue and Eastover Avenue
 
Traffic traveling on Leonard Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
intersection with Eastover Avenue; and traffic traveling on Eastover Avenue
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Leonard Avenue.


Leonard Avenue and Inger Street
 
Traffic traveling on Leonard Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Inger Street: and traffic traveling on Inger Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Leonard Avenue.


Love Street and Mill Street
 
Traffic traveling on Love Street shall stop before entering and crossing the
intersection with Mill Street and every driver of a vehicle traveling on Mill
Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Love
Street.


Lowder Street and Church Street
 
Traffic traveling on Lowder Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Church Street; and the traffic traveling on Church
Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Lowder
Street.


Monroe Street and Wood Street
 
Traffic traveling on Monroe Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Wood Street; and traffic traveling on Wood Street shall
stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Monroe Street.


Montgomery Avenue and North Third Street, North Fourth Street, North Fifth
Street, and North Ninth Street
 
Traffic traveling on Montgomery Avenue shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersections with North Third Street, North Fourth Street,
North Fifth Street and North Ninth Street; and traffic traveling on North
Third Street, North Fourth Street, North Fifth Street and North Ninth Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection of Montgomery Avenue.


North Depot Street and Franklin Street
 
Traffic traveling on North Depot Street shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersection with Franklin Street; and traffic traveling on
Franklin Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with
North Depot Street.


North Fourth Street and East North Street
 
Traffic traveling on North Fourth Street shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersection with East North Street, and every driver of a
vehicle traveling on East North Street shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersection with North Fourth Street.


North Sixth Street and East Street
 
Traffic traveling on North Sixth Street shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersection with East Street; and the traffic traveling on East
Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with North
Sixth Street.


North Sixth Street and Yadkin Street
 
Traffic traveling on North Sixth Street shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersection with Yadkin Street; and the traffic traveling on
Yadkin Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with
North Sixth Street.


North Sixth Street and Avondale Avenue
 
Traffic traveling on North Sixth Street shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersection with Avondale Avenue; and the traffic traveling on
Avondale Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with
North Sixth Street.


Pee Dee Avenue and North Sixth Street
 
Traffic traveling on Pee Dee Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with North Sixth Street; and traffic traveling on North
Sixth Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection Pee Dee
Avenue.


Pee Dee Avenue and North Ninth Street
 
Traffic traveling on Pee Dee Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with North Ninth Street; and traffic traveling on North
Ninth Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection Pee Dee
Avenue.


Park Avenue and South Fourth Street
 
Traffic traveling on Park Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing the
intersection with South Fourth Street; and traffic traveling on South Fourth
Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Park
Avenue.


Poplar Street and Love Street
 
Traffic traveling on Poplar Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Love Street; and traffic traveling on Love Street shall
stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Poplar Street.


South Fourth Street
 
Traffic traveling on East Park Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with South Fourth Street; and traffic traveling on South
Fourth Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection of
East Park Avenue.


Summit Avenue and South Third Street
 
Traffic traveling on Summit Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with South Third Street; and traffic traveling on South
Third Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with
Summit Avenue.


Summit Avenue and South Fourth Street
 
Traffic traveling on Summit Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with South Fourth Street; and traffic traveling on South
Fourth Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with
Summit Avenue.


Sylvania Avenue and Belvedere Drive
 
Traffic traveling on Sylvania Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Belvedere Drive and the traffic traveling on Belvedere
Drive shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Sylvania
Avenue.


Valleyview Drive and Collins Drive
 
Traffic traveling on Valleyview Drive shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Collins Drive; and traffic traveling on Collins Drive
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Valleyview
Drive.


West Park Avenue and Short Street
 
Traffic traveling on West Park Avenue shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Short Street; and traffic traveling on Short Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with West Park
Avenue.


Wiscassett Street and Laurel Street/Pennington Road
 
Traffic traveling on Wiscassett Street shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersection with Laurel Street/Pennington Road; and traffic
traveling on Laurel Street or Pennington Road shall stop before entering and
crossing the intersection with Wiscassett Street.


Woodhurst Lane and Dogwood Street
 
Traffic traveling on Woodhurst Lane shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Dogwood Street; and traffic traveling on Dogwood Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Woodhurst Lane.


Woodhurst Lane and Lakeview Drive
 
Traffic traveling on Woodhurst Lane shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Lakeview Drive; and traffic traveling on Lakeview Drive
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Woodhurst Lane.


Yadkin Street and North Fifth Street
 
Traffic traveling on Yadkin Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with North Fifth Street; and traffic traveling on North
Fifth Street shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with
Yadkin Street.


Yadkin Street and Smith Street
 
Traffic traveling on Yadkin Street shall stop before entering and crossing
the intersection with Smith Street; and the traffic traveling on Smith Street
shall stop before entering and crossing the intersection with Yadkin Street.




 



(Am. Ord. 83-35, passed 11-7-83; Am. Ord. 89-2, passed 2-6-89; Am. Ord.
89-33, passed 12-4-89; Am. Ord. 90-28, passed 9-4-90; Am. Ord. 90-37, passed
11-19-90; Am. Ord. 92-10, passed 5-18-92; Am. Ord. 94-27, passed 11-7-94; Am.
Ord. 94-36, passed 12-19-94; Am. Ord. 97-05, passed 3-3-97; Am. Ord. 97-14,
passed 4-21-97; Am. Ord. 97-15, passed 4-21-97; Am. Ord. 97-16, passed
4-21-97; Am. Ord. 97-45, passed 8-18-97; Am. Ord. 99-18, passed 4-19-99; Am.
Ord. 99-19, passed 4-19-99; Am. Ord. 00-24, passed 7-17-00; Am. Ord. 01-27,
passed 6-4-01; Am. Ord. 02-18, passed 4-1-02; Am. Ord. 02-20, passed 4-15-02;
Am. Ord. 02-21, passed 4-15-02; Am. Ord. 03-33, passed 10-6-03; Am. Ord.
04-19, passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 05-37, passed 10-3-05; Am. Ord. 08-28, passed
8-18-08; Am. Ord. 08-29, passed 8-18-08)



SCHEDULE XXIII:  YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   The following first-named streets are through streets and their
intersections with the following last-named streets are designated as yield
right-of-way intersections when entered upon from the streets first named.



 


Intersection

 

Through Street




Park Road at Garrison Drive

 

Park Road




Short Street at Jackson Street

 

Short Street




South Street and traffic  traveling north on Railroad Street

 

South Street





 










(Am. Ord. 99-51, passed 9-20-99)



SCHEDULE XXIV:  TRUCK ROUTES.



   The following streets, or portions thereof, are designated as truck
routes.



 


Street

 

Portion




Concord Road

 

From the intersection with West Main Street to the corporate limit




Highway 740

 

From its intersection with East Main Street northwardly to the corporate
limits




N.C. Highway 24-27

 

As it runs through the corporate limits




U.S. Highway 52

 

As it runs through the corporate limits




West Main Street

 

From its intersection with Concord Road to its intersection with U.S. Highway
52





 










(Ord. 89-13, passed 6-19-89)



SCHEDULE XXV: TRACTOR-TRAILER UNITS PROHIBITED.



   Tractor-trailer units are prohibited on the following streets, or
portions thereof.



SCHEDULE XXVI: VEHICLES WITH GROSS WEIGHT GREATER THAN ONE-HALF TON
PROHIBITED.



   (A)    Vehicles having a gross weight greater than one-half ton are
prohibited on the following streets or alleys, or portions thereof.



 


Street

 

Portion




The public alleys located to the rear of the business establishments on the
south side of East Main Street between South Third Street and South Fourth
Street

 






 










   (B)    Vehicles having a gross weight in excess of one and one-half
tons are prohibited on the following streets or alleys, or portions thereof.



 


Street

 

Portion




Groves Avenue

 

Amhurst Street to Henson Drive East Main Street to Amhurst Street




Henson Drive

 

Groves Avenue to North Carolina Highway 24-27 (Bypass)





 











(Am. Ord. 85-13, passed 5-20-85; Am. Ord. 85-25, passed 11-4-85)




SCHEDULE XXVII: ANGLE PARKING



   The following areas or streets, or portions thereof, are designated for
angle parking.



 


Street

 

Portion




North Second Street

 

On the west side from its intersection with Main Street northwardly for a
distance of 550 feet to a point 120 feet south of its intersection with North
Street.





 










(Am. Ord. 82-27, passed 12-20-82)



SCHEDULE XXVIII:  SCHOOL LOADING ZONES.



   The following areas or streets, or portions thereof, are designated as
school loading and unloading zone.



 


Street or Area

 

Portion




Street parking area

 

Austin Street beginning at a point on the north side thereof 208 feet west of
the north west intersection of said street and Carolina Avenue and running
west a distance of 167 feet.





 










(Am. Ord. 87-37, passed 12-10-87; Am. Ord. 90-24, passed 8-15-90; Am. Ord.
93- 13, passed 4-5-93; Am. Ord. 93-24, passed 8-2-93; Am. Ord. 99-66, passed
12-6-99; Am. Ord. 00-11, passed 3-20-00; Am. Ord. 02-42, passed 9-16-02; Am.
Ord. 07-33, passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. 08-33, passed 10-6-08)



SCHEDULE XXIX:  COMMERCIAL FREIGHT LOADING ZONES.



   The following streets, or portions thereof, are designated as
commercial freight loading zones.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side






Carolina Avenue

 

From the intersection with Corbin  Street, south 100 feet.

 

East




Montgomery Avenue

 

Beginning at a point 81 feet from the southeast corner of the intersection
with North Fourth Street, and running eastwardly one parking space.

 

South




North Second Street

 

Beginning 325 feet south of the southwest corner of the intersection with
North Street, and running south  two parking spaces.

 

West




North Third Street

 

Beginning at a point 87 feet north of the intersection with Montgomery Avenue
and running northwardly a distance of 25 feet.

 

East




South First Street

 

The first parking space north of the intersection of South First Street and
South Street.

 

West




South Second Street

 

Beginning at a point 320 feet from the northeast corner of the intersection
with South Street, and running northwardly one parking space.

 

East





 


 











(Am. Ord. 93-41, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 93-44, passed 12-20-03; Am. Ord.
93- 35, passed 10-2-05; Am. Ord. 96-12, passed 5-6-06; Am. Ord. 04-38, passed
8-16-04; Am. Ord. 07-33, passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. 08-11, passed 4-7-08; Am.
Ord. 08-34, passed 10-6-08; Am. Ord. 10-05, passed 2-15-10)



SCHEDULE XXX: PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.



   The following streets, or portions thereof, are designated as passenger
loading zones.



 

Street
 
Side
 
Portion
 
Restrictions


Montgomery Avenue
 
North
 
Starting 130 west of North Fourth Street and continuing westward for a
distance of 49 feet.
 
Limited or restricted to 15 minutes


West Main Street
 
South
 
A passenger loading zone being the first two parking spaces beginning 100
feet east of West Main Street’s intersection with Short Street.
 


 
 
 



 



(Am. Ord. 07-32, passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. 08-43, passed 12-15-08; Am. Ord.
11-15, passed 7-5-11; Am. Ord. 13-46, passed 11-4-13)



SCHEDULE XXXI:  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.



   Parking is prohibited within 25 feet of any intersection and on the
following Streets or portions thereof.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side






Amhurst Street

 

From its intersection with Bell Avenue, westwardly a distance of 185 feet,
and a distance of 350 feet.

 

North
South




Amhurst Street

 

From Groves Avenue westwardly 125 feet.

 

North




Arey Avenue

 

From East Main Street southwardly to the dead end.

 

Both




Ash Street

 

From 100 feet west of the intersection  with Fairview Street, and running
Northwardly 650 feet.

 

West




Austin Street

 

From the intersection with West Main Street to the intersection  with
Carolina Avenue.

 

East




Badin Road

 

From East Main Street to Northeast Connector.

 

Both




Barnard Road

 

From NC 24/27/73 Highway to Hilco Street.

 

Both




Belmont Circle

 

From Depot Street to Wilson Street.

 





Bogan Avenue

 

From East Main Street southwardly 669 feet.

 

East




Broome Street 

 

From Lowder Street southwardly 100 feet south of Woodland Street

 

West




C.B. Crook Drive
(formerly Glenn Street)

 

From the intersection with North First Street eastwardly 75 feet

 

North




Cannon Avenue

 

From the intersection with Third Street  south to the intersection with
Fourth Street.

 






 

From West Oakwood Avenue to Corbin  Street.

 

West





 

From the intersection of Wicassett  Street to U.S. Highway 52.

 

East




College Street

 

From the intersection of West Main Street northwardly to the end thereof.

 

East and West




Commerce Street

 

From its intersection with NC Highway 24-27, southwardly 420 feet

 

East




Commerce Street

 

From its intersection with NC Highway 24-27, southwardly 210 feet

 

West




Concord Road

 

From the intersection with West Main Street northwestwardly a distance  of
200 feet.

 

Northeast




Church Street

 

From West Main Street to N.C. Highway 73.

 

West





 

From South Street to Salisbury Avenue.

 

West




Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive

 

From 250 feet west of the northwest  corner of the intersection with 
Lincoln Street westwardly 100 feet west of the point where the  west
right-of-way line of Richardson  Street extended intersects with the north
right-of-way line of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive.

 

North




East Street

 

From the intersection with Second Street to the intersection with Fulton
Street.

 

Both




East Main Street

 

From Arey Avenue westwardly 200 feet.

 

South





 

From Arey Avenue to the corporate limits east.

 

Both




East North Street

 

From its intersection with North Fourth Street to its intersection with North
Fifth Street.

 

Both




Elizabeth Avenue

 

From Grant Street eastwardly 460 feet.

 

South




Fourth Street

 

From the corner of East Main to the first private driveway.

 

East




Franklin Street

 

From the intersection with Depot Street eastwardly 150 feet.

 

Both




Gibson Street

 

From the intersection of Arey Avenue westwardly a distance of 143 feet.

 

North




Green Street

 

From the intersection with South Fourth Street, eastwardly 50 feet.

 

Both




Greenwood Street

 

From Columbus Street to Carolina Avenue.

 

North




Groves Avenue

 

From East Main Street to Amhurst Street.

 

West




Hawthorn Avenue

 

From Sharon Road east to Northbrook Drive.

 

South




Harwood Street

 

From the intersection of Old Charlotte Road, northwardly 350 feet.

 

West





 

From the intersection with West Main Street, southwardly 100 feet.

 

East




Hawthorn Avenue

 

From Sharon Road east to Northbrook Drive.

 

South




Hawthorne Avenue

 

From the intersection with North Second Street to the intersection with North
Sixth Street.

 

Both




Henson Street

 

From the intersection of Groves Avenue  southwardly a distance of 540 feet.

 

East and West




Jeffries Street

 

From the intersection of North Carolina Highway 24-27 northwardly a distance
of 200 feet.

 

East-West




King Avenue

 


 

Left-hand side going West




Knollwood Circle

 

From the intersection of U.S.  Highway 52 westwardly to the intersection of
the private drive located on the south side of the street approximately 240
feet from U.S. Highway 52.

 

Both




Leonard Avenue

 

From NC Highway 24/27 north to a point 150 feet north of the intersection of
Inger Street with Lennox Street

 

Both




Lennox Avenue

 

From the intersection of Arey Avenue to the intersection of Leonard Avenue.

 

Both




Lincoln Street

 

From Elizabeth Avenue to Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive.

 

East





 

From South Street to Glendale Street

 

East




Love Street

 

From West Main Street to Lowder, Street.

 

East




Lundix Street

 

From a point 128 feet east of the intersection of Arey Avenue, eastwardly a
distance of 75 feet.

 

South




Main Street

 

From Five Points east to a point opposite the entrance to Heath on  the
south.

 

Left-hand side going east, or the north side




Miller Street

 

From the intersection of Pee Dee Avenue to the intersection of East Main
Street.

 

East




Montgomery Avenue

 

From the intersection with Fifth Street to 80 feet west of the intersection.

 

South





 

From Third Street to Fourth Street.

 

South





 

From Third Street to Second Street.

 

Both





 

From the intersection with Fourth Street to the intersection with Ninth
Street.

 

North




North Bell Avenue

 

From the intersection of East Main Street northwardly a distance of 350 feet.

 

West




N.C. Highway 24-27 bypass

 

From the eastern corporate limits to the western corporate limits.

 

Both




North Fifth Street

 

From the intersection with Pee Dee Avenue, north 150 feet.

 

East





 

From the intersection with North Street, northwardly 200 feet.

 

West





 

From the intersection with Pee Dee Avenue, northwardly 403 feet.

 

East




North First Street (U.S. Highway No. 52)

 

125 feet south of Chestnut Street northwardly to U.S. Highway 52.

 

Both




North Fourth Street

 

From Pee Dee Avenue to the first residence.

 

East





 

From the northwest corner of the intersection of Montgomery Avenue
northwardly a distance of 50 feet.

 

West





 

Beginning at a point 386 feet from the northwest corner of the intersection
of Montgomery Avenue northwardly to the southeast corner of East Cannon
Avenue.

 

West





 

From the southeast corner of intersection of North Fourth Street and
Montgomery Avenue southwardly a distance of 378 feet.

 

East




North Second Street

 

From a point 78 feet south of the southernmost intersection lines of
Montgomery Avenue and North Second Street northerly to Salisbury Avenue.

 

West





 

From the intersection of Salisbury Avenue and North Second Street northerly
to U.S. Highway 52 North.

 

Both




North Sixth Street

 

From East Main Street to Pee Dee Avenue.

 

East





 

Beginning where the north right-of-way line of Linwood Drive extended
intersects the west curb line of North Sixth Street, southwardly, 870 feet.

 

West




North Third Street

 

Beginning at a point on North Third  Street 600 feet north of the northeast
of the intersection of North Street and North Third Street a distance of 70
feet.

 

East





 

From the intersection with Montgomery Avenue extending north 87 feet and
beginning again 112 feet to the intersection with East Cannon Avenue.

 

East





 

From the intersection with Montgomery Avenue to the intersection with East
Cannon Avenue.

 

West





 

From 15 feet north of the north entrance to the north city parking lot,
southwardly 294 feet to a point 12 feet south of the exit of the south city
parking lot.

 

West




Northeast Connector

 

From Badin Road northwesterly for a distance of 2,000 feet

 

Both




Old Charlotte Road

 

From the intersection of South Second Street to the intersection of Coble
Avenue.

 

Both




Park Ridge Road

 

From its intersection with North Second Street to its intersection with North
Sixth Street.

 

East




Pee Dee Avenue

 

Between Fourth Street and Fifth Street.

 

North




Penny Street

 

From the intersection of North Second Street to its intersection with Shankle
Street.

 

Both




Ridge Street

 

From East Cannon Avenue to a point 150 feet south.

 

East




Salisbury Avenue

 

From the intersection with Sherwood Avenue northwardly for a distance of 105
feet.

 

West





 

From the intersection of Sherwood Avenue southwardly a distance of 85 feet.

 

West





 

From its intersection with U.S. Highway 52 Bypass to its intersection with
North Second Street.

 

Both




Sixth Street

 

From the intersection of East Main Street northwardly 130 feet and from the
intersection of Pee Dee Avenue southwardly 110 feet.

 

West




Smith Street

 

From the northeast intersection with Montgomery Avenue, northwardly 350 feet.

 

East




Snuggs Street

 

From the intersection with North First Street (U.S. Highway 52) to the
intersection with Snuggs Park Road.

 

Both




South Fourth Street

 

From Main Street to Green Street

 

East




South Second Street

 

From Englewood Avenue to the intersection with South First Street, except on
Sunday.

 

West





 

From the intersection with South First Street southwardly to the corporate
limits.

 

Both




Summitt Avenue

 

From the intersection of South Fourth Street to the intersection of
Richardson Street.

 

South




Tenth Street

 

From the intersection with Pee Dee Avenue northwardly to the intersection
with Montgomery Avenue.

 

East




U.S. Highway 52 Bypass

 

From the intersection with C.B. Crook Drive northwardly for a distance of 175
feet.

 

East





 

From the southern corporate limits to the northern corporate limits.

 

Both




Wall Street

 

From its intersection with McLaughlin Street to 100 feet south of the
intersection.

 

East




West Drive

 

From Amhurst Street to Inger Street.

 

East




West Main Street

 

From Railroad Street to Harwood Street.

 

Both





 

From the intersection of Short Street Eastwardly 100 feet

 

South





 

The first space designated for vehicular parking located immediately west of
the intersection with North Second Street, except police cars of the city
Police Department.

 

North




West Oakwood Avenue

 

From the intersection with Carolina Avenue, eastwardly 150 feet.

 

North





 

From the intersection with Carolina Avenue, eastwardly 60 feet.

 

South




West Park Avenue

 

From the intersection of Short Street westerly 125 feet.

 

Both




Wilson Street

 

From North Depot Street to North Second Street, except Sundays.

 

South





 

From the intersection with North First Street, eastwardly 150 feet.

 

North




Woodland Street 

 

From the intersection of South Broome Street and extending westwardly 100 feet

 

North and South




Yadkin Street

 

From the intersection with North Second Street to the intersection with North
Fifth Street.

 

Both




Unnamed Street

 

Extending from the west terminus of Chestnut Street northwardly to Salisbury
Avenue.

 

Both










(Am. Ord. 82-6, passed 11-8-82; Am. Ord. 82-8, passed 5-17-82; Am. Ord.
82-10, passed 6-7-82  Am. Ord. 83-6, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 83-19, passed
7-5-83; Am. Ord. 84-22, passed 11-5-84; Am. Ord. 85-18, passed 6-19-85; Am.
Ord. 85-22, passed 8-12-85; Am. Ord. 87-12, passed 6-1-87; Am. Ord. 87-23,
passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 87-40, passed 11-30-87; Am. Ord. 89-8, passed
5-15-89; Am. Ord. 89-39, passed 12-18-89; Am. Ord. 90-23, passed 8-6-90; Am.
Ord. 92-9, passed 4-20-92; Am. Ord. 92-25, passed 9-8-92; Am. Ord. 93-15,
passed 4-5-93; Am. Ord. 93-35, passed 10-4-93; Am. Ord. 94- 10, passed
4-18-94; Am. Ord. 95-09, passed 3-6-95; Am. Ord. 95-16, passed 5-1-95, Am.
Ord. 95-46, passed 1-2-96; Am. Ord. 96-07, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 96-18,
passed 6-17-96; Am. Ord. 97-18, passed 5-5-97; Am. Ord. 97-22, passed
5-19-97; Am. Ord. 97-23, passed 6-2-97; Am. Ord. 97-38, passed 7-7-97; Am.
Ord. 97-40, passed 7-7-97; Am. Ord. 98-05, passed 2-2-98; Am. Ord. 98-12,
passed 3-16-98; Am. Ord. 98-42, passed 10-5-98; Am. Ord. 99-29, passed
6-21-99; Am. Ord. 02-23, passed 5-6-02; Am. Ord. 03-20, passed 7-21-03; Am.
Ord. 03-24, passed 8-4-03; Am. Ord. 03-29, passed 9-15-03; Am. Ord. 04-18,
passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 04-39, passed 8-16-04; Am. Ord. 04-48, passed
10-18-04; Am. Ord. 04-49, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 05-26, passed 6-20-05;
Am. Ord. 06-26, passed 10-2-06; Am. Ord. 07-20, passed 7-2-07; Am. Ord.
07-34, passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. 08-35, passed 10-6-08; Am. Ord. 09-03, passed
1-26-09; Am. Ord. 10-04, passed 2-15-10; Am. Ord. 11-09, passed 5-2-11; Am.
Ord. 11-12, passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. 14-16, passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord. 16-38,
passed 10-17-16)



SCHEDULE XXXII:  NO PARKING BETWEEN 8:00 A.M. AND 6:00 P.M.



   No parking is allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
any day except Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays on any of the
following streets or portions thereof



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side




Coble Avenue

 

From N.C. Highway 24-27 Bypass to Old Charlotte Road

 

East




Park Ridge Road

 

From the intersection with North Sixth Street to the intersection with Park
Road

 

Both




Salisbury Avenue

 

From the intersection with Ash Street, westwardly a distance of 175

 

North









(Am. Ord. 91-23, passed 10-7-91; Am. Ord. 93-16, passed 4-5-93; Am. Ord.
10-04, passed 2-15-10)



SCHEDULE XXXII-A:  THIRTY-MINUTE PARKING.



   No person shall park a vehicle for more than 30 minutes upon that part
of any street designated as 30-minute parking zone.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side





 


 










(Ord. 93-14, passed 4-5-93; Am. Ord. 93-18, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 10-04,
passed 2-15-10)



SCHEDULE XXXII-B:  WEEKEND PARKING.



   No person shall park a vehicle, excepting on Saturdays, Sundays, and
public holidays, upon that part of any street that is designated below.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side




North Fourth Street

 

From the intersection of Webb Street to the intersection of Yadkin Street.

 

Both









(Ord. 97-37, passed 7-7-97; Am. Ord. 97-38, passed 7-7-97; Am. Ord. 03-25,
passed 8-4-03)



SCHEDULE XXXIII: NO PARKING BETWEEN 8:00 A.M. AND 4:00 P.M.



   No parking is allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
any day except Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays on any of the
following streets or portions thereof.



SCHEDULE XXXIII-A:  PARKING PROHIBITED BETWEEN HOURS OF 2:30 P.M. AND 6:00
P.M.



   No person shall park a vehicle from 2:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday upon any part of the following streets.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side





 


 










(Am. Ord. 99-65, passed 12-6-99; Am. Ord. 99-69, passed 1-4-00; Am. Ord.
07-33, passed 10-1-07)



SCHEDULE XXXIII-B:  POLICE VEHICLE PARKING



   That part of a street that is hereinafter designated is hereby reserved
and set aside for parking police vehicles and no vehicle excepting a city
police department vehicle shall be parked upon that part of any of the
following streets.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side




North Street

 

From the intersection of North Second Street and North Street westwardly 44
feet

 

North




South Third Street

 

Starting at the first parking space 418 feet from the intersection with East
Main Street and traveling southwardly for four parking spaces

 

West




West Main Street

 

The first parking space westwardly from Second Street.

 

North





 

The first parking space westwardly from First Street.

 










(Am. Ord. 99-64, passed 12-6-99; Am. Ord. 10-04, passed 2-15-10)



SCHEDULE XXXIV: TWO HOUR PARKING.



   Parking is limited to two hours on any day except Sundays and public
holidays on the following streets or portion thereof.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side



Monroe Street
 
Between Poplar Street and Walnut Street
 
West



 



SCHEDULE XXXIV-A:  PARKING BETWEEN 7:00 A.M. AND 3:30 P.M.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday,
during the days of the year when public schools are in session in the city:



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side



Austin Street
 
From Carolina Avenue to Corbin Street
 
South and East








(Ord. 90-25, passed 8-15-90)



SCHEDULE XXXV:  TWO HOUR PARKING BETWEEN 8:00 A.M. AND 6:00 P.M.



   Parking is limited to two hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any
day except Sundays and public holidays on the following streets or portions
thereof.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side





East Main Street
 
From Fourth Street to Heath Street
 
South


First Street
 
From North Street to Main Street.
 
Both


Fourth Street
 
From the northeast intersection with Montgomery Avenue, north 478 feet.
 
East


King Street
 
From Second Street to First Street.
 
North


Main Street
 
From Third Street to Depot Street.
 
Both


Montgomery Avenue
 
From the southeast intersection with Fourth Street, east 290 feet.
 
South


North Street
 
From Second Street to First Street.
 
North


 
 
From its intersection with Montgomery Avenue southwardly a distance of 300
feet.
 
East


Pee Dee Avenue
 
From the intersection with Fourth Street and East Main Street (known as Five
Points), east to the intersection with Fifth Street.
 
South


Poplar Street
 
From the intersection with Hill Street to the intersection with Monroe Street.
 
South


Second Street
 
From North Street to South Street.
 
Both


South First Street
 
From West Main Street to West South Street
 
Both


South Third Street
 
Beginning 340 feet south of the centerline of East Main Street and being the
next two spaces south of the beginning point.
 
East


 
 
 
 
 









(Am. Ord. 82-7, passed 3-15-82; Am. Ord. 84-12, passed 5-21-84; Am. Ord.
84-16, passed 7-16-84; Am. Ord. 95-28, passed 7-11-95; Am. Ord. 96-06, passed
3-18-96; Am. Ord. 99-14, passed 4-5-99; Am. Ord. 07-33, passed 10-1-07; Am.
Ord. 10-04, passed 2-15-10; Am. Ord. 11-17, passed 6-20-11; Am. Ord. 12-03,
passed 2-6-12; Am. Ord. 16-03, passed 1-19-16)



SCHEDULE XXXVI: ONE HOUR PARKING BETWEEN 9:00 A.M. AND 5:00 P.M.



   Parking is limited to one hour between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
day except Sundays and public holidays on the following streets or portions
thereof.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side



Wall Street
 
From the intersection with Thomas Street to the intersection with McLaughlin
Street.
 
West








(Am. Ord. 84-12, passed 5-21-84; Am. Ord. 10-04, passed 2-15-10)



SCHEDULE XXXVII:  FIFTEEN MINUTE PARKING.



 


Street

 

Portion

 

Side



North First Street
 
All parking spaces starting 136 feet south of the intersection with Wilson
Street and traveling north to the intersection with Wilson Street.
 
East


North Second Street
 
In the first parking space designated for vehicular parking immediately north
of the northwest corner of the intersection of North Second Street and North
Street.
 
West


West South Street
 
In the second parking space designated for vehicular parking located 160 feet
west of the southwest corner of the intersection of West South Street and
South Second Street
 
South



 



(Am. Ord. 83-41, passed 12-12-83; Am. Ord. 95-05, passed 2-6-95; Am. Ord.
10-04, passed 2-15-10)



SCHEDULE XXXVIII:  CROSSWALKS



   Crosswalks at locations other than intersections of streets are
designated and established as follows:



 

Street
 
Description




North Second Street
 
Directly in front of the entrance to the public parking lot maintained by the
city adjacent to the city hall


South Second Street
 
Directly in front of the entrance to the courthouse.


South Second Street
 
110 feet north of the intersection with Hearne Street


North Third Street
 
382 feet south of the intersection with Montgomery Avenue.


Austin Street
 
368 feet west of the intersection with Carolina Avenue


Judy Street
 
250 feet south of NC Highway 24/27


Public Alley
 
Lying adjacent and north of First Presbyterian Church, commencing at a point
on the north line of the alley 19 east from the point where the north line of
the alley intersects the east right- of-way line of North First Street and
extends southwestwardly at a 45° angle with the north line of the alley to
the point of intersection with the south line of the alley









(Am. Ord. 90-31, passed 10-15-90; Am. Ord. 05-28, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord.
10-06, passed 2-15-10)



SCHEDULE XXXIX:  HANDICAPPED PARKING.



   The following spaces are designated as parking for handicapped persons
only:



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location




Edgemont Street
 
North
 
From the northeast corner of the intersection of Edgemont Street and
Hollywood Terrace eastwardly 146 feet.


Glenn Street
 
South
 
The first parallel parking space east of the intersection of Glenn Street and
North second Street.


Glenn Street
 
South
 
The fifth parallel parking space west of the intersection of Glenn Street and
North Second Street.


Montgomery Avenue
 
North
 
The fifth vehicular parking space east located 125 feet east of the northeast
corner of the intersection of North Third Street and Montgomery Avenue.


North First Street
 
West
 
The first three parallel parking spaces north of the intersection of North
First Street and Glenn Street.


North Second Street
 
West
 
One parking space beginning 300 feet south of the intersection of North
Second Street with West North Street.


Short Street
 
East
 
The first three parking spaces beginning 65 feet south of the intersection
with West Main Street.


South Second Street
 
West
 
The first parking space north from King Avenue, located 20 feet north of the
northwest corner of the intersection of King Avenue and South Second Street.


South Second Street
 
West
 
The first parking space located immediately south of the intersection of King
Avenue.


South Third Street
 
West
 
The first parking space located 388 feet south of the intersection of East
Main Street.


West Main Street
 
North
 
The first parking space east of the intersection of First Street and West
Main Street.


West Main Street
 
South
 
The first parking space designated for vehicular parking located 37 feet west
of the southwest corner of the intersection of West Main Street and Depot
Street.


West South Street
 
South
 
Located 150 feet west of the southwest corner of the intersection of South
Street and South Second Street.




 



(Ord. 83-32, passed 9-19-83; Am. Ord. 84-5, passed 5-7-84; Am. Ord. 88-19,
passed 7-18-88; Am. Ord. 88-21, passed 7-18-88; Am. Ord. 89-3, passed 3-6-89;
Am. Ord. 89-28, passed 9-5-89; Am. Ord. 96-03, passed 2-19-96; Am. Ord.
98-20, passed 4-20-98; Am. Ord. 99-32, passed 7-6-99; Am. Ord. 00- 28, passed
8-21-00; Am. Ord. 02-17, passed 4-2-02; Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 3-17-03; Am.
Ord. 03-19, passed 7-21-03; Am. Ord. 03-37, passed 11-3-03; Am. Ord. 07-06,
passed 3-5-07; Am. Ord. 10-06, passed 2-15-10; Am. Ord. 13-47, passed
11-4-13; Am. Ord. 17-14, passed - -17)



SCHEDULE XXXX:  HANDICAPPED PARKING - MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY BETWEEN 8:00
A.M. AND 5:00 P.M.



   The following spaces are designated as parking for handicapped persons
only:



 

Street
 
Side
 
Location


North Third Street
 
West
 
Beginning approximately 108 feet from the southwest corner of the
intersection of Montgomery Avenue and North Third Street and extending south
88 linear feet therefrom.



 



(Ord. 03-02, passed 3-17-03; Am. Ord. 03-03, passed 3-17-03)



 


Notes

Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive 
Dr. Martin Luther King Drive was added as 1996-10 Repl. because of a letter
from the city. (It was merely the change of a street name and not the
addition of a new street to the list)  They did not send an ordinance, and
therefor, the history was not updated.



TITLE VIII:  OFFENSES



   Chapter



      80.   ABANDONED/NUISANCE/JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES



      81.   ANIMALS AND FOWL



      82.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



CHAPTER 80: ABANDONED/NUISANCE/JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   80.01   Administration



   80.02   Definitions



   80.03   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   80.04   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   80.05   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized



   80.06   Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles;
pre- towing notice requirements



   80.07   Exception to prior notice requirement



   80.08   Removal of vehicles; post- towing notice requirements



   80.09   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final
disposition of vehicle



   80.10   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings



   80.11   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles



   80.12   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property



   80.13   Protection against criminal or civil liablity



   80.14   Exceptions



   80.15   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle



§ 80.01  ADMINISTRATION.



   The City Manager or designee(s) shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. The City Manager or
designee(s) shall be responsible for administering the removal and
disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets
and highways within the city, on property owned by the city, and on private
property. The city may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck
operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned
vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this
chapter and applicable state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to limit the legal authority or powers of the City Manager or designee(s) in
enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ABANDONED VEHICLE."  As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, a
motor vehicle that:



      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of
a law or ordinance prohibiting parking;



      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than
seven days;



      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the city for
longer than 24 hours; or



      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours.



   "AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL."  The City Manager or designee(s) designated to
authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.



   "JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE."  As authorized and defined in G.S. §
160A-303.2, a vehicle that does not lawfully display a current license plate,
and that:



      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;



      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which
it originally was intended to move; or



      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less
than $500.



   "MOTOR VEHICLE" or "VEHICLE."  All machines designed or intended to
travel over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled
vehicle.



   "NUISANCE VEHICLE."  A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance,
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other
insects, rats or other pests;



      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious
vegetation over 14 inches in height;



      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;



      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil,
or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;



      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be
operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, and the like;



      (6)   So situated or located that there is danger of it
falling or turning over;



      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food
waste, animal waste, or other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;



      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or
contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or



      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and
safety hazard and a public nuisance by the City Council.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 02-47, passed 11-4-02; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.03  ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be
abandoned as the term is defined herein.



   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the city
may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle
removed.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 80.04  NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located, to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a
nuisance vehicle.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the City Manager or designee(s) may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a
nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 80.05  JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is
located, to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the
vehicle has been ordered removed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have more than two junked motor
vehicles, as defined in § 80.02, on the premises of public or private
property.  The permitted junked motor vehicle(s) must strictly comply with
the location and concealment requirements of this section.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the
possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located, to fail to
comply with the locational requirements of this section.



   (D)   Subject to the provisions of division (E) of this section,
upon investigation, the City Manager or designee(s) may order the removal of
a junked motor vehicle, as defined in this chapter, after finding in writing
that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens
imposed on the private property owner. Such finding shall be based on a
balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the
corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community,
neighborhood or area appearance. The following among other relevant factors
may be considered:



      (1)   Protection of property values;



      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development
opportunities;



      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;



      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the
community; and



      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional
stability of area residents.



   (E)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicles.



      (1)   (a)   Two junked motor vehicles, in their entirety,
can be located in the rear yard, as defined by the city's zoning ordinance,
if they are entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from
abutting premises by an acceptable covering.



         (b)   The City Manager or designee(s) has the authority
to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as
required by this provision. The covering must remain in good repair and must
not be allowed to deteriorate. The covering or enclosure must be compatible
with the objectives stated in the preamble of this chapter.



      (2)   More than two junked motor vehicles. Any other junked
motor vehicle(s) must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides
a complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicle(s) cannot be seen from
a public street or abutting property. A "GARAGE" or "BUILDING STRUCTURE"
means either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure
erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit, and which has
been constructed in accordance with all zoning and building code regulations.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 80.06  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, NUISANCE, OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES;
PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as set forth in § 80.07 below, an abandoned, nuisance,
or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to
the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the
case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and
mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to possession of
the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon
which the vehicle is located, can be ascertained in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The
person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show the
name(s) and address(es) to which mailed, and the date mailed. If such names
and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an
abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield
or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the
vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date (no sooner than seven
days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle
will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven days
after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the
owner or legal possessor prior to that time.



   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property,
nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be
given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not
remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle
is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle, or in the case of a junked motor vehicle,
that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens,
such appeal shall be made to the City Council in writing, heard at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council. Further proceeding to remove
the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.07  EXCEPTION TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.



   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such finding
shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the
appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles
without prior notice include:



   (A)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the
public streets and highways, the City Council hereby determines that
immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:



      (1)   Obstructing traffic;



      (2)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or
restricting parking;



      (3)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;



      (4)   Parked in loading zones;



      (5)   Parked in bus zones; or



      (6)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions
imposed under code sections.



   (B)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to
abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on city-owned property other than the
streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed
without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing
official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the
public health, safety, and welfare. By way of illustration and not of
limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing
ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a
location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage
to public or private property.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.08  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST- TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which has
been ordered removed may, as directed by the city, be removed to a storage
garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracted to
perform such services for the city. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the
authorizing city official shall immediately notify the last known registered
owner of the vehicle. Such notice shall include the following:



      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;



      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;



      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;



      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the
vehicle; and



      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a
probable cause hearing on the removal.



   (B)   The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5)
of this section, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known
address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his
agent.



   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall
be given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state,
notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the
removal of the vehicle.



   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle is
removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates,
the authorizing city official shall make reasonable efforts, including
checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known
registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set
forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5)of this section.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.09  RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION
OF VEHICLE.



   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is
entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause
existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in
writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district judge to
receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72
hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-222, as amended.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.10  REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.



   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double
the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing
business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of
a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle
shall not allow or engage in further violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.11  SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.



   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed
by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the
tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. 
Disposition of such vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the
city and in accordance with G.S. Ch. 44A, Art. 1.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.12  CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   As a general policy, the city will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the city from private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a
vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been
ordered removed by the City Manager or designee(s). The city may require any
person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor
vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against any loss,
expense, or liability incurred because of its removal, storage, or sale.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.13  PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.



   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance, or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided
in this chapter.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.14  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:



   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide "automobile graveyard" or
"junkyard" as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the "Junkyard
Control Act", G.S. §§ 136-141 et seq.;



   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;



   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the enterprise; or



   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)



§ 80.15  UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from
any storage facility designated by the city any vehicle which has been
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this code, unless and until all
towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have
been paid.



(Ord. 94-35, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 9-19-16)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



CHAPTER 81:  ANIMALS AND FOWL



Section



Animals Generally



   81.01   Running at large



   81.01.1   Defecating upon private property prohibited



   81.01.2Defecating upon public property prohibited



   81.02   Conditions to keeping horses



   81.03   Conditions to keeping cattle



   81.03.1   Cattle prohibited in public parks



   81.04   Conditions to keeping fowl or rabbits



   81.04.1   Maintenance of fowl or rabbits in pens or hutches



   81.04.2   Rats, flies or odor in fowl or rabbit pens or hutches



   81.04.3   Enforcement of provisions for fowl or rabbits



   81.05   Male goats not to be kept



   81.06   Swine prohibited



   81.07   Removal of carcasses



Dogs



   81.15   Definitions



   81.16   Enforcement



   81.17   Licensing



   81.18   Restraint



   81.18.1   Dogs prohibited



   81.18.2   Unrestrained dog prohibited in public parks



   81.19   Impoundment



   81.20   Care of dogs



   81.21   Confinement of female dogs in heat



   81.22   Rabies



   81.23   Investigation and interference with officers



   81.23.1   Protective measures for confinement of dogs



   81.24   Exemptions



Keeping of Wild or Vicious Animals



   81.25   Definitions



   81.26   Unlawful



   81.27   Enforcement



ANIMALS GENERALLY



§ 81.01  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal, fowl, or bird
owned or controlled by him or in his custody to run or be at large in the
city.



('58 Code, § 3-l)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.01.1  DEFECATING UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, or harborer of any
animal to allow such animal(s) under his or her control, whether at large or
under restraint, to defecate on the private property of another.



(Ord. 07-36, passed 10-16-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.01.2  DEFECATING UPON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, or harborer of any
animal to allow such animal(s) under his or her control, whether at large or
under restraint, to defecate on any public property, or public right-of-way
without immediately removing and properly disposing of the said defecation of
the animal(s) in an appropriate trash receptacle.



(Ord. 07-36, passed 10-16-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.02  CONDITIONS TO KEEPING HORSES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or allow to be
kept, harbor or allow to be harbored, maintain or allow to be maintained more
than two horses, mules, jackasses, or jennies, or any combination thereof, on
any premises within the jurisdictional limits of the city; provided, however,
that additional horses, mules, jackasses, or jennies may be kept on the
premises if a minimum of two acres of pasture per animal is provided for each
additional animal greater than two. Provided further however, that the
offspring of any mare or jenny kept harbored or maintained in the
jurisdictional limits of the city may remain with such mare or jenny until
weaned.



('58 Code, § 3-2)



   (B)   Private stables with a capacity of housing not more than two
horses, mules, jackasses or jennies may be located within the corporate
limits provided such stable, pen or other enclosure for keeping horses,
mules, jackasses or jennies is located at least 200 feet from a place of
human habitation.  Any offspring of a mare or jenny may be housed in the
same stable with such mare or jenny until weaned.



   (C)   Every stable shall be kept clean at all times.  If such
premises, after inspection by the County Health Department, are found to be a
nuisance or detrimental to the public health of the owner or occupant of the
premises shall remedy the condition in accordance with the instructions of
the County Health Department within 24 hours.  Any such person failing to
comply shall be guilty of violating this section.



   (D)   Stable manure shall be removed at least once every day and
deposited in a covered, flyproof, hard-bottom bin or other suitable
receptacle.  This requirement shall not apply to concrete or other
impervious types of floors that can by flushed and drained into the sanitary
sewer.  No stable manure may be disposed of in such a manner that it is
collected or disposed by the city's solid waste collection system.



(Am. Ord. 91-9, passed 5-6-91; Am. Ord. 96-27, passed 10-8-96)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 81.03  CONDITIONS TO KEEPING CATTLE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or allow to be
kept, graze or allow to be grazed, house or allow to be housed, any cow,
bull, steer, or cattle of any kind, nature, or description in the limits of
the city within 400 feet of any building or house occupied for purpose of
residence.



('58 Code, § 3-4)



   (B)   Any person keeping or allowing to be kept, grazing or allowing
to be grazed, housing or allowing to be housed, any cow, bull, steer, or
cattle of any nature or description within the limits of the city in a place
or area more than 400 feet distant from any building or house occupied for
residential purposes shall keep, graze, and house the same in strict
compliance with all rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the
board of health of Stanly County, the board of health of the state, and the
City Council. 



('58 Code, § 3-5) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.03.1  CATTLE PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or allow to be kept, graze
or allow to be grazed, any horse, cow, bull, steer, or cattle of any kind,
nature, or description in any public park owned and maintained by the city.



(Ord. 07-36, passed 10-16-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.04  CONDITIONS TO KEEPING FOWL OR RABBITS.



   All persons owning or controlling or having in their custody any fowl
or rabbit confined in pens or enclosures on their premises.  As used in §§
81.04 through 81.04.3, "rabbit" shall mean an adult rabbit over the age of
six weeks.



('58 Code, § 3-6) (Ord. 97-59, passed 11-17-97; Am. Ord. 07-13, passed
5-7-07) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.04.1  MAINTENANCE OF FOWL OR RABBITS IN PENS OR HUTCHES.



   All pens and enclosures in which any fowl or rabbit is kept shall
comply at all times with the following provisions:



   (A)   Shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any property line;



   (B)   Must be used for fowl or rabbits only and must be well
ventilated;



   (C)   Shall have a minimum of four square feet of floor area for
each fowl or rabbit; and



   (D)   Shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from accumulation of
excrement and objectionable odors and shall be cleaned daily; and all
droppings and body excrement shall be placed in a fly proof container and
double-bagged in plastic bags.



   (E)   Maximum number of rabbits allowed is four.  This provision
does not refer to fowl.



(Ord. 97-59, passed 11-17-97; Am. Ord. 07-13, passed 5-7-07) Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 81.04.2  RATS, FLIES OR ODOR IN FOWL OR RABBIT PENS OR HUTCHES.



   The presence of rats in or about a pen or enclosure in which any fowl
or rabbit is kept shall be prima facie evidence that such pen or enclosure is
maintained in violation of the provisions of § 81.04.1(D).



(Ord. 97-59, passed 11-17-97; Am. Ord. 07-13, passed 5-7-07) Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 81.04.3  ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS FOR FOWL OR RABBITS.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer or his or her duly appointed
agent shall enforce the provisions of § 81.04 and § 81.04.1.  The Code
Enforcement Officer or his or her duly appointed agent upon notice from any
person, or upon their own observation, of the existence of any conditions in
violation of the provisions of § 81.04.1, shall make such investigations as
may be necessary to determine whether in fact such conditions as exist
constitute a violation of § 81.04.1.



   (B)   Upon determination that a violation of § 81.04.1 does exist,
the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her duly appointed agent shall notify
in writing the owner, occupant or person in possession of the premises upon
which the pen or enclosure is located that a violation of § 81.04.1 exists,
and direct and order such offender to bring the pen or enclosure in
compliance with § 81.04.1 within 15 days from the receipt of such notice.



(Ord. 97-59, passed 11-17-97; Am. Ord. 07-13, passed 5-7-07) Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 81.05  MALE GOATS NOT TO BE KEPT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or harbor any
male goat within the city.



('58 Code, § 3-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.06  SWINE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, keep, or maintain any
swine within the city.



('58 Code, § 3-8) (Am. Ord. 98-30, passed 7-20-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.07  REMOVAL OF CARCASSES.



   The owner of any animal which shall die shall remove the carcass from
the city, where it shall be buried.



('58 Code, § 3-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DOGS



§ 81.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of §§ 81.15 through 81.24  the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   "DOG."  A dog of either sex if over the age of four months.



   "EXPOSED TO RABIES."  A dog has been exposed to rabies within the
meaning of this subchapter if it has been bitten by any other animal known or
reasonably suspected to be infected with rabies.



   "OWNER."  Any person, group of persons, or corporation owning,
keeping, or harboring a dog.



   "RESTRAINT."  A dog is under restraint if it is secured by a leash or
lead; if it is on property of its owner; or if it is under the immediate and
effective control of a responsible person.



   "SPAYED FEMALE DOG."  A female dog certified by a licensed
veterinarian to have been spayed.



('58 Code, § 3-10)



§ 81.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of §§ 81.15 through 81.24 shall be enforced by the
Police Department.



('58 Code, § 3-10.1)



§ 81.17  LICENSING.



   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog within the city
unless the dog is licensed as herein provided. Written application for a
license shall be made to the City Tax Collector and shall state the name,
address, and telephone number of the owner and the name, breed, color, sex,
and distinguishing marks of the dog.  The license fee shall be paid to the
City Tax Collector at the time of making the application.  The City Tax
Collector shall transmit to the Police Department all registration forms
after all fees have been paid.  The Police Department shall keep all
registration forms for a three-year period open to public inspection at
regular city business hours.  The records shall be filed alphabetically by
name of dog owner and numerically by Stanly County dog tax tag number.



   (B)   The yearly license fees shall be $2 for male dog or spayed
female dog and $2 for an unspayed female dog.



   (C)   All dog licenses shall be issued for one year beginning with
January 1.  The owner may apply for the license during January without
penalty for the delay, but when an application which should have been made by
January 1 is not made until after January 31, the appropriate license fee
shall be increased by 50%.  However, if the applicant became the owner of
the dog after January 1, the license fee may be prorated to the nearest
quarter and the penalty for delinquency shall be added 30 days after the date
when the license should have been procured.



   (D)   If ownership of a dog is transferred, the new owner may have
the current license transferred to his name on payment of a fee of $1.



   (E)   The owner shall keep on the dog, at all times when the dog is
not inside a private building, a collar or harness, and the tag issued by the
Stanly County Tax Collector shall be affixed to the collar or harness in such
a manner that the tag can be easily seen.



   (F)   No person shall use for any dog a tag issued for a different
dog.



   (G)   If a license is destroyed or lost, a duplicate or replacement
shall be obtained from the Stanly County Tax Collector and the Police
Department shall be notified of the new number.



('58 Code, § 3-10.2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.18  RESTRAINT.



   A dog owner shall keep his dog under restraint at all times.



('58 Code, § 3-10.3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.18.1  DOGS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Dogs are prohibited on the premises of the Old Albemarle
Cemetery located on Pee Dee Avenue and the Liberty Gardens located at the
south west corner of the intersection of West Main Street and Depot Street,
provided however, this prohibition shall not apply to police dogs supervised
and controlled by a police officer and to service animals accompanied by its
master.



   (B)   Dogs found on the above described premises may be apprehended
and impounded pursuant to the provisions of § 81.19.



(Ord. 07-29, passed 9-4-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.18.2  UNRESTRAINED DOG PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor, or harborer of
any dog to allow such dog(s) to enter the premises of a public park owned or
maintained by the city unless such dog(s) is under leash or other restraint;
provided however, nothing herein contained shall be construed to allow dog(s)
where prohibited by § 81.19 of this code.



   (B)   Dog(s) found on the premises of a public park that are not
under leash or other restraint may be apprehended and impounded pursuant to
the provisions of § 81.19 of this code.



(Ord. 07-36, passed 10-16-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.19  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Dogs not licensed pursuant to §§ 81.15 through 18.24, or
found not under restraint or abandoned, may be seized and impounded by any
police or humane officer.  Impoundment may be in the Stanly County dog pound
or any animal shelter designated by the City Council.



   (B)   If the dog wears a license tag or if the owner can by any
other reasonable means be identified and located, the owner shall within 12
hours be notified by mail that the dog has been impounded.



   (C)   If the dog is impounded in the Stanly County dog pound it then
becomes the responsibility of the county, and its further disposition shall
be under the applicable county or state laws.  All boarding, release, or
adoption fees shall be paid to Stanly County.



   (D)   If the dog for some good reason is not placed in the Stanly
County pound then the following further disposition shall apply.



      (1)   If a dog is not redeemed by the owner within four days
after impoundment, the dog may be disposed of in one of the following ways,
but no other way.



         (a)   Euthanasia, using a method approved by the humane
society of the United States.



         (b)   Release for adoption by a new owner who shows
evidence of ability and intention to provide the dog with an appropriate home
and humane care; provided, that no unspayed female dog shall be released for
adoption unless a licensed veterinarian certifies in writing that he has been
paid in full for spaying of the dog and will perform the operation within 30
days or before the dog's first oestriol period.



      (2)   An owner redeeming a dog from impoundment shall pay,
before release, an impoundment fee of $2 plus a boarding charge of $1 for
each 24 hours or fraction thereof that the dog has been impounded.  The fees
shall be delivered by the animal shelter manager to the City Treasurer.



      (3)   Any new owner adopting a dog from the pound shall first
obtain a license for the dog and shall, in addition, pay an adoption fee of
$5.



   (E)   The intent of §§ 81.15 through 81.24 is to require dog
owners to comply with the law, not merely to operate an impoundment
program.  Police officers shall therefore place primary emphasis upon
apprehending and initiating prosecution of violators of §§ 81.15 through
81.24.



('58 Code, § 3-10.4)



§ 81.20  CARE OF DOGS.



   The owner of a dog shall provide it with humane shelter from heat,
cold, rain, wind, and snow, and shall give it food and water adequate to keep
the animal in good health and comfort. Doghouses and kennels must be soundly
constructed, dry, and provided in cold weather with clean bedding.  All dogs
must be given opportunity for vigorous daily exercise and must be provided by
their owners with veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.  No
owner shall permit a dog habitually to bark, howl, or in other ways be a
public nuisance.



('58 Code, § 3-10.5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.21  CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.



   The owner shall confine any female dog in heat within a building, in
such manner that the dog will not be accessible to other dogs except for
planned breeding and will not attract male dogs.



('58 Code, § 3-10.6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.22  RABIES.



   (A)   Every rabid dog or dog exposed to rabies shall be immedi-ately
confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify a police officer or a humane
officer.  The owner shall, upon demand by the Stanly County Health
Department surrender any such dog for quarantine in the county pound, a
humane society animal shelter, or a licensed veterinary hospital; provided
that, if the owner elects to place the dog in a hospital, he shall be
respon-sible for all costs.  The dog may be quarantined a maximum of two
weeks but shall be released earlier if certified by a licensed veterinarian
to be free of rabies.  No fee shall be charged for quarantine by the public
pound.



   (B)   No person shall kill a rabid animal exposed to rabies, nor
remove such an animal from the city without permission from the Stanly County
Health Department, except when it is necessary to kill the animal to prevent
it from escaping or from biting any other animal or person.



   (C)   The body of any animal dead of rabies or having been exposed
to rabies prior to death shall be surrendered by the owner upon demand of the
Stanly County Health Department.



('58 Code, § 3-10.7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.23  INVESTIGATION AND INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.



   Any police officer of the city is authorized to enter any premises
where a dog is kept or harbored, to inspect conditions under which the dog is
kept, and to require the owner to exhibit a license for the dog.  No person
shall hinder, molest, or interfere with any police officer in the performane
of his duties.



('58 Code, § 3-10.8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.23.1  PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR CONFINEMENT OF DOGS.



   (A)   Circumstances requiring special preventive measures.  Any
officer of the Police Department shall have the authority to require the
owner or custodian of a dog to comply with specific preventive measures, as
described below in subsection (B), after taking into consideration the
following three circumstances.  This provision shall not limit the authority
of the Police Department to declare any animal vicious and order its removal
from the city limits as provided in § 81.26 of the City Code.



      (1)   Nature of the particular dog.  The behavior, size,
temperament, breed, capacity for inflicting serious injury, the number of
dogs or other such similar factors which would be relevant to a determination
of whether or not additional preventive measures need to be imposed for a
particular situation; and



      (2)   Adequacy of confinement.  The adequacy of the enclosure
or confinement, if any; and



      (3)   Immediate surrounding area.  The likelihood that the
conditions pertaining to the particular dog and the dog's confinement are
detrimental to the safety or welfare of citizens or the peace and
tranquillity of citizens in the immediate surrounding area. In considering
whether to order a special preventive measure, an officer of the Police
Department is authorized to consider additional factors as aggravating
circumstances that might warrant the ordering of special preventive measures:



      (1)   Child under the age of seven.  There is a child under
the age of seven who lives in such close proximity, or children walk by or
are otherwise in close proximity, to the property occupied by the dog; or



      (2)   Bite.  The dog has bitten a human being or domestic
animals without provocation or without a trespass, and the person bitten does
not ordinarily reside on the premises; or



      (3)   Dog trained for fighting or aggressive attack.  The dog
is kept primarily or in part for the purpose of dogfighting or the dog has
been trained for aggressive attacks; or



      (4)   Attitude of attack incident.  A dog, without
provocation or a trespass, has approached a person in an apparent attitude of
attack; or



      (5)   Reputation of a dog.  The individual dog has a known
propensity, reputation or tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to
cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic
animals; or



      (6)   Dangerous animals.  Any animal whose behavior
constitutes a reasonable risk of injuring a human or animal or damaging
personal property.  That behavior includes, but is not limited to, an
animal's biting or attacking or attempting to attack a human or another
animal.  However, this definition shall not apply to any animal that has
been subject to provocation or if the victim has been trespassing, as defined
herein, upon the animal owner's premises.



   (B)   Preventive measures.  If the Chief of Police determines that
the circumstances require special preventive measures, then the Police
Department shall have the authority to require appropriate, specific
preventive measures which might include, but are not limited to, the
following:  necessary repairs for any fence or enclosure, measures to ensure
that a gate will remain closed,  a "fence" or "secure dog fence" as
described below or any other similar devise such as electronic electric fence
that would provide greater assurance for the confinement of the dog, all of
which are subject to being specifically approved for their adequacy by the
Police Department.



   A fence shall be at least a minimum of four feet high and constitute a
secure enough enclosure sufficient to contain the dog at all times.  The
minimum size of the enclosure may be at least 120 square feet.  If the dog
is over 15 inches at the shoulder or deemed capable of climbing a standard
four-foot fence, then the Police Chief may require a six-foot fence or may
require up to 160 square feet enclosure. The location of the enclosure shall
be at the approval of the Chief of Police.  It shall be in compliance with
§ 92.017 of the City Zoning Code.



   A secure dog fence means a fence, as immediately described above, that
may also be enclosed on all six sides including the top.  The bottom may be
concrete unless the sides of the fence are buried one foot deep in a hard
packed soil.



   Any reference to "fence" or "secure dog fence" shall be defined as
stated immediately above.



   The Police Department shall also have the authority to require the
owner to tattoo the dog at the owner's expense if that is necessary for
identification, investigative or enforcement purposes.



   The Police Department shall have the authority to require the owner to
procure liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000 at the owner's
expense, or to have the dog tattooed or to display a sign on the premises
warning of the dog on the premises.  The department shall have the authority
to require the owner to show signed written statements about maintaining the
liability insurance, the designated enclosure for the dogs and the duty to
notify the Police Department if the dog escapes, and to require the owner to
give the Police Department the authority to seize and impound the dog if the
owner fails to comply with the provisions.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to waive any or all of
these requirements if the Chief determines that a bite is inconsequential or
that there is no necessity for action.



   (C)   Written order.  If the Chief of Police determines that
specific preventive measures must be complied with by the owner of a dog, the
Police Department shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of the
written order, state the reasons that preventive measures are required,
identify the specific preventive measures that must be implemented and state
the designated time period within which to comply with the written order. 
The Police Department shall have the authority to exercise discretion for
extensions of time if that is reasonable in view of the good-faith progress
of the owner in implementing the preventive measures.



   (D)   Failure to comply with written order.  It shall be unlawful
for an owner to fail to comply with a written order within the designated
time for compliance stated in the written order or any extension thereof. 
In addition to the remedies set forth in § 33.99 of the City Code the
penalty for failure to comply with the written order shall be $100. The
Police Department shall have the authority to issue additional $100 citations
for a continuing failure to comply with a written order.



   (E)   Owner's challenge to the written order.  The owner may submit
in writing a challenge to the Police Department's determination that
subsection (A) is applicable to the owner's premises or submit in writing a
challenge to the specific preventive measures required by the division.  The
owner's written challenge must be received at the office of the City Manager
at 144 North Second Street, during normal working hours, five days from the
date of the written order, not counting the day of issuance of the written
order.  The City Manager or a designee shall review the written challenge. 
The review of the challenge may be done on the basis of the written material
and information received from the Police Department regarding the order.



   The person reviewing the challenge shall have the authority to make
findings of fact and conclusions in respect to the written order. The
decision, the written order and any findings of act and conclusions shall be
final with the only other appeal made to the general courts of North Carolina.



   (F)   Seizure and disposition of animal.  The Police Department is
authorized to request Stanly Animal Control to seize any animal in violation
as provided.



(Ord. 97-55, passed 10-27-97)



§ 81.24  EXEMPTIONS.



   Hospitals, clinics, and other facilities operated by licensed
veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from all
provisions of this chapter except §§ 81.22 and 81.23.  The licensing
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nonresidents of the city unless
they keep a dog within the city for more than 30 days.



('58 Code, § 3-10.9)



KEEPING OF WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS



§ 81.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "ANIMAL."  Any living vertebrate, domestic or wild, excluding humans.



   "OWN."  The status of holding a license for or legal title to an
animal, or feeding, having charge of, harboring, sheltering, or taking care
of any animal for three or more consecutive days.



   "VICIOUS ANIMAL."  Any animal whose owner or keeper knows, or
reasonably should know, has a propensity to attack a person by biting or in
any manner causing injury or the reasonable likelihood of injury; or, one
which has a propensity to habitually or repeatedly attack livestock or other
domestic animals. This definition shall not apply to any animal which bites,
attacks, or attempts to attack any person or animal unlawfully present upon
the premises, or which is provoked to attack.



   "WILD ANIMAL."  Any animal which can normally be found in a wild
state; those feral, exotic, dangerous, or non- domestic animals which
generally do not live in or about the habitation of humans, including, but
not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, wildcats, bears, deer, and the like.



(Ord. 86-21, passed 10-6-86)



§ 81.26  UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or
in any way maintain a wild or vicious animal within the corporate limits of
the city.  After a determination by the designated agent or employee of the
city that a particular animal is wild or vicious, the owner or keeper of the
animal shall have it humanely destroyed, or shall otherwise remove it from
within the corporate limits of the city.



   (B)   Any person who owns or keeps an animal which has been declared
wild or vicious shall have the right to appeal this decision to the City
Manager.  The City Manager or his representative shall conduct an informal
hearing to determine whether the animal is wild or vicious.  If the animal
is judged not to be wild or vicious, it shall be returned to the owner.



(Ord. 86-21, passed 10-6-86)  Penalty, see § 81.27



§ 81.27  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Members of the Police Department are empowered to issue
citations to any person if there is reasonable cause to believe that the
person has violated any provision of this subchapter.  A civil penalty of
$25 may be levied against any such person.  Each wild or vicious animal, and
each day's continuing violation, shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation, subject to further penalties.



   (B)   Violation of this subchapter shall also constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $50, or
imprisonment of not more than 30 days, as provided in G.S. 14-4.



   (C)   Alternatively, the city may apply to the appropriate court for
an injunction and order of abatement requiring a violator to correct any
unlawful condition relating to this subchapter existing on his property,
pursuant to G.S. 160A-175.



(Ord. 86-21, passed 10-6-86)



CHAPTER 82:  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



Section



General Provisions



   82.01   Failure to pay admission fee



   82.02   Failure to pay for ambulance service



Offenses Against Property



   82.10   Posting bills



   82.10.1   Consent of owner of property requisite to posting bills
thereon



   82.11   Damaging streets and property



   82.12   Damaging playground and park property



   82.13   Damaging trees and plants



   82.14   Defacing property



   82.15   Spitting, defacing walls, throwing refuse on sidewalks



Nuisances; Abatement Procedures



   82.16   Nuisances enumerated



   82.17   Investigation; notice to abate



   82.18   Abatement by the city; recovery of costs



Offenses Against Morals



   82.20   Profanity; riotous conduct



   82.21   Massage of private parts for hire prohibited



   82.22   Public consumption of malt beverages or unfortified wines
prohibited



   82.23   Obscene words or pictures, writing or drawing on walls;
obscene acts



   82.24   Registered sex offenders banned from public parks,
recreation areas and green ways



Offenses Against Public Peace and Safety



   82.30   Begging, panhandling, or soliciting contributions or alms
for personal gain



   82.31   Soliciting alms under pretext of selling merchandise



   82.32   Disturbing church services



   82.33   Disturbing public meetings



   82.34   Firearms and fireworks



   82.35   Playing games in streets



   82.36   Soliciting subscriptions on streets



   82.37   Restriction on use of coasters, roller skates



   82.37.1   Restriction on use of skateboards, coasters



   82.38   City parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers; entering
during closed hours prohibited; rules and regulations for operation



   82.39   Sound levels regulated



   82.40   Loitering for the purpose of engaging in drug-related
activity



   82.41   Weapons prohibited on city property



   82.42   Solicitation



Graffiti



   82.50   Definition



   82.51   Prohibited



   82.52   Exemption



   82.53   Removal of graffiti



   82.54   Restitution



   82.55   Removal of graffiti by city



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 82.01  FAILURE TO PAY ADMISSION FEE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to see any public
entertainment for which a fee is charged without paying the admission fee.



('58 Code, § 10-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.02  FAILURE TO PAY FOR AMBULANCE SERVICE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   "AMBULANCE."  Any motor vehicle equipped with facilities therein to
transport injured or infirm persons, on call or demand, accepting patients
and transporting them from one point to another in the city.



   "CALL" or "RUN."  The act of progressing with an ambulance to the
scene of need and transporting a patient to his destination.



('58 Code, § 18-30)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to do the following.



      (1)   Obtain or receive ambulance services without intending
at the time of obtaining or receiving the services to pay, if financially
able, the necessary charges.



      (2)   Knowingly and wilfully summon an ambulance or report
that an ambulance is needed when the person knows that the services of an
ambulance are not needed.



('58 Code, § 18-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



§ 82.10  POSTING BILLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tack up or post any sign or
advertisement on any utility pole, tree, or other structure or fixture
located on the public right-of-way or state, city, or county owned property.



('58 Code, § 10-l)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.10.1  CONSENT OF OWNER OF PROPERTY REQUISITE TO POSTING BILLS THEREON.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills, signs or
advertisements on any buildings, fences or other property belonging to
another without the consent of the owner of such property.  Such consent
shall be secured in writing and shall be exhibited by the person having the
same to any public safety officer on demand.



(Ord. 97-70, passed 1-5-98)



§ 82.11  DAMAGING STREETS AND PROPERTY.



   No person shall wilfully or wantonly damage any of the public bridges,
pavements, sidewalks, or any of the property belonging to the city, or
wantonly pull down or damage in any manner, any fences, gates, signs,
awnings, buildings, or other property situated in the city, and owned by
individuals.



('58 Code, § 10-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.12  DAMAGING PLAYGROUND AND PARK PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully injure any of
the playground equipment or property used in connection with the playgrounds,
public parks, or school grounds of the city, or scar, deface, or injure any
of the trees or shrubbery of the parks or grounds, or wilfully use any of the
equipment on the grounds in such a manner as to injure any person.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discharge, or
otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pool,
pond, or other body of water in any park, playground, or recreation center
maintained by the city any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans,
dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash.



('58 Code, § 10-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.13  DAMAGING TREES AND PLANTS.



   No person shall wilfully, carelessly, or negligently damage or destroy
any of the shade trees, shrubbery, plants, or other growing things belonging
to the city without consent of the Mayor or City Council.



('58 Code, § 10-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.14  DEFACING PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to mark or deface the walls of any
public building or the waiting room of the railroad company, or the paved
sidewalk of any street.



('58 Code, § 10-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.15  SPITTING, DEFACING WALLS, THROWING REFUSE ON SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful to spit on the floor or walls of the post office,
courthouse, or other public building or deface the walls in any way, or spit
on any of the sidewalks of the city or throw trash or refuse on any sidewalk.



('58 Code, § 10-24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



NUISANCES; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE



§ 82.16  NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot,
parcel or public right-of-way within the city is declared to be dangerous, or
prejudicial to the public health or safety, or detrimental to the economic
well-being of the community, and therefore constitutes a public nuisance:



   (A)   The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or grass to include,
but not to be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The growth of weeds or grass to a height of 15 inches;



      (2)   The growth of vines (such as kudzu, honeysuckle, or
similar vines) beyond the banks of a steep incline, in trees or upon other
vegetation, or upon buildings; or



      (3)   The growth of poisonous plants (poison ivy, poison oak,
or related vegetation).



      (4)    It shall be the duty of every person occupying, owning
or having control of property abutting on a street or highway that utilizes a
portion of the unused street or highway right-of-way as a yard or any other
use, to maintain said right-of-way in the same character and manner as the
abutting use. In no event shall the growth of weeds or grasses reach a height
of 15 inches between the property line and the vacant adjacent paved roadway,
including both swale and sidewalks.



   (B)   Any excessive accumulation of animal or vegetable matter.
Animal and/or vegetable matter shall be disposed of in a manner suitable for
collection by the agent responsible for household waste collection, and shall
not be allowed to collect in yards, porches, and so forth, except as follows:



      (1)   Animal and/or vegetable matter may be deposited in a
compost pile or treated as compost, provided same is free of rodents and
vermin. If rodents or vermin are present, the



compost pile shall be constructed in such a manner as to be rodent free or
same shall be removed.



      (2)   Fire wood and/or other useable wood shall be stored in a
manner to discourage the harborage of rodents, vermin, and/or wood destroying
insects.



   (C)   Any excessive accumulation of rubbish, trash or junk. Debris
and discarded items shall not be allowed to accumulate within the yard or
unenclosed porches. Appliances, upholstered furniture and other items not
designed as  patio  or  lawn furniture shall not be kept on unenclosed
porches visible from a public street or in yard areas.



   (D)   The accumulation of stagnant water or conditions which promote
the breeding of mosquitoes.



   (E)   Any violation of § 41.04 (pre- collection practices) or §
41.05 (collection practices) of this code.



(Ord. 94-33, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 05-43, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 07-02,
passed 1-2-07)



§ 82.17  INVESTIGATION; NOTICE TO ABATE.



   (A)   The City Manager or his duly appointed agent, upon notice from
any person, or upon their own observation, of the existence of any of the
conditions described in § 82.16, shall cause to be made by the appropriate
city official such investigation as may be necessary to determine whether, in
fact, such conditions exist as to constitute a public nuisance as declared in
such section.



   (B)   Upon a determination that such conditions constituting a
public nuisance exist, the City Manager or his or her duly appointed agent
shall notify, in writing, the owner, occupant, or person in possession of the
premises in  question of the conditions constituting the public nuisance and
shall order the prompt abatement thereof within 15 days from the mailing of
such written notice excepting violations of § 82.16(E) which shall have ten
days from the mailing of such written notice.  Upon consultation with the
offending party, the public official shall be allowed to use their discretion
and allow a reasonable extension of the time to abate the nuisance.



   (C)   After being served a second nuisance warning given for the
uncontrolled growth of vegetation, the property owner shall keep the growth
on that lot under control for the duration of the growing season without any
further warning from the city. If the owner shall fail to keep the growth
under control for the remainder of the growing season, the city may mow same
or seek other remedies without further warning. Wooded lots, or lots where
the terrain does not allow use of necessary equipment, shall be exempted from
abatement except on lots where equipment may maneuver around trees, bushes,
and other natural obstructions.



(Ord. 94-33, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 07-02, passed 1-2-07)



§ 82.18  ABATEMENT BY THE CITY; RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   (A)   If any person, having been ordered to abate a public nuisance
pursuant to this subchapter, fails, neglects, or refuses to abate or remove
the condition constituting the nuisance within 15 days from mailing of such
order excepting violation of § 92.16(E) which shall have ten days from the
mailing of such written notice, the City Manager or his duly appointed agent
shall cause such condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by having
employees of the city or a private contractor obtained by the city go upon
such premises and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance under the
supervision of an officer or employee designated by the City Manager. Any
person who has been ordered to abate a public nuisance may, within the time
allowed by this subchapter, request the city, in writing, to remove such
condition, the cost of which shall be paid by the person making such request.
The city may, at its option, accept such responsibility and enter written
agreement with the property owner to abate such nuisance and agree to payment
arrangements.



   (B)   The actual cost incurred by the city in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner of such lot or
parcel of land, and it shall be the duty of the Finance Director to mail a
statement of such charges to the owner or other person in possession of such
premises, with instruction that such charges are due and payable within 30
days from the receipt thereof. The actual cost incurred, when the owner does
not abate the nuisance, shall be established by City Council. Such costs may
include an administrative expense.



   (C)   If charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance
are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges, such
charges shall become a lien upon the land or premises where the public
nuisance existed and shall be collected as unpaid taxes.



(Ord. 94-33, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 07-02, passed 1-2-07)



OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS



§ 82.20  PROFANITY; RIOTOUS CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use profane, indecent, or
boisterous language, or to behave in a riotous and disorderly manner in any
street, alley, or other public place.



('58 Code, § 10-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.21  MASSAGE OF PRIVATE PARTS FOR HIRE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   "MASSAGE."  The manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, or tapping by hand or mechanical device.



   "PRIVATE PARTS."  The penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva, or vaginal
area.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to massage or to offer to
massage the private parts of another for hire.  The provisions of this
section shall not apply to licensed medical practitioners, osteopaths,
chiropractors, or persons operating at their directions, in connection with
the practice of medicine, chiropractic, or osteopathy.



('58 Code, § 10-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.22  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF MALT BEVERAGES OR UNFORTIFIED WINES
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt beverages or
unfortified wine as defined by G.S. Chapter 18B on property owned or occupied
by the city.



('58 Code, § 10-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.23  OBSCENE WORDS OR PICTURES, WRITING OR DRAWING ON WALLS; OBSCENE
ACTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any obscene act in any public
place, or to write obscene language or to make obscene markings or drawings
on any public or private buildings, or on the streets or sidewalks.



('58 Code, § 10-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   As to obscenity, see G.S. 1943, §§ 14-189 through 14-194



§ 82.24  REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS BANNED FROM PUBLIC PARKS, RECREATION
AREAS AND GREEN WAYS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or otherwise requires a
different meaning:



      "REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER."  An individual who is registered by
any state or federal agency as a sex offender and whose name is published on
any state or federal registered sex offender listing, including but not
limited to the sex offender registry established in G.S. Chapter 14, Article
27A.



      "PARKS, RECREATION AREAS, AND GREEN WAYS."  Any City of
Albemarle owned, leased or maintained land which is designated by the City of
Albemarle as a park, recreation area and/or green way".



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is a registered sex
offender to enter upon any park, recreation area, or greenway operated and
maintained by the City of Albemarle.  Each entry upon such areas, regardless
of the time period between such entries, shall constitute a separate offense
under this section.



   (C)   Any sex offender found to be in violation of division (B)
above shall be personally advised that they are banned from entry upon parks,
recreation areas and green ways of the City of Albemarle and subject to
criminal trespass for repeated violations.



   (D)   Any sex offender who is found in violation of this section
shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than
$500 per offense or 30 days in jail as set forth in G.S. 14-4.



   (E)   A map entitled "Protected Areas" clearly outlining the parks,
recreation areas and green ways owned and operated by the City of Albemarle
shall be posted and maintained on the City of Albemarle website.



(Ord. 08-06, passed 2-4-08)



OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY



§ 82.30  BEGGING, PANHANDLING, OR SOLICITING CONTRIBUTIONS OR ALMS FOR
PERSONAL GAIN.



   The intent of this section is to regulate begging, panhandling, or
soliciting contributions or Alms for personal gain from occupants of vehicles
and pedestrians within the city. Bona fide members of charitable, religious,
civic or fraternal organizations that are considered a charitable non-profit
organization as defined by the United States Internal Revenue Service and
receive no compensation of any kind for their services are exempt from this
section except in regards to the conduct of the person soliciting as
described in division (I) of this section.



   (A)   Definitions.



      (1)   To "BEG, PANHANDLE, OR SOLICIT CONTRIBUTIONS OR ALMS"
shall be defined to include, without limitation, the spoken, written, or
printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the
purpose of obtaining contributions or Alms;



      (2)   "ACCOSTING ANOTHER PERSON" shall be defined as
approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a
reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a
criminal act or damage to property in his or her immediate possession;



      (3)   "INTIMIDATE ANOTHER PERSON" shall be defined as acting
in such a way as would cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm and
therefore to do something he or she would not otherwise have done;



      (4)   "FORCING ONESELF UPON THE COMPANY OF ANOTHER PERSON"
shall be defined as:



         (a)   Continuing to request or solicit contributions in
close proximity to the person addressed after that person has responded
negatively;



         (b)   Blocking the passage of the person addressed; or



         (c)   Otherwise engaging in conduct which reasonably
could be understood as intended to force a person to accede to demands.



      (5)   "PUBLIC PLACE" shall be defined to include streets,
highways, and roadways (including the shoulders and medians), sidewalks,
alleys, and other public property, as well as city-owned and city-controlled
property and private property open to the public unless written permission to
solicit has been obtained from the property owner or other person in
authority.



      (6)   "VOCAL APPEAL" shall be defined as begging, panhandling,
or solicitation of contributions by spoken word or other verbal request. 
This shall not include the act of performing music with a sign or other
indication that a contribution is being sought, without any vocal request
other than in response to an inquiry.



      (7)   "DIRECT WRITTEN APPEAL" shall be defined as begging,
panhandling, or solicitation by handing to a person or attempting to hand to
a person a written solicitation for immediate contributions.



      (8)   "NIGHTTIME" shall be defined as the time after sunset
and before sunrise.



   (B)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions for
personal gain in a public place without the written permission of the
property owner or person of authority.



   (C)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions in a
public place in a manner so as to intimidate another person or by accosting
another person, or by forcing oneself upon the company of another person.



   (D)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions from
another person within 50 feet of an entrance or exit of any bank or financial
institution or within 50 feet of any automated teller machine.



   (E)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions in
any public vehicle owned or operated by the city or at any station for such
vehicle or within six feet of a bus stop sign, bus stop shelter, or bus stop
bench.



   (F)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions while
sitting or standing on a roadway or the shoulder or median of a roadway.



   (G)   No person shall beg, panhandle, or solicit contributions in a
public place by vocal appeal or direct written appeal during the nighttime
without the written permission of the property owner or person of authority.



   (H)   This section shall not apply to events conducted on city owned
property that have previously been approved by City Council.



   (I)   Any members of charitable, religious, civic or fraternal
organizations including persons acting on their behalf shall act in
accordance with divisions (C), (D), (E), and (F) of this section. 
Violations of these sections may result in the penalty as described in
division (H) of this section.



   (J)   Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and
shall subject the violator to a fine of not more than $50 or imprisonment for
not more than 30 days.



('58 Code, § 10-2)  (Am. Ord. 06-02, passed 1-3-06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.31  SOLICITING ALMS UNDER PRETEXT OF SELLING MERCHANDISE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit alms in public places by
offering for sale any article or merchandise.



('58 Code, § 10-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.32  DISTURBING CHURCH SERVICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any number of persons to congregate and remain
on the outside of any church or other place of public worship to the
annoyance, disturbance, or inconvenience of the people worshipping on the
inside.



('58 Code, § 10-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.33  DISTURBING PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any public meeting,
place of public entertainment or amusement, or to disturb such a place by
loud talking, whistling, using indecent language, or in any other unseeming
manner, or to wilfully obstruct the entrance way to the meeting or wilfully
impede the ingress or egress of those seeking to attend or depart from such a
place in the city.



('58 Code, § 10-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.34  FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire off or discharge
any firearms, without first obtaining a permit from the Police Department,
except that target practice may be conducted at the range at city landfill
while strictly following all rules of such facility.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot with a bow and
arrow, or to shoot missiles of any description from slings, spring guns, or
instruments of any kind, except that target practice may be conducted at the
range at Rock Creek Park while strictly following all rules of that facility;
provided, however, that conducting safety programs that have been approved by
the City Council relating to shooting a bow and arrow, or shooting missiles
of any description from slings, spring guns or instruments of any kind are
exempt from the provisions hereof and provided that deer, coyote and feral
hog hunting in accordance with § 82.34(C) is exempt from the provisions
herein.



   (C)   However, hunting by bow and arrow or crossbow (“collectively
archery”), as defined by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission,
is permitted on private property only during the archery seasons (Central
Deer Archery Season and Deer Urban Archery Season) as established by the
North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission. A person may engage in archery
on his or her own property if he or she has on his or her person a valid
North Carolina hunting license (or qualifies for an exemption from licensing
by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission), or on the property of
another in their absence if he or she has on his or her person both a valid
North Carolina hunting license (or qualifies for an exemption from licensing
by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission) and written permission
from the property owner or the property owner’s authorized agent or
manager. Parcels or tracts of land that are either owned by a person engaged
in archery or for which that person has been given written permission to hunt
shall be referred to as “areas of consent”. Archery may only occur within
areas of consent when the following requirements are met:



      (1)   Archery must be conducted from a permanent or portable
elevated platform of at least ten feet above the ground; and



      (2)   Areas of consent must be greater than two acres in area
and may be comprised of contiguous parcels or tracts; and



      (3)   No arrow shall be discharged within 250 feet of any
residential dwelling, school, church, commercial building, governmental
property, occupied structure, street, park, or other recreational area; and



      (4)   No arrow shall be discharged from or onto any City of
Albemarle water, sewer or electrical right of way; and



      (5)   Hunters shall make every reasonable effort to track
wounded animal for the purpose of completing the harvest and recovering the
carcass; and



      (6)   There is a valid hunting season in effect for which the
hunting license applies at the time the bow or crossbow is discharged; and



      (7)   The hunter adheres to all applicable State and Local
regulations; and



      (8)   The person discharging the bow or crossbow exercises
reasonable regard for the safety and property of other persons.



(‘58 Code, § 10-13)  (Am. Ord. 85-24, passed 11-18-85; Am. Ord. 92-17,
passed 6-15-92; Am. Ord. 12-05, passed 2-20-12; Am. Ord. 14-06, passed
3-17-14; Am. Ord. 15-10, passed 4-6-15; Am. Ord. 18-06, passed 4-2-18) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.35  PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball in any manner or
engage in any game of any kind calculated to damage glass windows or other
property on the public streets or alleys within the city.



('58 Code, § 10-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.36  SOLICITING SUBSCRIPTIONS ON STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit newspaper, magazine, or
map subscriptions on the streets of the city without filing with the City
Clerk as provided in § 64.02.



('58 Code, § 10-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.37  RESTRICTION ON USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES.



   No person on roller skates or riding in any coaster, toy vehicle, or
similar device, shall go upon any roadway, other than a street set aside as a
play street, unless it be while crossing a street at a crosswalk or
intersection.



('58 Code, § 16-41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.37.1  RESTRICTION ON USE OF SKATEBOARDS, COASTERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person on skateboards or riding
in any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar devise to go upon any public street,
alley or sidewalk located in the business district of the city.



   (B)   As used herein, the term "BUSINESS DISTRICT OF THE CITY" shall
include the area within the City of Albemarle, North Carolina, bounded on the
north by North Street, on the east by Third Street, on the south by South
Street, and the west by Depot Street.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person on skateboards or riding
any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device to go upon the premises of the
Courthouse Square Park at the northeast corner of the intersection of Main
Street and Second Street or upon the premises of the Market Station located
on the south side of West Main Street in the city.



(Ord. 95-36, passed 10-2-95; Am. Ord. 99-42, passed 8-2-99)



§ 82.38  CITY PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND RECREATION CENTERS; ENTERING DURING
CLOSED HOURS PROHIBITED; RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION.



   (A)   When the City Council has established the hours of the day the
city's public parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers shall be opened and
closed to the public use and shall have caused the hours of opening and
closing to be posted in a conspicuous place at the respective parks,
playgrounds, and recreation centers, it shall be unlawful for anyone to go
upon the premises of the parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers during
the time when they are closed to the public use.



   (B)   When the City Council has established rules and regulations
pertaining to the use and operation of the city's public parks, playgrounds,
and recreation centers, and shall have caused the rules and regulations to be
posted in a conspicuous place at the respective parks, playgrounds, and
recreation centers, it shall be unlawful for anyone to disobey those rules
and regulations.



('58 Code, § 10-30)   (Am. Ord. 86-14, passed 6-30-86)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 82.39  SOUND LEVELS REGULATED.



   (A)   (1)   Subject to the provisions of this section, it shall
be unlawful for any person or persons to make, permit, continue or cause to
be made or create any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in
the city, with the exception of construction work done pursuant to a federal,
state, county, or city contract which requires work to be performed during
certain hours. Construction work under these conditions shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section. For the purposes of this section, the
following definitions shall apply:



         (a)   Unreasonably loud.  Noise which is substantially
incompatible with the time and location where created to the extent that it
creates an actual or imminent interference with peace or good order.



         (b)   Disturbing.  Noise which is perceived by a person
of ordinary sensibilities as interrupting the normal peace and calm of the
area. 



         (c)   Unnecessary.  Any excessive or unusually loud
sound or any sound which is of such character, intensity and duration as to
disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any person, and
being a type of sound which could be lessened or otherwise controlled by the
maker without unduly restricting his conduct. 



      (2)   In determining whether a noise is unreasonably loud,
disturbing and unnecessary, the following factors incident to such noise are
to be considered: time of day; proximity to residential structures; whether
the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; the volume and intensity;
whether the noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of
electronic or mechanical means; the character and zoning of the area; whether
the noise is related to the normal operation of a business or other labor
activity; whether the noise is subject to being controlled without
unreasonable effort or expense to the creator thereof.



   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section but this
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   Blowing horns.  The sounding of any horn, whistle or
signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle or railroad
train, except as a danger signal or as required by law, so as to create any
unreasonable, loud or harsh sound or the sounding of such device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.



      (2)   Radios, stereos, etc.  The playing of any radio,
television set, record player, stereo or other sound reproduction system,
musical instrument or sound-producing or sound-amplifying device on the
premises of any dwelling, hotel or motel room, in such manner or with such
volume, particularly but not limited to the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., if the sound generated is audible at a distance of 30 feet or more from
the dwelling's property line, or, in the case of a hotel or motel room, the
unit's most outer boundary wall.



      (2.1)   Sound-producing equipment in vehicles.  The playing
of any radio, cassette player, compact disc, video tape or disc, or other
similar device for reproducing sound located on or in any motor vehicle on a
public street, highway, within any public vehicular area, or on the premises
of a private residence, if the sound generated or noise vibration there from
is audible or can be felt at a distance of 30 feet or more from the radio,
cassette player, compact disc, video tape or disc, or other similar device
that is producing the sound.



      (3)   Pets.  The keeping of any animal or bird, which, by
causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and
repose of any person in the vicinity.



      (4)   Use of vehicles.  The use of any automobile,
motorcycle, dirt bike, go-cart, recreational vehicle or any other vehicle so
out of repair, so loaded or operated in such manner as to create loud or
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, screeching of tires or other noise.



      (5)   Blowing whistles.  The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler except as a warning of danger.



      (6)   Exhaust discharge.  The discharge into the open of the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.



      (7)   Compressed air devices.  The use of any mechanical
device operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is
effectively muffled and reduced.



      (8)   Building operations.  The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a
residential district between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day
or in any district other than a residential district between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day, except in the case of urgent necessity
in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the city
manager or his designee, which permit may be renewed for a period of three
(3) days or less while the emergency continues.



      (9)   Noises near schools, etc.  The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, library, or court while the same is in session, or adjacent to any
hospital, or any church during services, which unreasonably interferes with
the operation or activities of such institution.



      (10)   Loading and unloading operations.  The creation of a
loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle
or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.



      (11)   Bells and gongs.  The sounding of any bell or gong
which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof.



      (12)   Noises to attract attention.  The use of any drum,
loudspeaker or other instrument for the purpose of attracting attention by
creation of noise to any performance, show, sale, display or advertisement of
merchandise.



      (13)   Blowers, engines.  The operation of any noise-creating
blower, power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which
causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the
noise emitting therefrom is sufficiently muffled and the engine is equipped
with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, so that the same shall
not cause annoyance to the public nor unreasonably disturb the rest and quiet
of persons on adjacent premises or within the vicinity thereof.



      (14)   Appliances and other mechanical devices.  The
operation of any noise-producing appliance or other mechanical device which,
due to operational deficiencies, malfunction or other type of disrepair,
causes loud and excessive noises in such a manner as to unreasonably annoy
the public or disturb the rest and quiet of persons on adjacent premises or
within the vicinity thereof.



      (15)   Loudspeakers or amplifiers. 



         (a)   It is prohibited within or from any commercial
establishment or private entertainment or recreational venue to allow any
loudspeaker or other mechanically-amplified device to be played so that the
sound there from may be heard at a distance of 30 feet or more from the
facility's property line, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) and 7:00
a.m.



         (b)   In the exercise of noncommercial free speech,
loudspeakers or amplifiers may be used, subject to the following
conditions:  It shall be unlawful for any person to speak into a loudspeaker
or amplifier within the corporate limits of the city, when such loudspeaker
or amplifier is so adjusted that the voice of the speaker is amplified to the
extent that it is audible at a distance in excess of 150 feet from the person
speaking;



   (C)   Enforcement. Where there is a violation of any provision of
this article, the city, at its discretion, may take one or more of the
following enforcement actions:



      (1)   A police officer may issue a citation as provided
herein, subjecting the violator to a civil penalty of $100.00.



      (2)   The civil penalties imposed by this section and the
proceeds therefrom as collected by payment, civil action or otherwise, shall
belong to the city and shall be paid into the general fund of the city under
such conditions as prescribed by the annual budget.



      (3)   In the alternative, pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, a
violation of this section may be considered a misdemeanor. Such a misdemeanor
is punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment designated for
a Class 3 misdemeanor.



   (D)   Each separate day of a continued violation shall be a separate
and distinct offense and shall give rise to a separate and distinct penalty.



('58 Code, ' 10-19)  (Am. Ord. 92-2, passed 1-21-92; Am. Ord. 07-24, passed
7-16-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.40  LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENGAGING IN DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, "PUBLIC PLACE" means any
street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking
lot or transportation facility, or the doorways and entranceways to any
building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor vehicle in or on any
of those places, or any property owned by the city.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a "KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER,
POSSESSOR, OR SELLER" is a person who has, within the knowledge of the
arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state in the past
ten (10) years of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any
of the substances referred to in the North Carolina Controlled Substances
Act, G.S. Ch. 90, Article 5, or has been convicted of any violation of any
substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of
any other state or of federal law within the past ten (10) years.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about in
a public place for the purpose of violating any subdivision of the North
Carolina Controlled Substances Act, G.S. Ch. 90, Article 5. Circumstances
that may be considered in establishing a person's purpose include, without
limitation, the following:



      (1)   Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop
passers-by, or repeatedly attempting to engage passers-by in conversation;



      (2)   Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles;



      (3)   Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other
persons;



      (4)   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or
seller;



      (5)   Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from
passers-by, whether on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects;



      (6)   Such person takes flight upon the approach or appearance
of a police officer;



      (7)   Such person is at a location frequented by persons who
use, possess, or sell drugs; or



      (8)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful
drug user, possessor, or seller, or is known to be or have been involved in
drug-related activities.



(Ord. 89-21, passed 9-5-89; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-4-10)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 82.41  WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON CITY PROPERTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) below, all persons are
prohibited from possessing weapons as defined in G.S. 14-269 in city owned
buildings, their appurtenant premises, parks and all city owned property
except as defined in subsection (B) below.



   (B)   This prohibition shall not apply to the following persons:



      (1)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed forces of
the United States when in discharge of their official duties as such and
acting under Orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;



      (2)   Civil officers of the United States while in the
discharge of their official duties;



      (3)   Officers and soldiers of the militia and the national
guard when called into actual service.



      (4)   Animal Control Officers while in the discharge of their
official duties;



      (5)   Sworn law enforcement officers;



      (6)   Persons possessing a lawful concealed carry permit
within city parks except for the specific areas of the parks delineated in
the subsection below; more generally defined as athletic fields, courts, and
gymnasiums including appurtenant spectator areas; swimming pools and
appurtenant pool decks including bath houses;



         (a)   Albemarle Soccer Complex: playing fields including
spectator seating areas, and concession/restroom building during organized
games, practices, and athletic programs scheduled through Albemarle Parks and
Recreation and/or Stanly County Community College.



         (b)   E.E. Waddell Community Center: athletic field
including spectator seating area during organized games, practices, and
athletic programs scheduled through Albemarle Parks and Recreation, and
gymnasium including spectator seating areas.



         (c)   Ingram Park: athletic field including spectator
seating areas, press box and restrooms during organized games, practices, and
athletic programs scheduled through Albemarle Parks and Recreation.



         (d)   Montgomery Park: Athletic field including
spectator seating areas, press box and restrooms during organized games,
practices, and athletic programs scheduled through Albemarle Parks and
Recreation.



         (e)   Morehead Park: swimming pool, deck, bath house and
restrooms; and soccer fields including spectator areas during organized
games, practices, and athletic programs scheduled through practices, and
athletic programs scheduled through Albemarle Parks and Recreation.



         (f)   Optimist Park: athletic fields including spectator
areas and press box during organized games, practices, and athletic programs
scheduled through Albemarle Parks and Recreation.



         (g)   Rock Creek Park: athletic field including
spectator area, press box and restrooms during organized games, practices,
and athletic programs scheduled through Albemarle Parks and Recreation;
swimming pool, deck, bath house, and tennis courts including spectator area
during organized games, practices, and athletic programs scheduled through
Albemarle Parks and Recreation.



         (h)   Amhurst Gardens Athletic Field during organized
games, practices, and athletic programs scheduled through Albemarle Parks and
Recreation and/or Albemarle Public Housing Department.



   (C)   A conspicuous notice shall be posted at each entrance to any
property set forth above, stating: "Possession of weapons or carrying a
concealed handgun is prohibited."



   (D)   Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined $500 or imprisoned for six
months, or both.



   (E)   This section is effective upon the posting of the notice in
division (C) above.



(Ord. 95-43, passed 12-12-95; Am. Ord. 12-05, passed 2-20-12; Am. Ord. 14-14,
passed 4-7-14)



§ 82.42  SOLICITATION.



   (A)   Solicitation of funds, subscription papers, or display or sale
of merchandise shall be prohibited each work day during the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 5:30 p.m., of the standard time then in effect, in offices and work
areas in municipal buildings where employees of the city perform work.



   (B)   The City Manager shall cause each municipal building to be
posted with appropriate signs indicating that solicitation is prohibited. 
Such signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each office and work
area designed to give notice to the public as well as to employees.



   (C)   Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor
punish- able in accordance with G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. 00-37, passed 10-2-00)



GRAFFITI



§ 82.50 DEFINITION.



   "GRAFFITI." Writings, drawings, inscriptions, figures or marks of
paint, ink, chalk, dye or similar substances on private or public buildings,
structures or places which are not authorized or permitted by the property
owner or possessor. For the purpose of this subchapter, "GRAFFITI" includes
drawing, writings, markings or inscriptions regardless of the content or the
nature of materials used in the commission of the act.



(Ord. 05-04, passed 2-7-05)



§ 82.51 PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to write, paint, inscribe, scratch,
scrawl, spray, place or draw graffiti of any type on any public or private
building, structure or any other real or personal property. Any person
convicted of a violation of this subchapter shall be fined not less than $250
for a first offense and $500 for second and subsequent offenses.



(Ord. 05-04, passed 2-7-05)



§ 82.52 EXEMPTION.



   Section 82.51 shall not be construed to prohibit temporary, easily
removable chalk or other water-soluble markings on public or private
sidewalks, streets or other paved surfaces which are used in connection with
traditional children's activities, such as drawings or bases for stickball,
kickball, handball, hopscotch or similar activities, nor shall it be
construed to prohibit temporary, easily removable chalk or other water
soluble markings used in connection with any lawful business or public
purpose or activity.



(Ord. 05-04, passed 2-7-05)



§ 82.53 REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning property, acting as manager
or agent for the owner of property, or in possession or control of property
to fail to remove or effectively obscure any graffiti upon such property. Any
such person convicted of a violation of this section shall be fined not more
than $100. In determining the fine to be imposed, the court may consider the
efforts, if any, taken by the violator to remove or effectively obscure the
graffiti during the preceding calendar year. The mandatory fine provided in
this section shall not apply to a property owner, agent, manager, or
possessor of property if such property owner, agent, manager or possessor has
been victimized two or more times by graffiti within any calendar year and,
during such time, has removed or effectively obscured such graffiti from the
property in a timely manner.



(Ord. 05-04, passed 2-7-05)



§ 82.54 RESTITUTION.



   In addition to any other punishment imposed, the court shall order the
person convicted of a violation of this subchapter to make restitution to the
victim for the damage or loss suffered by the victim as a result of the
offense. The court may determine the amount, terms, and conditions of the
restitution.



(Ord. 05-04, passed 2-7-05)



§ 82.55 REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI BY CITY.



   (A)   Notice. Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of
graffiti on any property, the city is authorized to remove the graffiti as
set forth in this section after giving, or causing to be given, written
notice to remove or effectively obscure such graffiti to the property owner,
such property owner's agent or manager, or any other person in possession or
control of the property. If the city intends to place a lien on the property,
as provided in division (B) below, it must also notify all other persons
whose names appear on the tax rolls of the county as having an interest in
the property. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail,
except that notice may be given by first class mail to those persons, other
than the property owner, whose names appear on the tax rolls of the county as
having an interest in the property. All notices shall state the procedure for
appeals under this section.



   (B)   Costs and liens. If the person owning the property, acting as
manager or agent for the owner of the property, or in possession or control
of the property fails to remove or effectively obscure the graffiti within 14
days from receipt of the notice described in division (A) above, the city may
cause the graffiti to be removed or effectively obscured and charge the
property owner, or the property owner's manager or agent, or the person in
possession or control of the property, for the expenses incurred by the city
in removing the graffiti. The city may sue in a court of competent
jurisdiction to recover all such expenses, which shall include, but not be
limited to, all administrative personnel costs, attorney's fees and costs
related to enforcing this section; and/or the city may record a lien in the
public records of the county, which lien shall be for all such expenses, and
the amount of the lien shall bear interest from the date of recording.



   (C)   Appeal procedure. Appeals may be taken to the City Council or
its designee by the person owning the property, acting as manager or agent
for the property, or in possession or control of the property to prevent the
removal of any graffiti, within 14 days of having received notice from the
city that the graffiti must be removed. Appeals shall be in writing and shall
state the reasons for the appeal. If the party filing the appeal requests a
hearing, such hearing shall be held at the next scheduled business meeting of
the City Council. If, on appeal, the City Council or its designee determines
that the graffiti must be removed, the Council or its designee may set a new
deadline date for compliance or authorize the city to proceed to remove or
obscure the graffiti. The city shall not remove or obscure any graffiti
during the appeal. Further, the City Council at its discretion may decide not
to place a lien on the property by reason of death, disability and/or mental
capacity.



   (D)   Emergency removal. If the city determines that any graffiti is
a danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the public and is unable to
provide notice by personal service after at least two attempts to do so, then
48 hours after either:



      (1)   The mailing of the notice described in division (A)
above by certified and first class mail to the person owning the property,
acting as agent or manager for the owner of such property, or in possession
or control of such property, or



      (2)   The posting of the notice in a conspicuous place on the
property, the city may remove or cause the graffiti to be removed at its
expense.



   (E)   Repair/restoration. In no case shall the city paint or repair
any area obscured by graffiti more extensively than where the graffiti itself
is located. The city shall not be required to restore the obscured area to
its original condition (i.e., color, texture, etc.).



(Ord. 05-04, passed 2-7-05)



TITLE IX:  PLANNING AND REGULATION OF DEVELOPMENT



   Chapter



      90.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      91.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      92.   ZONING REGULATIONS



      93.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



      94.   WATERSHED AREAS



         APPENDIX A:   APPLICATION FORMS




         APPENDIX B:   RULES FOR PROCEDURE FOR THE WATERSHED
REVIEW BOARD REGARDING APPEALS AND VARIANCES




CHAPTER 90:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



Adoption of Regulatory Codes by Reference



   90.01   Scope of chapter and codes



   90.02   Building code adopted



   90.03   Plumbing code adopted



   90.04   Heating code adopted



   90.05   Electrical code adopted



   90.06   Residential building code adopted



   90.07   Amendments to codes



   90.08   Compliance with codes



   90.09   Copies of codes filed with clerk



Inspection Department



   90.15   Organization of Department



   90.16   General duties of Department and inspectors



   90.17   Conflicts of interest



   90.18   Reports and records



   90.19   Inspection procedure



   90.20   Oversight not to legalize violation



   90.21   Powers of inspection officials



Enforcement



   90.30   Permits required



   90.31   Application for permit



   90.32   Plans and specifications



   90.33   Limitations on issuance of permits



   90.34   Issuance of permit



   90.35   Revocation of permits



   90.36   Time limitations on validity of permits



   90.37   Changes in work



   90.38   Permit fees; inspection fees



   90.39   City held harmless



Minimum Housing Standards



   90.45   Findings; purpose



   90.46   Definitions



   90.47   Minimum standards of fitness for dwellings and dwelling units



   90.48   Minimum standards for structural condition



   90.49   Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities



   90.50   Minimum standards for ventilation



   90.51   Minimum standards for space, use, and location



   90.52   Minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance



   90.53   Minimum standards for control of insects, rodents, and
infestations



   90.54   Minimum standards applicable to rooming houses; exceptions



   90.55   Responsibilities of owners and occupants



   90.56   Duties of Building Inspector



   90.57   Powers of Building Inspector



   90.58   Inspections; duty of owners and occupants



   90.59   Procedure for enforcement



   90.60   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   90.61   In rem action by Inspector; placarding



   90.62   Costs a lien on premises



   90.63   Alternative remedies



   90.64   Appeals of decisions or orders of the Inspector



   90.65   Conflict with other provisions



   90.66   Violations; penalty



Repair, Closing, or Demolition of Abandoned Structures



   90.75   Findings; intent



   90.76   Duties of the Building Inspector



   90.77   Powers of the Building Inspector



   90.78   Standards for enforcement



   90.79   Procedure for enforcement



   90.80   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   90.81   In rem action by Inspector; placarding



   90.82   Costs a lien on premises



   90.83   Alternative remedies



Insulation and Energy Utilization Equipment



   90.90   Purpose



   90.91   Required license



   90.92   Applications



   90.93   Procedure for issuance



   90.94   Bond required



   90.95   Termination and renewal of licenses



   90.96   Suspension; revocation



   90.97   Change of location



   90.98   Required permit; fee; exceptions



Movers of Buildings and Structures



   90.99    Permit required of movers of buildings and structures



   90.100   Deposit required



   90.101   Permittees to notify owners of utilities



   90.102   Use of deposit for damages or expenses



   90.103   Return of unused deposit



ADOPTION OF REGULATORY CODES BY REFERENCE



§ 90.01  SCOPE OF CHAPTER AND CODES.



   The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes herein
adopted shall apply to the following.



   (A)   The location, design, materials, equipment, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal,
use, and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances
connected or attached to the building or structure.



   (B)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use, and
maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains,
waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all fixtures
and appurtenances thereof.



   (C)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use, and
maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and
appurtenances thereof.



   (D)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.



§ 90.02  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The 1978 edition of the North Carolina State Building Code (Volume I,
General Construction), as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council
and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth
herein.



('58 Code, § 4-3)



§ 90.03  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   The 1968 edition of the North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina
State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing) as adopted by the North Carolina
Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully
as though set forth herein.



('58 Code, § 4-34.1)



§ 90.04  HEATING CODE ADOPTED.



   The 1971 edition of the North Carolina Heating Code (North Carolina
State Building Code, Volume III, Heating) as adopted by the North Carolina
Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully
as though set forth herein.



§ 90.05  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The 1971 edition of the North Carolina Electrical Code (North Carolina
State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical), as adopted by the North Carolina
Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully
as though set forth herein.



('58 Code, § 4-22)



§ 90.06  RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The 1968 edition of the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building
Code, as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended,
is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein.



('58 Code, § 4-3.1)



§ 90.07  AMENDMENTS TO CODES.



   Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference herein, which
are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations
referred to herein, shall be effective in the city at the time the amendments
are filed with the City Clerk or Building Inspector as provided in § 90.09.



('58 Code, §§ 4-3.3, 4-22.2, 4-34.3)



§ 90.08  COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.



   (A)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished, or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards, and other
provisions of either the North Carolina State Building Code, General
Construction, Volume I, or the North Carolina Uniform Residential State
Building Code, whichever is applicable, or if both are applicable.



   (B)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation,
occupancy, or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems, or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired, or reconstructed in
accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of
the North Carolina Plumbing Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume
II, Plumbing).



   (C)   All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used, and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other
provisions of the North Carolina Heating Code (North Carolina State Building
Code, Volume III, Heating).



   (D)   All electrical wiring, installations, and appurtenances shall
be erected, altered, repaired, used, and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of the North Carolina
Electrical Code (North Carolina State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical).



('58 Code, §§ 4-3.2, 4-22.1, 4-34.2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.09  COPIES OF CODES FILED WITH CLERK.



   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted herein, and official
copies of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Clerk or Building Inspector.  The copies shall be the official copies
of the codes and the amendments.



('58 Code, '§ 4-3.4, 4-22.3, 4-34.4)



INSPECTION DEPARTMENT



§ 90.15  ORGANIZATION OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Inspection Department of the city shall consist of a Building
Inspector, and may also include a Plumbing Inspector, a Heating-Air
Conditioning Inspector, an Electrical Inspector, and any other inspectors or
deputy or assistant inspectors as may be authorized by the City Council.



('58 Code, §§ 4-1, 4-9, 4-35)



§ 90.16  GENERAL DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT AND INSPECTORS.



   It shall be the duty of the Inspection Department to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted herein, and to
make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of
this chapter and the codes are being met.



§ 90.17  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   No officer or employee of the Inspection Department shall be
financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances
for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building or any part
thereof, or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless he is
the owner of the building.  No officer or employee of the Inspection
Department shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or
with the interests of the city.



('58 Code, '§ 4-2, 4-10, 4-36)



§ 90.18  REPORTS AND RECORDS.



   The Inspection Department shall keep complete, permanent, and accurate
records in convenient form of all applications received, permits issued,
inspections and reinspections made, and all other work and activities of the
Inspection Department.  Periodic reports shall be submitted to the Council
and to other agencies, as required.



§ 90.19  INSPECTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Inspections.  The Inspection Department shall inspect all
buildings and structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind has
been issued as often as necessary in order to determine whether the work
complies with the appropriate codes.  When deemed necessary by the
appropriate inspector, materials and assemblies may be inspected at the point
of manufacture or fabrication, or inspections may be made by approved and
recognized inspection organizations; however, no approval shall be based on
reports of the organizations unless the reports are in writing and certified
by a responsible officer of the organization.  All holders of permits, or
their agents, shall notify the Inspection Department and the appropriate
inspector at each of the following stages of construction, so that approval
may be given before work is continued.



      (1)   Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are
excavated and the necessary reinforcement and forms are in place, and before
concrete is placed.  Drilled footings, piles, and similar types of
foundations shall be inspected as installed.



      (2)   Framing inspection.  To be made after all structural
framing is in place and all roughing-in of plumbing, electrical, and heating
has been installed, after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing, and vents are
installed, but before any of the structure is enclosed or covered. Poured in
place concrete structural elements shall be inspected before each pour of any
structural member.



      (3)   Fireproofing inspection.  To be made after all areas
required to be protected by fireproofing are lathed, but before the
plastering or other fireproofing is applied.



      (4)   Final inspection.  To be made after the building or
structure has all doors hung, fixtures set, and is ready for occupancy, but
before the building is occupied.



   (B)   Calls for inspection. Request for inspections may be made to
the office of the Inspection Department or to the appropriate inspector. 
The Inspection Department shall make inspections as soon as practicable after
a request is made therefor; provided the work is ready for inspection at the
time the request is made.



   (C)   Reinspections.  Reinspections may be made at the convenience
of the inspector.  No work shall be inspected until it is in proper and
completed condition ready for inspection.  All work which has been concealed
before the inspection and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the
inspector and placed in condition for proper inspection.  Approval or
rejection of the work shall be furnished by the appropriate inspector in the
form of a notice posted on the building or given to the permit holder or his
agent.  Failure to call for inspections or proceeding without approval at
each stage of construction shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   Street or alley lines.  Where the applicant for a permit
proposes to erect any building or structure on the line of any street, alley,
or other public place, he shall secure a survey of the line of the street,
alley, or other public place, adjacent to the property on which the building
or structure is to be erected before proceeding with construction of the
building or structure.  It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
see that the building does not encroach on the street, alley, or other public
place.



   (E)   Certificate of occupancy. No new building or part thereof
shall be occupied, and no addition or enlargement of any existing building
shall be occupied, and no existing building after being altered or moved
shall be occupied, and no change of occupancy shall be made in any existing
building or part thereof, until the Inspection Department has issued a
certificate of occupancy therefor.  A temporary certificate of occupancy may
be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be
occupied prior to final completion and occupancy of the entire building. 
Application for a certificate of occupancy may be made by the owner or his
agent after all final inspections have been made for new buildings, or, in
the case of existing buildings, after supplying the information and data
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter, the appropriate
regulatory codes, and the zoning code for the occupancy intended.  The
Inspection Department shall issue a certificate of occupancy when, after
examination and inspection, it is found that the building in all respects
conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the regulatory codes, and the
zoning code for the occupancy intended.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.20  OVERSIGHT NOT TO LEGALIZE VIOLATION.



   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or
other official or employee of the Inspection Department shall be deemed to
legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any regulatory code herein adopted.



§ 90.21  POWERS OF INSPECTION OFFICIALS.



   (A)   Authority.  Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered, and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter, and the regulatory
codes herein adopted.



   (B)   Right of entry.  With an appropriate warrant or permission
from the owner or occupant, inspectors shall have the right to enter on any
premises within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes herein adopted at
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the
requirements of this chapter and the applicable regulatory codes.



   (C)   Stop orders.  Whenever any building or structure or part
thereof is being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired
in a hazardous manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or
any other city ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory
code herein adopted, or in violation of the terms of the permit or permits
issued therefor, or in such a manner as to endanger life or property, the
appropriate inspector may order the work to be immediately stopped.  The
order shall be in writing to the owner of the property or to his agent, or to
the person doing the work, and shall state the reasons therefor and the
conditions under which the work may be resumed.



ENFORCEMENT



§ 90.30  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Building permit.  No person shall commence or proceed with
the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition
of any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written
permit therefor from the Building Inspector.  In all cases of removal or
demolition of a building or structure, a good and sufficient bond may be
required to be posted by the property owner or by his contractor at the time
of application for a permit, to insure complete removal or demolition,
including all rubble and debris.  Failure on the part of the property owner
or his contractor to completely demolish, remove, and clear the premises,
after 30 days notice by the Building Inspector, shall be cause for forfeiture
of the bond.



   (B)   Plumbing permit.  No person shall commence or proceed with
the installation, extension, or general repair of any plumbing system without
a written permit therefor from the Plumbing Inspector.  However, no permit
shall be required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of a
trap to an installed system of plumbing if the repairs or replacements do not
disrupt the original water supply or the waste or ventilating systems.



   (C)   Heating-air conditioning permit.  No person shall commence or
proceed with the installation, extension, alteration, or general repair of
any heating or cooling equipment system without a written permit from the
Heating-Air Conditioning Inspector.  However, no permit shall be required
for minor repairs, minor burner services, or filter replacements of warm air
furnaces or cooling systems.



   (D)   Electrical permit.  No person shall commence or proceed with
the installation, extension, alteration, or general repair of any electrical
wiring, devices, appliances, or equipment without a written permit therefor
from the Electrical Inspector.



    However, no permit shall be required for minor repair work such as the
replacement of lamps or the connection of portable devices to suitable
receptacles which have been permanently installed.  Further, no permit shall
be required for the installation, alteration, or repair of the electrical
wiring, devices, appliances, and equipment installed by or for an electrical
public utility corporation for the use of the corporation in the generation,
transmission, distribution, or metering of electrical energy.



('58 Code, §§ 4-4, 4-14, 4-41) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.31  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Written application shall be made for all permits required by this
chapter, and shall be made on forms provided by the Inspection Department.



   The application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure
affected or by his authorized agent or representative, and, in addition to
other information as may be required by the appropriate inspector to enable
him to determine whether the permit applied for should be issued, shall show
the following.



   (A)   Name, residence, and business address of owner.



   (B)   Name, residence, and business of authorized representative or
agent, if any.



   (C)   Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with
evidence that he has obtained a certificate from the appropriate state
licensing board for such contractors, if a certificate is required for the
work involved in the permit for which application is made.



§ 90.32  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for
a permit when the estimated total cost of the building or structure is in
excess of $45,000 and for any other building or structure where plans and
specifications are deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector in order for
him to determine whether the proposed work complies with the appropriate
regulatory codes.  Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to
indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and the plans and
specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate that
the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this chapter, and the
appropriate regulatory codes.  Where plans and specifications are required,
a copy of the same shall be kept at the work until all authorized operations
have been completed and approved by the appropriate inspector.



('58 Code, § 4-4)



§ 90.33  LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or
structure, the estimated total cost of which is more than $30,000, unless the
work is to be performed by a licensed general contractor.



   (B)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or
structure, other than a one- or two-family dwelling, the estimated total cost
of which is more than $45,000, unless the plans bear the North Carolina seal
of a registered architect or a registered engineer.



   (C)   Where any provisions of the General Statutes of North Carolina
or of any ordinance requires that work be done by a licensed specialty
contractor of any kind, no permit for the work shall be issued unless it is
to be performed by the licensed specialty contractor.



   (D)   Where detailed plans and specifications are required by this
chapter, no building permit shall be issued unless the plans and
specifications have been provided.



('58 Code, §§ 4-12, 4-37)



§ 90.34  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   When proper application for a permit has been made, and the appropriate
inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work comply with
the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes, he shall
issue the permit, upon payment of the proper fee or fees as hereafter
provided.



§ 90.35  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of any
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the
revocation.  Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the
approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with proper orders of the inspector; for refusal or failure to comply
with requirements of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit.



§ 90.36  TIME LIMITATIONS ON VALIDITY OF PERMITS.



   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire by limitation three
months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has
not been commenced.  If after commencement, the work is discontinued for a
period of 12 months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire.  No work
authorized by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed
until a new permit has been secured.



§ 90.37  CHANGES IN WORK.



   After a permit has been issued, changes or deviations from the terms of
the application and permit, or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter or
of any regulatory code adopted herein, shall not be made until specific
written approval of the changes or deviations has been obtained from the
appropriate inspector.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.38  PERMIT FEES; INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   Permit fees.  Fees for permits shall be based on the total
estimated cost of the proposed work, including all subcontracts if any, but
in no case shall the total estimated cost be less than the market value of
similar completed work in the city as determined by the appropriate inspector
or inspectors.  Permit fees shall be as established by the Council and filed
in the office of the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Inspection fees.  Building permit fees for the construction,
alteration, or addition of buildings shall be based upon the total cost of
the general construction, alteration, or addition.  The term "total cost of
construction" shall mean the greater amount of a bona fide bid price, duly
authenticated, of the general construction, alteration, or addition or a sum
equal to the product of the number of square feet of the general
construction, alteration, or addition multiplied by $25.  Building permit
fees shall be as stated below.



      (1)   All construction except as referred to in divisions (2),
(3), and (4) below.



 

Total Construction Cost
 
Fees


First $10,000.00
 
Minimum $10.00


$10,001.00 -
  200,000.00
 
$1.00 per thousand


$200,001.00
  and above 
 
$.50 per thousand


Maximum permit
 
$10,000.00



 



          



      (2)   Piers, bulkhead and waterway structures.



         (a)   Permit fees shall be $1.00 per $1,000.00 of
construc-tion, alteration, or additional cost or fraction thereof over
$1,000.00 with a minimum fee of $10.00.



         (b)   No permit fee shall be charged for any construc-
tion, alteration, or addition the cost of which is $50.00 or less.



      (3)   Mechanical permit.  In addition to the fees charged
above, a fee for heating installation and for air condition installation
shall be charged as follows:




Heating            $  .80 per square feet of area to be heated





Air Conditioning     .50 per square feet of area to be air conditioned
(it is estimated the fees will be approximately $2.50 for each $500.00 of
installation cost)




Minimum fee          10.00



      (4)   Mobile homes.  A permit fee of $15.00 shall be charged
for mobile homes.



(Ord. 83-17, passed 6-20-83)



§ 90.39  CITY HELD HARMLESS.



   The applicant seeking a permit required by this and other chapters
under the jurisdiction of the Inspections Section shall hold the city
harmless from claims of bodily injury and/or property damage of all persons
arising out of the use or occupancy of the premises as specified on the
permit by the applicant, his agents, employees, or invitees.



MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS



§ 90.45  FINDINGS; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. 160A- 441, it is hereby found and declared
that there exists in the city dwellings unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light, and sanitary facilities, and due to
other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or insanitary, and dangerous
and detrimental to the health, safety, and morals, and otherwise inimical to
the welfare of the residents of the city.



   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the city, it is the purpose of §§ 90.45 through 90.66 to
establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued
occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as expressly authorized
by G.S. 160A-444.



('58 Code, § 4-112)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.46  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of §§ 90.45 through 90.66, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   "BASEMENT."  A portion of a building located partly underground,
having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of
the adjoining ground.



   "CELLAR."  A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground, having inadequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.



   "DETERIORATED."  A dwelling unfit for human habitation that can be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by §§ 90.45 through 90.66 , at a cost not in excess of 50% of
its value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.



   "DILAPIDATED."  A dwelling unfit for human habitation that cannot be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by §§ 90.45 through 90.66, at a cost not in excess of 50% of
its value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.



   "DWELLING."  Any building wholly or partly used or intended to be used
for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing,
as herein defined, shall not be regarded as a dwelling.



   "DWELLING UNIT."  Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit, with facilities used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.



   "EXTERMINATION."  The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Inspector.



   "GARBAGE."  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



   "HABITABLE ROOM."  A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers,
communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces.



   "INFESTATION."  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants or to the public.



   "INSPECTOR."  A Building Inspector of the city or any agent who is
authorized by the city department responsible for the enforcement of this
chapter.



   "MULTIPLE DWELLING."  Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.



   "OCCUPANT."  Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.



   "OPERATOR."  Any person who has charge, care, or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   "OWNER."  Any person who alone, or jointly, or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with
or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the
owner.  Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.



   "PLUMBING."  Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment:  gas pipes, gas- burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical
garbage disposal units (mechanical sink grinders), waste pipes, water
closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines, catch basin, drains, vents, and any other
similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or
gas lines.



   "PUBLIC AUTHORITY."  The housing authority of the city, or any officer
who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city or
Stanly County or the State of North Carolina relating to health, fire,
building regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings in the city.



   "ROOMING HOUSE."  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or
operator, to three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or
daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.



   "ROOMING UNIT."  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   "RUBBISH."  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage and ashes, and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust.



   "SUPPLIED."  Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the control
of the owner or operator.



   "TEMPORARY HOUSING."  Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable, and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



   "UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION." Conditions exist in a dwelling which
violate or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of
fitness, or one or more of the requirements established by §§ 90.45 through
90.66 .



   (B)   Whenever the words "DWELLING," "DWELLING UNIT," "ROOMING
HOUSE," "ROOMING UNIT," or "PREMISES" are used in this chapter, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."



('58 Code, § 4-113)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.47  MINIMUM STANDARDS OF FITNESS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS.



   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held
out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum
standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of §§
90.45 through 90.66.  No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to
another for occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling
unit which does not comply with all of the minimum standards for human
habitation and all of the requirements of §§ 90.45 through 90.66.



('58 Code, § 4-114)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.48  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURAL CONDITION.



   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists,
rafters, or other structural members shall not list, lean, or buckle, and
shall not be rotted, deteriorated, or damaged, and shall not have holes or
cracks which might admit rodents.



   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.



   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers, or other foundation
supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged.



   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fall
or collapse.



   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall
be provided.



   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets, and
hallways shall be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of
reasonable household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall
be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain
reasonable privacy between various spaces.



   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors,
and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be weather- and watertight.



   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are
defective, deteriorated, or in danger of falling, or in such condition or
locations as to constitute a fire hazard.



   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors
on the ground.



('58 Code, § 4-115)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.49  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Plumbing system.



      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water
supply, and to the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.



      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen
sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and adequate supply of both cold
water and hot water.  All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.



      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the
city plumbing code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in
good working order.



      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within
the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same.  The water
closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording
privacy to the user.



   (B)   Heating system.  Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have
facilities for providing heat in accordance with either (1) or (2) below.



      (1)   Central and electric heating systems.  Every central or
electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling
unit to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70°F, measured
at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.



      (2)   Other heating facilities.  Where a central or electric
heating system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be
provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, or gas vents whereby
heating appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable rooms with a
minimum temperature of 70°F, measured three feet above the floor during
ordinary winter conditions.



   (C)   Electrical system.



      (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for
electric lights and convenience receptacles.  Every habitable room shall
contain at least two floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles,
connected in such manner as determined by the city electrical code. There
shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room, and
furnace room at least one supplied ceiling, or wall- type electric light
fixture.  In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in
any habitable room, then each such habitable room shall contain at least
three floor or wall- type electric convenience receptacles.



      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when
natural daylight is not sufficient.



      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall
be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and
installed in accordance with the city electrical code.



   (D)   Utilities.  Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be
actively serviced by public utilities for electricity, sanitary sewerage and
water.



('58 Code, § 4-116) (Am. Ord. 04- 23, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 16-27, passed
8-15-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.50  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR VENTILATION.



   (A)   General.  Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight facing directly to the outdoors.  The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor
area of the room.  Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room and the light-obstructing structures are located less
than five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to
the outdoors, and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a
skylight-type window in the top of the room, the total window area of the
skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area of the room.



   (B)   Habitable rooms.  Every habitable room shall have at least
one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as
will adequately ventilate the room.  The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size
or minimum skylight-type window size as required, or shall have other
approved, equivalent ventilation.



   (C)   Bathroom and water closet rooms.  Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements
for habitable rooms, except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.



('58 Code, § 4-117)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.51  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SPACE, USE, AND LOCATION.



   (A)   Room sizes.  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the
minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the city residential
building code.  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet
of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of
additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at least
75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional
occupant.  In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each occupant 12 years of age and over, and at least 35 square feet for
each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (B)   Ceiling height.  At least one- half of the floor area of
every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet
and six inches.



   (C)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the
basis of habitable room area.  However, closet area and wall area within the
dwelling unit may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable floor
area.  The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is
less than 4½ feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in
computing the total area of the room to determine maximum permissible
occupancy.



   (D)   Cellar.  No cellar shall be used for living purposes.



   (E)   Basements.  No basement shall be used for living purposes
unless: the floor and walls are substantially watertight; the total window
area, total openable window area, and ceiling height are equal to those
required for habitable rooms; the required minimum window area of every
habitable room is entirely above the grade adjoining the window area, except
where the window or windows face a stairwell, window well, or accessway.



('58 Code, § 4-118)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.52  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Exterior foundation, walls, and roofs.  Every foundation
wall, exterior wall, and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight,
watertight, and rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair; shall be capable of affording privacy; and shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed
thereon.  Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other
protective covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the
weather.



   (B)   Interior floor, walls, and ceilings.  Every floor, interior
wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.



   (C)   Windows and doors.  Every window, exterior door, basement or
cellar door, and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight,
and rodentproof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.



   (D)   Stairs, porches, and appurtenances.  Every inside and outside
stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable
of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (E)   Bathroom floors.  Every bathroom floor surface and water
closet compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to
be reasonably impervious to water, and so as to permit the floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (F)   Supplied facilities.  Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment, or utility required under §§ 90.45 through 90.66 shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (G)   Drainage.  Every yard shall be properly graded so as to
obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water.



   (H)   Noxious weeds.  Every yard and all exterior property areas
shall be kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health.



   (I)   Egress.  Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate
means of egress as required by the city building code.



('58 Code, § 4-119)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.53  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS, AND
INFESTATIONS.



   (A)   Screens.  In every dwelling unit, for protection against
mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door opening directly from a
dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied and installed screens and
a self-closing device; and every window or other device with openings to
outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall be likewise
supplied with screens installed.



   (B)   Rodent control.  Every basement or cellar window used or
intended to be used for ventilation and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens
installed or any other approved device as will effectively prevent their
entrance.



   (C)   Infestation.  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a
single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises; and every
occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination whenever his dwelling unit is
the only one infested.  Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the
owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodentproof or reasonably insectproof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.  Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in
the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.



   (D)   Rubbish storage and disposal.  Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for
storage of rubbish as required by city ordinances, and the owner, operator,
or agent in control of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the removal of rubbish.



   (E)   Garbage storage and disposal.  Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility,
which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink
grinder) in each dwelling unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the
Inspector, in the structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling
unit, or an approved outside garbage can as required by city ordinances.



('58 Code, § 4-120)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.54  MINIMUM STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ROOMING HOUSES; EXCEPTIONS.



   All of the provisions of §§ 90.45 through 90.66, and all of the
minimum standards and requirements of those sections, shall be applicable to
rooming houses, and to every person who operates a rooming house, or who
occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming
house, except as provided in the following divisions.



   (A)   Water closet, hand lavatory, and bath facilities.  At least
one water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected
to an approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be
supplied for every four rooms within a rooming house wherever the facilities
are shared.  All such facilities shall be located within the residence
building served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or
passageway, and shall be not more than one story removed from any of the
persons sharing the facilities.  Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times.  The required
facilities shall not be located in a cellar.



   (B)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes.  Every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each occupant 12 years of age and over, and at least 35 square feet of
floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (C)   Sanitary conditions.  The operator of every rooming house
shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and
ceilings and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming
house; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of
the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the
rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.



   (D)   Sanitary facilities.  Every water closet, flush urinal,
lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required by division (A) above shall be
located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which afford
privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are accessible
from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or through any
other room therein.



('58 Code, § 4-121)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.55  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   Public areas.  Every owner of a dwelling containing two or
more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises
thereof.



   (B)   Cleanliness.  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he occupies and controls.



   (C)   Rubbish and garbage.  Every occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing it in the supplied storage facilities.  In all
cases the owner shall be responsible for the availability of rubbish and
garbage storage facilities.



   (D)   Supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit
shall keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in
the proper use and operation of them.



   (E)   Care of facilities, equipment, and structure.  No occupant
shall willfully destroy, deface, or impair any of the facilities or
equipment, or any part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.



('58 Code, § 4-122)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.56  DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to enforce
the provisions of §§ 90.45 through 90.66 and to exercise the duties and
powers herein prescribed.  It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
do the following.



   (A)   Investigate the dwelling conditions, and inspect dwellings and
dwelling units located in the city in order to determine which dwellings and
dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of
carrying out the objectives of §§ 90.45 through 90.66 with respect to the
dwellings and dwelling units.



   (B)   Take any action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect
rehabilitation of deteriorated housing.



   (C)   Keep a record of the results of inspections made under §§
90.45 through 90.66 and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the
minimum standards of fitness herein prescribed.



   (D)   Perform any other duties as may be herein prescribed.



('58 Code, § 4-123)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.57  POWERS OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise any powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and
provisions of §§ 90.45 through 90.66, including the following powers in
addition to others herein granted.



   (A)   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.



   (B)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and
receive evidence.



   (C)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination
and inspections; provided the entries shall be made in such manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.



   (D)   To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents, and
employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of §§ 90.45
through 90.66.



('58 Code, § 4-124)



§ 90.58  INSPECTIONS; DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   For the purpose of making inspections, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises.  The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, or the person in
charge thereof, shall give the Inspector free access to the dwelling,
dwelling unit, or rooming unit, and its premises at all reasonable times for
the purposes of inspection, examination, and survey.  Every occupant of a
dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or
employee, access to any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit, and its
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making any repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of §§
90.45 through 90.66, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of §§ 90.45 through 90.66.



('58 Code, § 4-125)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 90.59  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing.  Whenever a
petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority or by at least
five residents of the city charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is
unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Inspector upon
inspection that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation,
he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for the charges,
issue and cause to be served, upon the owner of and parties in interest in
the dwelling or dwelling unit, a complaint stating the charges and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector at a place therein
fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.  Notice of the
hearing also shall be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition
relating to the dwelling.  Any person desiring to do so may attend the
hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard.  The rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Inspector.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing. After the notice and hearing, the
Inspector shall state in writing his determination whether the dwelling or
dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, and if so, whether it is
deteriorated or dilapidated.



   (C)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   In personam remedy.  If the owner of any deteriorated
dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector
to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling or dwelling unit within the time
specified therein, or if the owner of a dilapidated dwelling shall fail to
comply with an order of the Inspector to vacate and close, and remove or
demolish the dwelling within the time specified therein, the Inspector shall
submit to the City Council, at its next regular meeting, a resolution
directing the City Attorney to petition the Superior Court for an order
directing the owner to comply with the order of the Inspector, as authorized
by G.S. 160A-446(g).



      (2)   In rem remedy.  After failure of an owner of a
deteriorated dwelling or dwelling unit, or of a dilapidated dwelling, to
comply with an order of the Inspector within the time specified therein, if
injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided in
(C)(1) above, the Inspector shall submit to the City Council an ordinance
ordering the Inspector to cause the dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired,
altered, improved, or vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as
provided in the original order of the Inspector, and pending the removal or
demolition, to placard the dwelling as provided by G.S. 160A-443 and § 90.61.



   (D)   Appeals from orders of Inspector.  An appeal from any
decision or order of the Inspector may be taken by any person aggrieved
thereby.  Any appeal from the Inspector shall be taken within ten days from
the rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by
filing with the Inspector and the Housing Appeals Board a notice of appeal,
which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based.  Upon the
filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed
from was made.  When an appeal is made from a decision of the inspector
refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his decision
shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a
decision of the inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the
appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing
by the Board, unless the inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice
of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension
of his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which
case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order,
which may be granted for due cause shown, upon not less than one day's
written notice to the inspector, by the Board, or by a court of record upon
petition made pursuant to G.S. 160A-446(f) and division (E) below.  The
Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals, shall give
due notice to all the parties, and shall render its decision within a
reasonable time.  Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision
or order appealed from, and may make the decision and order as in its opinion
ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have the powers of
the inspector, the concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the inspector.  The
Board shall have the power also in passing upon appeals in any case where
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance to adapt the application of
the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of
the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.  Every decision of the Board shall be subject to
review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days
of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



   (E)   Petition to Superior Court by owner.  Any person aggrieved by
an order issued by the Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board shall
have the right, within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of
the decision, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction
restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as
provided by G.S. 160A-446(f).



('58 Code, § 4-126)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.60  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the
whereabouts of the persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the
Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Inspector shall make
an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of the complaint or order upon
the person may be made by publishing it once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city. Where service is made
by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.



('58 Code, § 4-127)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.61  IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING.



   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with
an order of the Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of §§ 90.45
through 90.66, and upon adoption by the City Council of an ordinance
authorizing and directing him to do so, as provided by G.S. 160A-443(5) and
§ 90.59(C), the Inspector shall proceed to cause the dwelling or dwelling
unit to be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by §§ 90.45 through 90.66, or to be
vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of
the City Council, and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the
dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with the following words: "This building
is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for
human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."  Each such ordinance shall be
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Stanly County and shall be
indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided
by G.S. 160A-443(5).



('58 Code, § 4-128)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.62  COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.



   As provided by G.S. 160A-443(6), the amount of the cost of any repairs,
alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or
demolition, caused to be made or done by the Inspector pursuant to § 90.61
shall be a lien against the real property on which the cost was incurred. 
The lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be enforced and the
costs collected as provided by Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General
Statutes.



('58 Code, § 4-129)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.63  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Neither §§ 90.45 through 90.66, nor any provisions of those
sections, shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the
city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary
action or otherwise, or to enforce those sections by criminal process, and
the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the
enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws.



   (B)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
dwelling, the Building Inspector (hereinafter "public officer") may file a
civil action in the name of the city to remove such occupant.  The action to
vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be
commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person
occupying such dwelling.  The Clerk of Superior Court shall issue a summons
requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date
and place, not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons to answer
the complaint.  The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in
G.S. 42-29.  The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on
its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the
public officer produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the
governing body pursuant to § 90.59(C)(2), authorizing the officer to proceed
to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering
that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed.  The judgment
ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as
the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from
any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in
G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided in
G.S. 7A-227.  An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant
of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding
pursuant to this division, unless such occupant was served with notice at
least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the
governing body has ordered the public officer to proceed to exercise his
duties under § 90.59 to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling.



('58 Code, § 4-130) (Am. Ord. 04- 23, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 16-27, passed
8-15-16)



§ 90.64  APPEALS OF DECISIONS OR ORDERS OF THE INSPECTOR.



   Appeals from decisions or orders of the Inspector, as provided by §§
90.45 through 90.66, may be taken to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. When
considering appeals of decisions or orders of the Inspector, the Board shall
perform the duties prescribed by § 90.59(D) and shall keep an accurate
record of all its proceedings.



('58 Code, § 4-131)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.65  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of §§ 90.45
through 90.66 is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other
ordinance or code of the city, the provision which establishes the higher
standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the residents of the city shall prevail.



('58 Code, § 4-132)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)



§ 90.66  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to
fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling, or to
vacate and close and remove or demolish the dwelling, on order of the
Inspector duly made and served as herein provided within the time specified
in the order, and each day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to
comply with the order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling
unit with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to § 90.59 to
occupy or permit the occupancy of the dwelling after the time prescribed in
the order for its repair, alteration, or improvement or its vacation and
closing, and each day that the occupancy continues after the prescribed time
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



('58 Code, § 4-133)  (Am. Ord. 16-27, passed 8-15-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



REPAIR, CLOSING, OR DEMOLITION OF ABANDONED STRUCTURES



§ 90.75  FINDINGS; INTENT.



   It is hereby found that there exist within the city abandoned
structures which the City Council finds to be hazardous to the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the city due to the attraction of
insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions
constituting a threat to children, or frequent use by vagrants as living
quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities.  Therefore, pursuant to the
authority granted by G.S. 160A-441, it is the intent of §§ 90.75 through
90.83 to provide for the repair, closing, or demolition of any abandoned
structures in accordance with the same provisions and procedures as are set
forth by law for the repair, closing, or demolition of dwellings unfit for
human habitation.



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



§ 90.76  DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the city officer to
enforce the provisions of §§ 90.75 through 90.83.  It shall be the duty of
the Building Inspector to do the following.



   (A)   Locate abandoned structures within the city which structures
are in violation of §§ 90.75 through 90.83.



   (B)   Take any action pursuant to these sections as may be necessary
to provide for the repair, closing, or demolition of the structures.



   (C)   Keep an accurate record of all enforcement proceedings begun
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 90.75 through 90.83.



   (D)   Perform any other duties as may be prescribed herein or
assigned to him by the City Council.



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



§ 90.77  POWERS OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise such powers as may be
necessary to carry out the intent and the provisions of §§ 90.75 through
90.83, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted.



   (A)   To investigate the condition of buildings within the city in
order to determine which structures are abandoned and in violation of §§
90.75 through 90.83.



   (B)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections.



   (C)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence.



   (D)   To designate any other officers, agents, and employees of the
city as he deems necessary to carry out the provisions of §§ 90.75 through
90.83.



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



§ 90.78  STANDARDS FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Every abandoned structure within the city shall be deemed in
violation of §§ 90.75 through 90.83 whenever the structure constitutes a
hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens as a result of the
following.



      (1)   The attraction of insects or rodents.



      (2)   Conditions creating a fire hazard.



      (3)   Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children.



      (4)   Frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities.



   (B)   In making the preliminary determination of whether or not an
abandoned structure is in violation of §§ 90.75 through 90.83, the Building
Inspector may, by way of illustration and not limitation, consider the
presence or absence of the following conditions.



      (1)   Holes or cracks in the structure's floors, walls,
ceilings, or roof which might attract or admit rodents and insects, or become
breed- ing places for rodents and insects.



      (2)   The collection of garbage or rubbish in or near the
structure which might attract rodents and insects, or become breeding places
for rodents and insects.



      (3)   Violations of the State Building Code, the State
Electrical Code, or the fire prevention code which constitutes a fire hazard
in the structure.



      (4)   The collection of garbage, rubbish, or combustible
material which constitute a fire hazard in the structure.



      (5)   The use of the structure or nearby grounds or facilities
by children as a play area.



      (6)   Violations of the State Building Code which might result
in danger to children using the structure or nearby grounds or facilities as
a play area.



      (7)   Repeated use of the structure by transients and
vagrants, in the absence of sanitary facilities, for living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating.



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



§ 90.79  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice, hearing.  Whenever a
petition is filed with the inspector by at least five residents of the city
charging that any structure exists in violation of §§ 90.75 through 90.83
or whenever it appears to the inspector, upon inspection, that any structure
exists in violation hereof, he shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for the charges, issue and cause to be served on the owner
of and parties in interest in the structure, a complaint stating the charges
and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the inspector at a
place therein fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the
serving of the complaint.  The owner or any party in interest shall have the
right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. 
Notice of the hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons
signing a petition relating to the structure.  Any person desiring to do so
may attend the hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being
heard.  The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall
not be controlling in hearings before the inspector.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing. After the notice and hearing, the
inspector shall state in writing his determination whether the structure
violates §§ 90.75 through 90.83.  If the inspector determines that the
dwelling is in violation he shall state in writing his findings of fact to
support the determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to either repair,
alter, and improve the structure or else remove or demolish it within a
specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.



   (C)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   In personam remedy.  If the owner of any structure
shall fail to comply with an order of the inspector within the time specified
therein, the inspector may submit to the City Council at its next regular
meeting a resolution directing the City Attorney to petition the superior
court for an order directing the owner to comply with the order of the
inspector, as authorized by G.S. 160A-446(g).



      (2)   In rem remedy.  After failure of an owner of a
structure to comply with an order of the inspector within the time specified
therein, if injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted as
provided in division (C)(1) above, the inspector shall submit to the City
Council an ordinance ordering the inspector to cause the structure to be
removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the inspector,
and pending the removal or demolition, to placard the dwelling as provided by
G.S. 160A-443.



   (D)   Petition to superior court by owner.  Any person aggrieved by
an order issued by the inspector shall have the right, within 30 days after
issuance of the order, to petition the superior court for a temporary
injunction restraining the inspector pending a final disposition of the
cause, as provided by G.S. 160A-446(f).



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



§ 90.80  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by the inspector shall be served on persons
either personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the whereabouts
of the persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the inspector in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the inspector shall make an affidavit to
that effect, and the serving of the complaint or order on the person may be
made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at
least once, no later than the time at which personal service is required
under § 90.79.  Where service is made by publication, a notice of the
pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order.



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



§ 90.81  IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING.



   After failure of an owner of a structure to comply with an order of the
inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of §§ 90.75 through 90.83, and
upon adoption by the City Council of an ordinance authorizing and directing
him to do so, as provided by G.S. 160A-443(5) and § 90.79 (C), the inspector
shall proceed to cause the structure either to be repaired or else to be
removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the City Council and
shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the structure a placard
prohibiting the use or occupation of the structure.  Use or occupation of a
building so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Each such ordinance
shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of Stanly County,
and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index,
as provided by G.S. 160A-443(5).



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



§ 90.82  COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.



   As provided by G.S. 160A-446(6), the amount of the cost of any removal
or demolition caused to be made or done by the inspector pursuant to §§
90.75 through 90.83 shall be a lien against the real property on which the
cost was incurred.  The lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be
enforced and the costs collected as provided by Article 10, Chapter 160A of
the General Statutes.



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



§ 90.83  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Neither §§ 90.75 through 90.83 nor any provisions of those sections
shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action
or otherwise, or to enforce those sections by criminal process, and the
enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement
of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or
laws.



(Ord. 83-3, passed 1-17-83)



INSULATION AND ENERGY UTILIZATION EQUIPMENT



§ 90.90  PURPOSE.



   Sections 90.90 through 90.98 are adopted pursuant to Chapter 703, North
Carolina Session Laws of 1977, and G.S. 160A-194 for the purpose of securing
effective enforcement of the insulation and energy utilization standards of
the State Building Code and to further protect the purchasers of products and
services designed to meet those standards.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.91  REQUIRED LICENSE.



   No person, firm, or corporation may for a consideration install, alter,
or restore within the city any insulation or other materials or energy
utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the State Building Code
requirements for insulation and energy utilization standards who is not
either licensed as a contractor to do the proposed work under Chapter 87 of
the General Statutes, working under the supervision of a registered architect
or professional engineer, an owner working on his own building, or licensed
under §§ 90.90 through 90.98.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.92  APPLICATIONS.



   Every person desiring a license under §§ 90.90 through 90.98 shall
submit an application for the license to the Building Inspector conforming to
the following requirements.



   (A)   Form of application.  Each application shall be a written
statement on forms provided by the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Contents of application. Each application shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   Name and home address of the applicant, if an
individual, or home office address, if a corporation or partnership.



      (2)   Names and home addresses of the partners, if a
partnership.



      (3)   Names and addresses of the officers and directors, if a
corporation.



      (4)   Place where the proposed business is to be located.



      (5)   Complete record of all convictions of felonies or acts
involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit by the applicant or any employee,
partner, officer, or director of the applicant, whether in this or any other
state or jurisdiction.



      (6)   Complete record of all licenses held by the applicant or
any employee, partner, officer, or director of the applicant authorizing
activities of the type authorized herein or other activities involving
construction, alteration, or modification of buildings and structures.



      (7)   Information as to the circumstances in which any local,
state, or federal government or agency has refused, suspended, or revoked a
license of the type described in division (6) above to the applicant or any
employee, partner, officer, or director of the applicant.



   (C)   Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, in the
amount established by the Council, such amount to be for the fiscal year.



   (D)   False statements.  False statements on any application for a
license shall be grounds for immediate revocation or denial of the license.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.93  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Review by City Inspection Department.  Each application
received by the Building Inspector shall be promptly forwarded to the
Inspection Department for review.  The Inspection Department shall promptly
review the application and submit comments and recommendations pertaining to
the application to the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Licensing agency.  The application and any comments and
recommendations relating thereto shall be considered by the Building
Inspector who shall then issue or deny the license pursuant to the following
standards.



   (C)   Standards.  The Building Inspector shall issue the license
unless he shall find that the applicant or any employee, partner, officer, or
director of the applicant has done any of the following.



      (1)   Been convicted within the last three years of a felony
or an act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit, whether in this or any
other state or jurisdiction.



      (2)   Been refused a license to do the type of work authorized
herein or has had such a license suspended or revoked by any local, state, or
federal government or agency and the government or agency has not
subsequently granted or restored the license.



      (3)   Knowingly made a false statement in the application.



      (4)   Failed to post the bond or other security required by §
90.94.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.94  BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   Before a license shall be issued to any applicant, the
applicant shall post a bond with the city in the amount of $1,000.  In lieu
of posting bond, the applicant may deposit a cashier's check or cash in the
same amount.



   (B)   The security required by division (A) above shall be available
to indemnify any person for any damage which may accrue by reason of the
applicant's failure to properly provide or install insulation, energy
utilization equipment, or other materials designed or intended to meet the
State Building Code standards for insulation and energy utilization.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.95  TERMINATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   All licenses issued hereunder shall terminate on the last day of the
fiscal year for which issued.  Renewal of the licenses shall be pursuant to
the same procedures and requirements set forth for initial issuance.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.96  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Building Inspector may suspend or revoke any license
issued hereunder at any time upon a showing that the applicant or any
employee, partner, officer, or director of the applicant has done any of the
following.



      (1)   Knowingly made a false statement in the application for
a license.



      (2)   Violated the State Building Code requirements as to
insulation or energy utilization equipment or materials, whether in this or
any other jurisdiction.



      (3)   Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, or
deceit with respect to any contract entered into for work requiring this
license.



   (B)   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked may appeal
the suspension or revocation to the Council.  After reasonable notice to the
licensee, the Council shall afford the licensee an opportunity to show why
its license should not be suspended or revoked.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.97  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   The location of any licensed business may be changed, provided ten days
notice thereof is given to the city and operation at the new location does
not violate any applicable state or local law, ordinance, or regulation.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



§ 90.98  REQUIRED PERMIT; FEE; EXCEPTIONS.



   No person, firm, or corporation licensed under §§ 90.90 through 90.98
may for a consideration install, alter, or restore any insulation or other
materials or energy utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the
State Building Code requirements for insulation and energy utilization
without first securing a special insulation and energy utilization permit
from the Building Inspector for each item of work, which permit shall
evidence compliance with the insulation and energy utilization standards of
the State Building Code.  There shall be a fee for each permit issued, in an
amount established by the Council.



(Ord. 78-4, passed 4-3-78)



MOVERS OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES



§ 90.99  PERMIT REQUIRED OF MOVERS OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move or
assist in moving any building or structure over, along, or through any street
or side alleys in the city without first having obtained a written permit on
a form provided by the City Manager.



(Ord. 88-1, passed 4-4-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.100  DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   In addition to fulfilling the requirements of G.S. §§ 20-256 through
372, permittees are required to make a deposit of $5,000 with the City
Finance Officer at least 24 hours prior to moving any structure within the
city limits.  Such deposit may be cash, certified or cashier's check, or a
bond.



(Ord. 88-1, passed 4-4-88)



§ 90.101  PERMITTEES TO NOTIFY OWNERS OF UTILITIES.



   The permittee shall give notice at least 24 hours prior to moving any
structure within the city limits to the City Director of Utilities and to all
private utility companies having facilities along the route over which it is
proposed to move the structure.



(Ord. 88-1, passed 4-4-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.102  USE OF DEPOSIT FOR DAMAGES OR EXPENSES.



   If damages occur to any city owned, occupied, or maintained property as
a result of moving activities, or if such activities cause the use of city
personnel for traffic control or other ancillary assistance, the cost of
repairs or expenses will be retained by the city from the deposit.  However,
the permittee is liable for all such damages and expenses, and his liability
is not limited to the amount of deposit.



(Ord. 88-1, passed 4-4-88)



§ 90.103  RETURN OF UNUSED DEPOSIT.



   The permittee shall notify the City Manager when the movement of the
structure has been completed.  After verification by the City Manager that
no damages or expenses occurred in the moving, the entire deposit will be
returned to the permittee.  If damages or expenses were incurred, the amount
of the deposit remaining, if any, after payment of such damages and expenses,
will be retunrned to the permittee.



(Ord. 88-1, passed 4-4-88)



CHAPTER 91:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   91.01   Purpose



   91.02   Jurisdiction



   91.03   Definitions



   91.04   Submission of sketch plan and general information



   91.05   Approval of exempt, minor and major subdivisions



   91.06   Submission of preliminary plat



   91.07   Submission of final plat



   91.08   Resubdivision procedures



   91.09   General design requirements



   91.10   Minimum design standards



   91.11   Permanent reference points



   91.12   Improvements within the city limits



   91.13   Improvements beyond the city limits



   91.14   Sketch plan



   91.15   Preliminary plat



   91.16   Final plat



   91.17   Exceptions, modifications



   91.18   Variances



   91.19   Penalties



   91.20   Amendments, amendment procedure



   91.21   Residential cluster developments



   91.22   Cluster development site plan standards



   91.23   Townhouse cluster developments



   91.24   Gated community development



Cross-reference:



   Flood hazard reduction standards for subdivision proposals, § 93.44



§ 91.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards
for the development and subdivision of real estate within the corporate
limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city in an effort to, among
other things, insure proper legal description, identification, monumentation,
and recordation of real estate boundaries; further, the orderly layout and
appropriate use of the land; provide safe, convenient, and economic
circulation of vehicular traffic; provide adequate building sites readily
accessible to emergency vehicles; assure the proper co-ordination and
installation of transportation networks and utilities; promote the eventual
elimination of unsafe or unsanitary conditions because of undue concentration
of population; and help conserve and protect the physical and economic
resources of the city and its environs. Further, the regulations must
substantially promote public health, safety, and the general welfare.



('58 Code, § 14-1)  (Ord. 06-09, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 16-48, passed
11-21-16)



§ 91.02  JURISDICTION.



   This chapter shall govern all subdivisions of land lying within the
corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, as now or
hereafter established.



('58 Code, § 14-2)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "BUILDING SETBACK LINE."  A line parallel to the front property line
in front of which no structure shall be erected.



   "COUNCIL."  The City Council of the city.



   "DOUBLE-FRONTAGE LOT."  A continuous (through) lot of the same depth
as the width of a block, containing two tiers of lots, and which is
accessible from both of the streets on which it fronts.



   "EASEMENT."  A grant by the property owner for use, by the public, a
corporation, or person of a strip of land for specified reasons.



   "EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION." The land, if any, as shown on the
official zoning map in the Inspector's office, as approved by joint action of
the City Council and the Stanly County Board of Commissioners.



   "GROUP DEVELOPMENT."  A development comprising two buildings such as a
group of apartments, and the land is not subdivided into the customary
streets and lots.



   "LOT."  A portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land
intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. 
The word "LOT" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."



   "OFFICIAL MAPS OR PLANS."  Any maps or plans officially adopted by the
Council as a guide for the development of the city and surrounding area.



   "PLANNING BOARD."  The planning board of the city.



   "SHALL."  The word "SHALL" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.



   "SINGLE-TIER LOT."  A lot which      backs on a limited- access
highway, a railroad, a physical barrier, or nonresidential use and to which
access from the rear of the lot is usually prohibited.



   "STREET."  A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular
and pedestrian circulation.



      (1)   "ARTERIAL."  A traffic artery designed primarily to
carry heavy volumes of local vehicular traffic.



      (2)   "COLLECTOR STREET."  A street designed to carry medium
volumes of vehicular traffic, provide access to the major street system, and
collect the vehicular traffic from the intersecting minor streets.



      (3)   "CUL-DE-SAC."  A street intersecting another street at
one end and permanently terminated by a vehicular turn- around at the other.



      (4)   "EXPRESSWAY."  A traffic artery designed primarily to
carry heavy volumes of through vehicular traffic at high speeds, with access
only from another street and not from abutting properties.



      (5)   "LOCAL AND MINOR STREET."  A street, the principal
purpose of which is to provide vehicular access to the properties abutting it.



      (6)   "MARGINAL ACCESS STREET."  A local or minor (service)
street which parallels and is immediately adjacent to a major street or
highway, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic and control of intersections with major traffic streets.



   "SUBDIVIDER."  Any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or
develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.



   "SUBDIVISION."  Includes all divisions of a tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions, including when any
one or more of those divisions are created for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of sale or building development, and shall include all divisions
of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing
streets."Exempt subdivisions", as defined in this section, shall not be
included within this definition, nor be subject to the regulations prescribed
by this chapter, except as necessary for ensuring city standards and proper
recording requirements for land records are met.



   "SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR."  Shall be the Director of the Planning
and Development Services Department or other city employee designated by the
Director responsible for overseeing the application, review and subsequent
approval or denial of all subdivisions of land and formal changes to parcels
of land occurring in the jurisdiction of the city.



   "SUBDIVISION (EXEMPT)."  Includes all state-exempt combinations,
recombinations, divisions, and public acquisitions of land, as defined in
this section and in accordance with all applicable state statutes. Where
conflicts arise in future definitions, the state statute shall be enforced.
The following shall be considered to be exempt:



      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of
previously platted lots, where the total number of lots is not increased and
the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the city as
required by this chapter. This shall include the common adjustment of lot
lines when properly surveyed and recorded.



      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved.



      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for
the widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system
corridors.



      (4)   The division of a tract of land in single ownership
whose entire area is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots,
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved, and where the resultant
lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the city, as required by this
chapter.



   "SUBDIVISION (MAJOR)."  Intended to allow for the common subdivision
of a parcel(s) of land for the eventual use, sale, improvement and/or
development of the parcel. This shall include all subdivisions requiring
dedication of public right-of-way and/or public amenities, and includes all
divisions of property or other changes to parcel lines not defined as either
"exempt" or "minor" subdivisions.



   "SUBDIVISION (MINOR)."  Intended to allow for the practical and
efficient division of family estates and other small-scale, residential
property distribution and sales, as well as commercial transactions, where
none of the aforementioned require significant dedication to or investment
from the city. This shall include the division of a tract or tracts of land
of any size into not more than three total parcels, both original and new
parcels, with the following conditions:



      (1)   All resultant lots shall meet or exceed all other
standards of the city and requirements of this ordinance.



      (2)   All lots shall have adequate frontage along an existing
street, and no lots shall require dedication of street rights-of-way to the
city.



      (3)   For a period of not less than five years, there shall be
no additional minor subdivisions of land on the resultant parcels, nor any
parcels under the ownership of the subdivider, their partners, affiliates or
any other party with a demonstrated shared financial interest at any point in
the five-year period when the parcels are located closer than one mile to the
closest point of any of the resultant parcels. Nothing in this section shall
prevent the designation of and subsequent subdivision of any of the
aforementioned properties as major subdivisions.



('58 Code, § 14-3)  (Am. Ord. 06- 09, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 16-48, passed
11-21-16)



§ 91.04  SUBMISSION OF SKETCH PLAN AND GENERAL INFORMATION.



   Prior to submitting a preliminary plat application in the case of major
subdivisions, or prior to submitting final plat applications in the case of
exempt and minor subdivisions, it is recommended that the subdivider or their
representative submit to the Director of Planning and Development Services,
or his or her designee, (heretofore referred to as the Subdivision
Administrator), a simple sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. Included
with the sketch plan shall be a sketch vicinity map,  showing the
subdivision in relation to the surrounding area. Within a reasonable time
following submission of a sketch plan, the Subdivision Administrator shall
schedule and hold a meeting with the subdivider and any other involved
parties. All parties should discuss the proposed subdivision and become
familiar with the regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. This
procedure is recommended to ensure that all subsequent plats are submitted
with complete information so that the subdivision process is not delayed;
however, sketch plan submission and review is not required and does not
require a formal application or a fee.



('58 Code, § 14-4)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.05  APPROVAL OF EXEMPT, MINOR AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   After determining a proposed subdivision to be either exempt, minor or
major, the Subdivision Administrator shall determine the appropriate process
for approval and provide the subdivider with the necessary information to
proceed, including application, required fees, schedule of any required board
and council meetings and the number and types of required plans, copies and
other documents.



(Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.06  SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   All major subdivisions must go through both a preliminary approval and
final approval process, whether single or multiphased developments. The
procedure for obtaining preliminary plat approval is as follows:



   (A)   The subdivider shall submit to the Director of Planning and
Development Services, or his or her designated Subdivision Administrator, the
following:



      (1)   A signed and completed application for subdivision
review, obtainable through the Subdivision Administrator and/or other
Planning and Development Services staff, as well as online when possible.
Application shall be deemed complete when the Administrator finds all
required information to be provided and the appropriate fee for the
subdivision type, as determined by the Administrator, has been paid.



      (2)   At least three black- or blueline prints of the proposed
subdivision prepared in accordance with the requirements of § 91.15.
Additional prints may be required when deemed necessary.



      (3)   Two signed statements describing the proposed use of the
land, and a draft, if required by the Subdivision Administrator, of any
protective covenants to be applied to the subdivision.



      (4)   Three copies of any supplemental information, such as
contour maps, floodplain maps, and the like, when required by the Subdivision
Administrator. Additional copies may be required when deemed necessary.



      (5)   A digital copy of all black- or blueline prints of the
proposed subdivision and all supplemental documents submitted with the
application. Copy may be submitted on disc, email or any other method, and in
PDF or other format deemed appropriate by the Subdivision Administrator.



   (B)   At the time of submission of the preliminary plat, the
subdivider shall pay to the Subdivision Administrator, or other designated
employee of the Planning and Development Services Department, a filing fee,
as provided in the schedule of fees relative to planning and zoning
established by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a completed application, including proposed
subdivision plans and all additional documents, the Subdivision Administrator
shall review and may request a report or feedback from any person or agency
directly concerned with the proposed development, such as the District
Highway Engineer, County Health Department, and the Superintendent of
Schools. The reports shall certify compliance with or note deviations from
the requirements of this chapter, and include comments on other factors that
bear upon the public interest. Such reports shall be provided to the
subdivider upon their request. In cases of larger proposed developments, the
Subdivision Administrator may require a formal review of the plans by a
committee designated to review and report on such plans.



   (D)   Following receipt of any requested reports, the Subdivision
Administrator may prepare recommendations for the subdivider, applicant,
Planning Board and other parties associated with the project. The
recommendations shall be completed in a reasonable time, and the subdivider
shall be granted reasonable time to respond to such recommendations and
provide amended plans and other documents at their discretion. Any revisions
made to the original preliminary plans and supplementary documents shall be
indicated on the new documents and hard copies and digital formats
resubmitted to the Administrator. The subdivider may also request a delay in
the review by any appointed or staff review board, including the Planning
Board. Any delay in time by the subdivider to respond to recommendations or
amendments to plans shall not count against the total time provided for the
Planning Board's action on the preliminary plan.



   (E)   Before acting on the preliminary plat, the Planning Board may
request reports from any person or agency directly affected by the proposed
development. These reports shall certify compliance with, or note deviations
from, the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this chapter.



   (F)   If the Planning Board fails to act on the preliminary plat
within 60 days after its submission, the subdivider may seek approval of the
plat at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council.



   (G)   If the Planning Board disapproves the preliminary plat, the
reasons for the action shall be stated in writing, and reference shall be
made to the specific section of this chapter with which the plat does not
comply.



   (H)   Following review by the Planning Board, the subdivider may
choose to proceed to the City Council or request a delay in review by the
City Council for revisions or amendments to be made to plans and resubmitted
to staff for the Council's review. Any revisions or amendments made must be
to address specific concerns of the Planning Board. Other changes, deemed to
be major by the Subdivision Administrator, must be returned to the Planning
Board for further review. Any delay in time by the subdivider for amendments
to plans shall not count against the total time provided for City Council's
action on the preliminary plan.



   (I)   Following review of the preliminary plat, the Planning Board
shall submit, with recommendations, the plat to the City Council. The Council
shall approve or disapprove the plat within 45 days after submission by the
Planning Board.



   (J)   Action of the City Council shall be documented by staff. Any
plats denied by City Council shall be final. A new application and
preliminary plat will be needed for future approval.



   (K)   All approvals shall be indicated on the three prints of the
preliminary plat. One print shall be returned to the subdivider, one shall be
filed with the City Clerk, and one print shall become a permanent record of
the Planning Board, filed with the Subdivision Administrator.



   (L)   The Subdivision Administrator shall promptly notify the
subdivider of the actions of City Council and assist them with planning for
submission and approval of the final subdivision plat(s).



   (M)   The preliminary plat shall be valid as approved by City
Council for two years, except as otherwise provided by state statute.
Following this time the approved preliminary plat must be resubmitted as part
of a new application and reviewed by the Planning Board and City Council
again before any final plats may be approved, except as where state statute
provides otherwise. Any major amendments or revisions to the approved
preliminary plat following action by Council must also be resubmitted and
approved.



('58 Code, § 14-5)  (Am. Ord. 94- 20, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 16-48,
passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.07  SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT.



   Prior to the recordation, sale or transfer of any newly created lots or
other parcels of land within city limits, all subdivisions (exempt, minor and
major) shall receive final plat review and approval by the Subdivision
Administrator.



   No street shall be accepted and maintained by the city, nor shall any
street lighting, water, or sewer be extended to or connected with any
subdivision of land as defined herein, nor shall any permit be issued by the
administrative agent or department of the city, for the construction of any
building or other improvement requiring a permit, upon any land concerning
which a plat is required to be approved unless and until the final plat has
been approved by the City Council, and a final plat has been approved by the
Subdivision Administrator.  The procedure for obtaining final plat approval
is as follows.



   (A)   Prior to expiration of preliminary plat approval, the
subdivider shall submit to the Subdivision Administrator a final plat, for
the entirety of or any portion of the land included in the approved
preliminary plat, which includes the following:



      (1)   At least three black- or blueline prints of the proposed
final plat for the entirety of or any portion of the approved preliminary
subdivision prepared in accordance with the requirements of § 91.15.
Additional prints may be required when deemed necessary.



      (2)   Two signed statements describing the proposed use of the
land and a draft, if required by the Subdivision Administrator, of any
protective covenants to be applied to the subdivision.



      (3)   A digital copy of all black- or blueline prints of the
proposed subdivision and all supplemental documents submitted with the
application. Copy may be submitted on disc, email or any other method deemed
appropriate by the Subdivision Administrator.



   (B)   Within a reasonable amount of time, the Subdivision
Administrator shall review and approve or deny the final plat. Final plats
meeting all requirements of this chapter shall be approved. Final plats may
be denied or held by the Subdivision Administrator for the following reasons:



      (1)   As drawn, the plat does not comply with applicable state
statute, city ordinance or requirements of City Council or the Planning Board.



      (2)   There are major changes from the preliminary plat
including:



         (a)   Increase in overall units for the proposed area;



         (b)   Significant decrease in the average size of the
units in the proposed area;



         (c)   Significant changes to road orientation,
dimensions, alignment or access points;



         (d)   Decrease in any approved amenities such as
sidewalks and designated open space in the proposed area; and



         (e)   The character of the area or nature of the
development has significantly changed.



      (3)   The plat is missing any of the information required for
recording final plats.



      (4)   Subdivider has not provided the required items as deemed
necessary, including:



         (a)   Surety for guarantee of completion of project(s);



         (b)   Covenants and/or deed restrictions;



         (c)   Documents formalizing establishment of HoA or
other agency responsible for maintenance of common areas and other common
amenities and/or infrastructure; and



         (d)   Formal documentation of any other easements or
agreements.



   (C)   The Subdivision Administrator shall notify the subdivider of
their decision to approve or deny the final plat. In the case of denial, the
Administrator shall site the specific city ordinance pertaining to the denial.



   (D)   Following denial of a final plat, it shall be at the
discretion of the subdivider to make changes and resubmit a new final plat to
the Subdivision Administrator that conforms to the requirements of this
section, or to resubmit the denied final plat to the Planning Board for
approval. When major changes are proposed in the final plat of a phased
subdivision which will affect future phases, the subdivider may also choose
to resubmit the preliminary plan in accordance with § 91.06.



   (E)   Once approved, the final plat shall be properly signed and
executed as required for recording by the Register of Deeds of Stanly County,
who shall comply with G.S. 160A-373. The approved final plat must be recorded
by the subdivider with the Register of Deeds of Stanly County within six
months after approval.



('58 Code, § 14-6) (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.08  RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.



   For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedure, rules,
and regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision,
except that lot sizes may be varied on an approved plan after recording,
provided that the following are complied with.



   (A)   No lot or tract of land shall be created or sold that is
smaller than the size shown on the approved plan.



   (B)   Drainage, easements, or rights-of-way shall not be changed.



   (C)   Street alignment and block sizes shall not be changed.



   (D)   The property lines between the back of the lots shall not be
changed.



   (E)   The rear position of lots shall not be subdivided from the
front yard.



   (F)   The character of the area shall be maintained.



('58 Code, § 14-7)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 91.09  GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Uninhabitable land.  Land subject to flooding and land deemed
by the Planning Board to be uninhabitable for other reasons shall not be
platted for residential occupancy, nor for any other uses as may increase
danger to health, life, or property, or aggravate the flood hazard; but the
land within a plan shall be set aside for uses as will not be endangered by
periodic or occasional inundation, or will not produce unsatisfactory living
conditions.



   (B)   Conformity to existing maps or plans.  The location and width
of all proposed streets shall be in conformity with official plans and maps
of the city and with existing or amended plans of the Planning Board.



   (C)   Continuation of adjoining street system.  The proposed street
layout shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area.
Where possible, existing principal streets shall be extended.



   (D)   Access to adjacent properties.  Where, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, it is desirable to provide for street access to an adjoining
property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of
the property and a temporary turnaround shall be provided.



   (E)   Private streets and reserve strips.  There shall be no
private streets or reserve strips platted in any subdivision.



   (F)   Large tracts or parcels. Where land is subdivided into larger
parcels than ordinary building lots, the parcels shall be arranged so as to
allow for the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision.



   (G)   Lots.  All lots shall front on a public street. 
Double-frontage lots shall be avoided.



   (H)   Alleys.  Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots
used for other than residential purposes. Alleys are prohibited in
residential blocks unless they are approved by the Planning Board.  All
deadend alleys shall be provided with a turnaround.



   (I)   Contour map.  A contour map shall be provided if required by
the Planning Board.  The contour interval required will depend on
topographic and drainage characteristics and shall be specified by the City
Engineer.



   (J)   Street names.  Proposed streets, which are obviously in
alignment with others existing and named, shall bear the assigned name of the
existing streets.  In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate
or be phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the use
of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, or the like.



   (K)   [Reserved]



   (L)   (1)   (a)   The city may require that a traffic impact
study (TIS) be performed to determine the effect of a proposed development,
zoning change, or special use approval on the adjacent transportation system.



         (b)   These guidelines and requirements have been
developed to provide for a uniform and consistent approach in the preparation
of TIS and to establish report requirements to facilitate the review
process.  These guidelines and requirements are intended to address several
purposes.



         (c)   These include:



            1.    Establishing analysis methodologies and
reporting formats;



            2.    Identifying traffic impacts caused by the
proposed development;



            3.    Determining the site access and off-site
infrastructure improvements necessary to accommodate the proposed development;



            4.    Providing the city with an opportunity to
provide input on the number and location of site access points, internal site
circulation, and truck and service vehicle access and circulation;



            5.    Providing public agencies and officials a
comprehensive study that clearly and concisely evaluates and documents the
traffic impacts of land-use decisions;



            6.    Facilitating the identification and
negotiation of mitigation requirements and the funding and time of
implementation required to accommodate the development or mitigate its
impacts.



      (2)   (a)   The guidelines and report requirements that
follow are based on similar information published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers and other sources.  The guidelines depart from
those sources by providing additional details concerning information needed
and methodologies to be used to meet the requirements of the city.



         (b)   A traffic impact study may/shall be required in
the following situations:



            1.   Where a potential development generates 100
or more trips during the roadway or development peak hour;



            2.   Where a potential development generates 500
daily trips;



            3.   Where expansion of an existing development
creates additional trips totaling either of the two previous requirements;



            4.   Where a development proposal requires
rezoning or a special use permit;



            5.   Where there are potential safety or capacity
deficiencies, including:



               a.    High accident locations, confusing
intersections, and intersections where a traffic signal or other changes in
traffic control device may be warranted;



               b.    Locations where current or projected
roadway or intersection levels of service will be significantly affected by
the proposed development;



               c.    Where the adjacent roadway system
lacks the capacity to accommodate increased traffic;



               d.    Where roadway improvements necessary
to accommodate the development may not be feasible;



               e.    Where vertical and/or horizontal
curves and other conditions may affect the development form being
accommodated.



      (3)   (a)   The decision regarding the need for, and
contents of, an impact study can be appealed in writing to the City Manager
within ten days of the date of the decision.  The City Manager shall reply
to this appeal in writing within ten days of receipt of the appeal.



         (b)   Prior to initiating a TIS, a study scope meeting
shall be held with the applicant, appropriate North Carolina Department of
Transportation district engineering staff and city staff.  At this meeting:



            1.   The TIS guidelines will be provided and an
understanding established of the requirements to be met;



            2.   The study area limits will be established,
based on the location, size, and potential impact of the proposed development;



            3.   Study area intersections to be analyzed will
be identified;



            4.   Projects generating background traffic and
the annual growth rate to be applied will be identified;



            5.   Trip generation procedures will be discussed,
and the ITE Land Use code, other trip generation rates, and any trip
generation reductions to be used in the study will be established;



            6.   Peak hours to be counted and analyzed will be
established;



            7.   Any other project-specific requirements will
be discussed and established.



      (4)   Revisions to the study will be provided by the applicant
as required by the city.  Revisions needed will be determined by the study's
completeness, thoroughness, and compatibility with the proposed access and
development plans.



('58 Code, § 14-8)  (Am. Ord. 01-36, passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. 01-39, passed
8-20-01; Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.10  MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Streets.  The design standards which shall apply to streets
are as follows.



      (1)   Right-of-way widths. Minimum street right-of-way widths
shall be in accordance with the major street plan and shall be not less than
the following.



         (a)   Expressway               120 feet



         (b)   Arterials



               acceptable            80 feet




               desirable            100 feet




         (c)   Collector streets



               acceptable            60 feet



               desirable            80 feet



         (d)   Local or minor streets            60
feet



         (e)   Marginal access streets         60 feet



         (f)   Cul-de-sacs               55 feet



         (g)   All streets located beyond the corporate limits



            of the city and within one mile thereof   60 feet



      (2)   Pavement widths. Pavement widths back-to-back of curb
shall be not less than the following.



         (a)   Arterials



               acceptable             49 feet



               desirable            73 feet



         (b)   Collector streets



               acceptable             45 feet



               desirable            49 feet



         (c)   Local or minor streets            32
feet using city-approved traditional curb, 26 feet using city approved
mountable curb



         (d)   Marginal access streets         32 feet



         (e)   Cul-de-sacs               32 feet
using city-approved traditional curb, 26 feet using city-approved mountable
curb



      (3)   Grades.  Street grades shall be as follows.



         (a)   Street grades shall be not more than 10% nor less
than 0.5%.



         (b)   Grades approaching intersections shall not exceed
5% for a distance of not less than 100 feet from the centerline of the
intersection.



      (4)   (a)   Horizontal curves. Where a centerline
deflection angle of more than ten degrees occurs, a circular curve shall be
introduced, having a centerline radius of not less than the following.



            1.   Major streets            500 feet



            2.   Collector streets         300 feet



            3.   Local or minor streets         150
feet



         (b)   Proper superelevation shall be provided for curves
on major streets.



      (5)   Vertical curves.  All vertical curves shall have a
length as necessary to provide safe sight distance.



      (6)   Tangents.  A tangent of not less than 100 feet in
length shall be provided between curves.



      (7)   Intersections.  Street intersections shall be laid out
as follows.



         (a)   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no street shall intersect at less than 75 degrees.



         (b)   Sight distances at all intersections other than in
the Central Business District shall comply with the North Carolina Department
of Transportation standard of a 10 feet  70 feet sight distance triangle.



         (c)   Property lines at street intersections shall be
rounded with a minimum radius of 20 feet.  At an angle of intersection of
less than 90 degrees, a greater radius may be required.  Where a street
intersects a highway, the design standards of the State Highway Commission
shall apply.



         (d)   A centerline off-set minimum of 125 feet shall be
provided at street jogs.



      (8)   Cul-de-sacs.  Permanent deadend streets shall not
exceed 400 feet in length, depending on topography, and shall be provided
with a turnaround having a 40-foot radius, and a right-of-way radius of 55
feet. Temporary deadend streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a
40-foot radius.  Temporary turnarounds shall be paved or graveled in
accordance with the city specifications and standards.



      (9)   Half-streets.  The dedication of half-streets at the
perimeter of a new subdivision is prohibited.  If circumstances render this
impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of the
remaining half of the street must be furnished by the subdivider.  Where
there exists a half-street in an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half
shall be provided by the proposed development.



   (B)   Alleys.  All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with
city specifications and standards and shall meet the following requirements.



      (1)   Right-of-way
width                              20 feet



      (2)   Minimum centerline radius when a deflection angle of
more than ten degrees occurs   35 feet



      (3)   Property-line radius at alley
intersections                     15 feet



   (C)   Blocks.  The maximum and minimum length and width of blocks
shall be as follows.



      (1)   Length.  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,500 feet, nor
be less than 400 feet.  Where deemed necessary by the Planning Board, a
pedestrian crosswalk of at least eight feet in width shall be provided.



      (2)   Width.  Blocks shall have a sufficient width to allow
two tiers of lots of minimum depth.  Blocks may consist of single-tier lots
where they are required to separate residential development from through
vehicular traffic or nonresidential uses.



   (D)   Lots.  The size, shape, and orientation of nonresidential
lots shall be such as the Planning Board deems appropriate for the type of
development and use contemplated. Residential lots shall comply with the
following requirements.



      (1)   Area.  All lots shall have an area of not less than
8,000 square feet.  Additional area is required when the following
conditions exist.



         (a)   Public water but not a public sewer is provided. 
In this case, the lot shall be not less than 10,000 square feet in area.



         (b)   Neither public water nor a public sewer is
provided.



In this case, the lot shall be not less than 20,000 square feet in area.



      (2)   Width.  All lots shall have a minimum width at the
building line of not less than 70 feet, and a minimum width at the street
line of not less 35 feet.  Corner lots shall have an additional width of ten
feet to permit adequate setback from the abutting street.  Greater lot width
is required when the following conditions exist.



         (a)   Public water but not a public sewer is provided. 
In this case, the mean lot depth shall be not less than 120 feet.



         (b)   Neither public water nor a public sewer is
provided.



In this case, the mean lot depth shall be not less than 150 feet.



      (3)   Depth.  All lots shall have a minimum mean depth of not
less than 110 feet.  Greater lot depth is required when the following
conditions exist.



         (a)   Public water but not a public sewer is provided. 
In this case, the mean lot depth shall be not less than 120 feet.



         (b)   Neither public water nor a public sewer is
provided.  In this case, the mean lot depth shall be not less than 150 feet.



      (4)   Orientation.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at
right angles or radial to street lines.



   (E)   Building setback lines.  The minimum setback from property
lines shall be as follows.



      (1)   From the front property lines            35
feet



      (2)   From the side property lines            A
combined requirement of 20 feet and a minimum of eight feet on one side



      (3)   From the rear property lines            12
feet



      (4)   From the side property line which abuts a street   20
feet



   (F)   Easements.  Utility and other easements shall be provided as
follows.



      (1)   Utilities.  Utility easements centered on rear or side
lot lines shall be provided where deemed necessary by the City Engineer, and
shall be at least 12 feet in width.



      (2)   Crosswalks.  A crosswalk easement of at least eight
feet in width shall be provided if required by the Planning Board.



      (3)   Drainage.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a
storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with
the lines of the watercourse, and any further width or construction, both, as
will be adequate for the purpose.  Parallel streets or parkways may be
required in connection therewith.



      (4)   Lakes, similar areas. Lakes, ponds, creeks, and similar
areas within the city will be accepted for maintenance only if the acceptance
is recommended by the Planning Board and approved by the Council.



   (G)   Park lands.  In the event that a proposed park, playground,
school, or other public facility shown on the comprehensive plan is located,
in whole or in part, in the subdivision, the Planning Board shall require a
reservation or dedication of the area by the subdivider as a condition of
recording the plat.



   (H)   Open recreational, or green space: require 10% in the
approximate geographic center of the project. The intent of the open space
requirement is to enhance the quality of life in the development by providing
for picnicking, walking, team sports and similar recreational opportunities.
Open space does not include existing rights-of-way, utility easements, buffer
zones, streambeds, flood plains, and other land considered unsuitable for
building purposes. All open space shall be in one tract, with no portion less
than 100 feet in width. The foregoing 100-feet-width requirement can be
decreased upon a finding by the Planning and Zoning Board and City Council
that, because of unique circumstances related to topography, streams, rock
outcroppings, trees, and other natural resources, less open space width will
better serve the development and the city. Such open space shall be held in a
nonprofit corporate ownership by the owners of the lots within the
development. If the development adjoins an existing greenway or is shown on
an adopted greenway plan, then the developer shall incorporate the greenway
dedication into the subdivision.



   (I)   Access.  In developments containing more than 15 lots, two
streets in and out of the development will be required in all developments
containing three or more acres.  No exceptions.  Developers will be
encouraged to purchase adjoining land if two streets are not feasible.  In
developments containing 15 lots or fewer, the entrance to the development
shall be 54 feet wide, measuring from the back of the curb to the back of the
curb, with an island six feet in width and 24 feet in length located not less
than 20 feet from the intersecting street, with the divided street
transitioning into a city standard street 26 feet in width with mounted curb.



      (1)   All streets and utilities will be stubbed out to
adjoining parcels to insure connectivity and prevent landlocked property.



      (2)   A five-foot wide sidewalk will be required on one side
of the street, and there will be a seven-foot wide grassed strip between the
street and the sidewalk.



      (3)   Curb and gutter will be required in all developments
except those located in the watershed.



      (4)   All commercial and non-residential developments on
existing streets shall install curb and gutter and a five-foot wide side
walks as required by the City Engineer, excepting however, industrial
developments are exempt from this requirement.



   (J)   Irrigation lines.  Encroachment agreements will be required
for irrigation lines within the right-of-way.



   (K)   Electronic requirement.  Approved plat and construction
specification shall be provided on an approved digital format by the City
Engineer.



   (L)   Access connections.  Access connections for commercial
developments are required.  The connection shall be not less than 22 feet in
width between adjoining lots on all commercially developed property.  The
purpose is to eliminate having to reenter the public street to visit
adjoining businesses.



('58 Code, §§ 14-9)  (Am. Ord. 94-20, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 01-36,
passed 8-6-02; Am. Ord. 01-39, passed 8-20-01; Am. Ord. 01-40, passed
8-20-01; Am. Ord. 02-40, passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 02-53, passed 12-16-02; Am.
Ord. 07-14, passed 6-4-07; Am. Ord. 08-13, passed 4-21-08; Am. Ord. 10-20,
passed 6-8-10; Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.11  PERMANENT REFERENCE POINTS.



   Prior to the approval of the final plat, permanent reference points
shall have been placed in accordance with the following requirements.



   (A)   Subdivision corner tie.  At least one corner of the
subdivision shall be designated by course and distance (tie) from a readily
discernible reference marker.  If a corner is within 2,000 feet of a U.S.
Coast and Geodetic Station or N.C. Grid System coordinated monument, or city
coordinated system, then this corner shall be marked with a monument so
designated by computed X and Y coordinates, which shall appear on the map
with a statement identifying this station or monument to an accuracy of
1:10000.  When such a monument or station is not available, the tie shall be
made to some pertinent and readily recognizable landmark or identifiable
point, physical object, or structure that could not be destroyed.



   (B)   Monuments.  Within each block of a subdivision at least two
monuments, designed and designated as control corners, shall be installed. 
The surveyor shall employ additional monuments if and when required.  All
monuments shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at least four inches
in diameter or square, and not less than three feet in length.  Each
monument shall have imbedded in its top or attached by a suitable means, a
metal plate of noncorrosive material and marked plainly with the point, the
surveyor's registration number, the month and the year it was installed, and
the word "monument" or "control corner."  Monuments shall be set at least 30
inches in the ground, with at least six inches exposed above the ground
unless this requirement is impractical.



   (C)   Property markers.  A steel or wrought iron pipe or the
equivalent, not less than 3/4 inches in diameter and at least 30 inches in
length, shall be set at all corners, except those located by monuments.  A
marker shall also be set at a point of curve, point of intersection, property
corner, point of tangency and reference point unless a monument is placed
where necessary.



   (D)   Accuracy.  The allowable angular error of closure and linear
error of closure for surveys within the city limits and extraterritorial
jurisdiction shall be as follows.



      (1)   Angular error of closure within the city limits shall
not exceed 25 seconds times the square root of the number of angles turned.



      (2)   Linear error of closure within the city limits shall not
exceed one foot per 7,500 feet of perimeter of the lot of land (l:7500).



      (3)   Angular error of closure beyond the city limits shall
not exceed 30 seconds times the square root of the number of angles turned.



      (4)   Linear error of closure beyond the city limits shall not
exceed one foot per 5,000 feet of perimeter of the land (l:5000).



('58 Code, § 14-10)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 91.12  IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS.



   Approval of the final plat shall be subject to the subdivider having
installed the improvements herein designated or having guaranteed, to the
satisfaction of the city, the installation of the improvements.  All
improvements required herein shall be at the expense of the developer and may
not be financed by the city's assessment program.



   (A)   Street improvements.  The following requirements shall apply
to all streets within the corporate limits of the city.



      (1)   Grading and drainage. All streets shall be graded to
their full right-of-way width and properly drained of all storm water by the
construction of necessary ditches, culverts, and storm sewers.  No drainage
may be connected to the sanitary sewer system.  Finished grades of street
centerline, ditches, culverts, and storm sewers, including street cross
sections, shall be approved by the City Engineer.



      (2)   Paving.  Road base and paving shall be installed in
accordance with the city specifications and standards, to a minimum width of
20 feet wide paving.



      (3)   Where any street of a subdivision is a continuation of
an existing curb and guttered street, a continuation of the curb and gutter
is required on all lots abutting that street.



   (B)   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks shall be constructed on such streets
the Planning Board considers sidewalks to be necessary.  Sidewalks shall be
constructed within the street right-of-way and installed in accordance with
city specifications and standards.



   (C)   Utilities.  All lots shall be served by water distribution
lines, necessary fire hydrants, and sanitary sewers, as designed by a
registered professional engineer according to city standards and
specifications, and approved by the City Engineer.  Should private water or
sewerage systems be provided, they shall meet the requirements of the North
Carolina Division of Health Services.



   (D)   Guarantee of improvements. Where the required improvements
have not been completed prior to the submission of the plat for final
approval, the approval of the plat shall be subject to the subdivider
guaranteeing the installation of the improvements in one of the following
methods.



      (1)   Bond.  Filing a performance or surety bond in an amount
to be determined by the city, but generally 120% of the estimated cost of
completion of approved improvements.



      (2)   Cash deposit. Depositing or placing in escrow a
certified check or cash in an amount to be determined by the city, but
generally 120% of the estimated cost of completion of approved
improvements.  Portions of the security deposit may be released as work
progresses.



      (3)   Agreement.  Entering into an agreement with the city
guaranteeing the completion of the required work, the agreement to be binding
on subsequent purchasers of the property, and to be recorded at the option of
the city.  The agreement shall provide that satisfactory security be
furnished guaranteeing the completion of the necessary improvements before
each section is developed.



('58 Code, § 14-11)  (Am. Ord. 94-20, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 16-48,
passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.13  IMPROVEMENTS BEYOND THE CITY LIMITS.



   In the adoption of this chapter, the City Council recognizes that under
the General Statutes it may not be mandatory that a subdivision located
beyond the city limits shall comply with the requirements set forth in this
chapter as a condition precedent for final approval of a plat of the
subdivision.  However, unless the requirements are complied with, the city
will not extend its water or sewer mains to any such subdivision or permit
any connection thereto.



('58 Code, § 14-12)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.14  SKETCH PLAN.



   A simple free-hand sketch plan shall be drawn at an approximate scale
of 200 feet to one inch, and shall show the tentative street layout,
approximate rights-of-way widths, lot arrangements, drainage and utility
easements, sites for schools, parks, churches, and the like, existing
structures, watercourses, wooded areas, approximate number of acres devoted
to each use, total acreage, average lot size, approximate number of lots, and
existing zoning.



('58 Code, § 14-13)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.15  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of 100 feet to one inch and
will be drawn on a sheet 14 inches by 18 inches or 18 inches by 24 inches, or
any other size acceptable to the Register of Deeds of Stanly County. The
preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer and
shall show the following.



   (A)   The location of existing and platted property lines, streets,
buildings, watercourses, railroads, transmission lines, sewers, bridges,
culverts, and drainpipes, water mains, city limit lines, and any public
utility easements.



   (B)   Boundaries of tract shown with bearings, distances, and
closures.



   (C)   Wooded areas, marshes, and any other physical condition
affecting the site.



   (D)   Names of adjoining subdivision or property owners.



   (E)   Zoning classification, if any, both on the land to be
subdivided and on adjoining lands.



   (F)   Proposed streets, street names, rights-of-way, pavement
widths, and approximate grades.



   (G)   The location (layout) of proposed utilities (sewer, water,
gas, electricity), showing connections to existing systems or location plans
for individual water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, and the like.



   (H)   Other proposed rights- of-way or easements, location, widths,
and purposes.



   (I)   Proposed lot lines, lot and block number, and approximate
dimensions.



   (J)   Proposed minimum building setback lines.



   (K)   Proposed parks, school sites, or other public open spaces, if
any.



   (L)   Title, date, north point, and graphic scale.



   (M)   Name of owner, surveyor, engineer, or land planner.



   (N)   Site data.



      (1)   Acreage in total tract.



      (2)   Acreage in park or other land usage.



      (3)   Average lot size.



      (4)   Total number of lots.



      (5)   Lineal feet in streets.



   (O)   Sketch vicinity map showing relationship between subdivision
and surrounding area.



   (P)   Forms for preliminary certification.  The following
certificates shall be lettered or rubber stamped on the preliminary plat.
Plat shall include additional certifications from any other parties as deemed
necessary by the Subdivision Administrator.



      (1)   Certificate of accuracy.



         (As required under G.S. 47-30, as amended.)



                                                
               



Date         Engineer or registered surveyor



      (2)   Certificate of ownership and dedication.  I (We) hereby
certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described
hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our)
free consent, establish minimum building lines, and dedicate all streets,
alleys, walks, parks, and other sites to public or private use as noted.
Further, I (we) certify the land as shown hereon is within the planning
jurisdiction of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina.



                                               
                             



Date      Owner         Date      Owner



      (3)   Certificate of approval by the Planning Board.  I,   
          , chairman of the Planning Board, hereby certify that the said
board fully approved the preliminary plat of the subdivision entitled    
            , on the   day of           , 20  .



                                                
               



Date         Chairman



      (4)   Certificate of approval of plan by Council.  I,    
            , the city clerk of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina,
do certify  that on the   day of           , 20  the City Council of
the City of Albemarle approved the preliminary plat entitled          
                  .



Following its approval, final plat(s) may be for recorded and Council shall
accept the dedication of streets, easements, rights-of-way and public parks
and other sites for public purposes, as shown hereon, but assume no
responsibility to open or maintain the same until, in the opinion of the City
Council of the City of Albemarle, it is in the public interest to do so.



                                               
                   



Date             City clerk



('58 Code, § 14-14)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.16  FINAL PLAT.



   The final plat shall be drawn on linen or milar with India ink, at the
same scale and on the same sheet size as the preliminary plat as approved.
The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary
plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time;
however, that portion shall conform to all requirements of this chapter. 
The final plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer and
shall show the following information.



   (A)   The lines and names of all streets and roads.



   (B)   Lot lines and lot and block numbers.



   (C)   Minimum building setback lines.



   (D)   Reservations, easements, alleys, and any areas to be dedicated
to public uses or sites for other than residential use, with notes stating
their purpose and any limitations.



   (E)   Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the
ground the location, bearing, and length of every street line, lot line,
boundary line (with errors of closure), block line, and building line,
whether curved or straight, and including true north point.  This should
include the radius, central angle, point of tangent, tangent distance, and
arcs and chords of all curved streets and curved property lines.



   (F)   All dimensions should be to the nearest 1/10 of a foot and
angles to the nearest minute.



   (G)   Accurate location and description of all monuments and markers.



   (H)   The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets,
and the location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property.



   (I)   Title, date, name, and location of subdivision, and graphic
scale.



   (J)   Name of subdivider, registered surveyor, engineer, or land
planner.



   (K)   Utility layouts.



      (1)   Water.



      (2)   Gas.



      (3)   Sanitary sewer.



      (4)   Storm drainage.



      (5)   Electrical lines.



   (L)   Forms for final certification.  The following certificate
shall be lettered or rubber stamped on the final plat.  Final plat shall
include any additional certifications from any other parties as deemed
necessary by the Subdivision Administrator.



      (1)   Certificate of accuracy.



         (As required under G.S. 47-30, as amended.)



                                         



Date         Engineer or registered surveyor



      (2)   Certificate of ownership and dedication.  I (We) hereby
certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described
hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our)
free consent, establish minimum building lines, and dedicate all streets,
alleys, walks, parks, and other sites to public or private use as noted. 
Further, I (we) certify the land as shown hereon is within the planning
jurisdiction of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina.



                                      
               



Date      Owner         Dat e      Owner



      (3)   Certificate of approval for recording plan and
acceptance of dedications.  I,                      , the
designated subdivision administrator of the City of Albemarle, North
Carolina, do certify that this final plat has been approved for recording and
accepted for the dedication of streets, easements, rights-of-way and public
parks and other sites for public purposes as shown hereon; however, the City
of Albemarle assumes no responsibility to open or maintain the same until, in
the opinion of the City Council of the City of Albemarle, it is in the public
interest to do so.



                                          



Date         Subdivision administrator



      (4)   Insite septic tanks. The Stanly County Health Department
has evaluated each lot in the                     subdivision for
onsite septic tank suitability.  As of             (date), based on
conditions noted in site evaluation sheet number         , each lot is
suitable for a septic system not to exceed         (no.) bedroom house.



                                      



Date         County Health Officer or Legal Representative



      (5)   Certification of the approval of the installation and
construction of streets, utilities, and other required improvements.



I hereby certify



         (a)   That streets, utilities, and other required
improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to
city specifications and standards in the subdivision entitled          
                  ; or



         (b)   That a guarantee of the installation of the
improvements in an amount or manner satisfactory to the City of Albemarle has
been received.



                   (1)                    



Date            City engineer



                   (2)                    



Date            City clerk



('58 Code, § 14-15)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.17  EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS.



   The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the
Planning Board in the case of a plan or program for a complete group
development, which in the judgment of the Board, provides adequate public
spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and
service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which also
provides any covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to
and achievement of the plan.  However, individual lots within a townhouse
development shall be exempt from minimum lot widths and setback requirements
of § 92.086.



('58 Code, § 14-16)  (Am. Ord. 87-19, passed 8-17-87; Am. Ord. 16-48,
passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.18  VARIANCES.



   Where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the
site, strict adherence to the provisions of the regulations of this chapter
would cause an unnecessary hardship, the Planning Board may recommend and the
City Council authorize a variance, if the variance can be made without
destroying the intent of this chapter. Any variance thus authorized is
required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the Planning Board and of
the City Council, and the reasoning on which the departure was justified set
forth.



('58 Code, § 14-17)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.19  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any
land located within the platting jurisdiction granted to the city transfers
or sells land by reference to a plat showing a subdivision of the land before
the plat has been approved by the City Council and recorded in the office of
the Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, and the
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the
transaction from this penalty. Building permits required pursuant to G.S.
160A-417 may be denied for lots that have been illegally subdivided. In
addition to other remedies, a city may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent the unlawful subdivision of land, to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or
its agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease by reference to an
approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not yet been properly
approved under this chapter or recorded with the Register of Deeds, provided
the contract does all of the following:



      (1)   Incorporates as an attachment a copy of the preliminary
plat referenced in the contract and obligates the owner to deliver to the
buyer a copy of the recorded plat prior to closing and conveyance.



      (2)   Plainly and conspicuously notifies the prospective buyer
or lessee that a final subdivision plat has not been approved or recorded at
the time of the contract, that no governmental body will incur any obligation
to the prospective buyer or lessee with respect to the approval of the final
subdivision plat, that changes between the preliminary and final plats are
possible, and that the contract or lease may be terminated without breach by
the buyer or lessee if the final recorded plat differs in any material
respect from the preliminary plat.



      (3)   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat
does not differ in any material respect from the plat referred to in the
contract, the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to
close any earlier than five days after the delivery of a copy of the final
recorded plat.



      (4)   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat
differs in any material respect from the preliminary plat referred to in the
contract, the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to
close any earlier than 15 days after the delivery of the final recorded plat,
during which 15-day period the buyer or lessee may terminate the contract
without breach or any further obligation, and may receive a refund of all
earnest money or prepaid purchase price.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any owner or
its agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease land by reference to
an approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not been properly
approved under this chapter or recorded with the Register of Deeds, where the
buyer or lessee is any person who has contracted to acquire or lease the land
for the purpose of engaging in the business of construction of residential,
commercial, or industrial buildings on the land, or for the purpose of resale
or lease of the land to persons engaged in that kind of business, provided
that no conveyance of that land may occur and no contract to lease it may
become effective until after the final plat has been properly approved under
this chapter and recorded with the Register of Deeds.



('58 Code, § 14-18)  (Ord. 06-09, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 16-48, passed
11-21-16)



§ 91.20  AMENDMENTS, AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.



   This chapter may be amended from time to time by the City Council, but
no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or
shall have been submitted to the Planning Board for review and
recommendation.  The Planning Board shall have 30 days within which to
submit its report.  If the Planning Board fails to submit a report within
the specified time, it shall be deemed to have approved the amendment.



('58 Code, § 14-19)  (Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.21  RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of cluster development is to permit a
procedure for development which will result in improved living and working
environments; which will promote more economic subdivision layout; which will
encourage a variety of types of residential dwellings; which will encourage
ingenuity and originality in total subdivision and individual site design;
and which can preserve open space to serve recreational, scenic, and public
service purposes, and other purposes related thereto, within the densities
established for the cluster net tract area.



      (1)   Variations in lot sizes are permitted.



      (2)   Procedures are established to assure adequate
maintenance and restricted use of open space areas for the benefit of the
inhabitants of the subdivisions.



   (B)   Dwelling Types and Acreage.



      (1)   Only single-family residential dwellings that are
allowed in the R-10 district may be permitted in cluster developments.



      (2)   Cluster developments shall consist of at least a
five-acre tract, except that cluster developments that are found by the City
Council to be a logical extension of an existing or approved cluster
development, may contain a smaller acreage.



      (3)   The final size of each and every lot within the cluster
shall reside with the developer.



   (C)   Maximum Number of Lots.



      (1)   To determine the maximum number of lots, subtract 15%
(the approximate area needed for roadways) from the gross area of land to be
developed; divide by the minimum lot size within the R-10 district.



   (D)   Subdivision Approval Required.



      (1)   No cluster development may be constructed except in
accordance with a preliminary subdivision plat approved by the City Council,
after review and comment by the Planning Board, and then a final plat
approved by the Subdivision Administrator.



   (E)   Modification of Yard and Lot Requirements.



      (1)   Such modifications or reductions (in the same proportion
as the lot size reduction) are permitted so long as they are indicated in the
preliminary subdivision plat; however, the particular yard (normally the back
or side) abutting the boundary of the entire cluster development site shall
not be less than the minimum requirement for the R-10 district.



   (F)   Common or Open Space.



      (1)   Open Space Standards.  At the discretion of the
developer, a cluster development may utilize a range of lot sizes not in
conflict with division (B) above, and provided further that the common area
shall be designated as a park or open space. Such parks or open space shall
be held and maintained in nonprofit corporate ownership by the owners of the
lots within the development, unless otherwise agreed upon by the city.



      (2)   In consideration of the purposes served by a cluster
development, the title to such areas as provided shall be preserved to the
perpetual benefit of the private properties in the development, and shall be
restricted against private ownership for any other purposes. Improvements
clearly incidental to the purposes of these provisions may be made within the
open space, provided that the maximum coverage of such improvements shall not
exceed 25% of the open space.



      (3)   Access to Open Space.  All lots created within the
development shall have direct access to all parks or open space as provided
by means of public streets, dedicated walkways, facts of physical contiguity,
other public lands, or lands in common ownership by all residents.



      (4)   Open Space Provisions.  Where the open space is to be
deeded to a homeowners' association or other such nonprofit ownership, the
developer shall file a declaration of the covenants and restrictions that
will govern the open space and the association or nonprofit organization.
This declaration shall be submitted with preliminary plat approval and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   The homeowners' association or the nonprofit
organization shall be established before any lots are sold;



         (b)   Membership shall be mandatory for each lot buyer
and any successive buyer;



         (c)   The association shall provide for liability
insurance, any taxes, and maintenance of grounds and facilities; and



         (d)   Any sums levied by the association that remain
unpaid shall become a lien upon the lot owner's property.



(Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.22  CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN STANDARDS.



   Before a conditional use can be permitted, a site plan must be approved
by the City Council based on a recommendation from the Planning Board. At no
greater than 1"=20' scale, the site plan shall show the following information:



   (A)   Location, arrangement, dimensions and number of automobile
parking spaces;



   (B)   Location and dimensions of vehicular entrances, exits, and
drives;



   (C)   General drainage system;



   (D)   Location and materials of walls and fences;




   (E)   Ground cover, topography, slopes, banks, and ditches;



   (F)   The location and general exterior dimensions of the various
residences;



   (G)   The location, dimensions, and arrangements of areas to be
devoted to planting lawns, trees, and other plants;



   (H)   The plans for proposed utility layouts, including sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone, and
electric service (all utilities will be constructed to city standards);



   (I)   An analysis of anticipated traffic volume;



   (J)   Sedimentation and erosion control plan;



   (K)   Evidence that the North Carolina Department of Transportation
has been made aware of the proposed development and that the developer, if
required, will coordinate planning for the development with this agency;



   (L)   Plans for refuse disposal equipment and method of refuse
disposal, such as compactors and dumpsters, if pertinent;



   (M)   Delineation of areas to be constructed in phases and
sequential order;



   (N)   Sidewalks of five feet in width, linking development within
the R-4 District and that within the N-S District, if pertinent;



   (O)   Sidewalks of five feet in width within a residential cluster
development or a zero lot-line development; and



   (P)   Any other reasonable conditions felt necessary by the Planning
Board or City Council.



(Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.23  TOWNHOUSE CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of a townhouse cluster development is
to permit a procedure that will result in an improved living environment,
more affordable housing, and more land left in its undeveloped state as open
space.



   (B)   Townhouse Defined.  "TOWNHOUSE."  Row housing on individual
lots, provided no more than six dwelling units are attached one to another.
Each unit has ground floor access to the outside.



   (C)   Dwelling Types and Acreage.  Cluster developments shall
consist of at least five-acre tracts; except that a cluster development that
is found by the City Council to be a logical extension of an existing or
approved townhouse cluster development, may contain a smaller acreage.



   (D)   Maximum Number of Lots.  To determine the maximum number of
lots, subtract 15% (the approximate amount needed for roadways) from the
gross amount of land to be developed; divide by the district minimum lot size.



   (E)   Subdivision Approval Required.  No townhouse cluster
development may be constructed except in accordance with a preliminary
subdivision plat approved by the City Council, after review and comment by
the Planning Board, and then a final plat approved by the Subdivision
Administrator.



   (F)   Common Space.  In consideration of the purposes served by a
cluster development, the title to such areas as provided shall be preserved
to the perpetual benefit of the private properties in the development, and
shall be restricted against private ownership for any other purposes.
Improvements clearly incidental to the purposes of these provisions may be
made within the open space, provided that the maximum coverage of such
improvements shall not exceed 25% of the open space.



      (1)   Access to Open Space.  All lots created within the
development shall have direct access to some or all parks or open space as
provided by means of public or private streets, dedicated walkways, facts of
physical contiguity, other public lands or lands in common ownership by all
residents.



      (2)   Open Space Provisions.  Where the open space is deeded
to a homeowners' association or other such nonprofit ownership, the developer
shall file a declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the
open space and the association or nonprofit organization. This declaration
shall be submitted with preliminary plat approval and shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:



         (a)   The homeowners' association or the nonprofit
organization shall be established before any lots are sold;



         (b)   Membership shall be mandatory for each lot buyer
and any successive buyer;



         (c)   The association shall provide for liability
insurance, any taxes, and maintenance of all grounds and facilities; and



         (d)   Any sums levied by the association that remain
unpaid shall become a lien upon the lot owner's property.



(Ord. 99-44, passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



§ 91.24  GATED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of a gated community development is to
permit a procedure to allow for limited access to a development with private
streets and public utilities.



   (B)   Zoning Districts.  This type development shall be allowed in
all residential zoning districts.  Detached duplex and multiplex units will
be allowed in the proper zones, not to exceed six units in a building. 



   (C)   Development Agreement.  A development agreement will be
executed, detailing responsibilities of the developer and city. 



   (D)   Access.  Two ways of ingress/egress must be established for
use by residents, public safety, and utility personnel of connecting streets
during routine maintenance and emergencies.  All other governmental
employees shall be granted access during the normal course of their duties. 



   (E)   Streets and Sidewalks. Streets and sidewalks shall be designed
to current city standards, but will remain private. 



   (F)   City Utilities.  The developer shall build water and sewer
lines to city standards, turn the lines over to the city, and grant the city
easements to allow for maintenance of lines and metering points. 



   (G)   Homeowners’ Association.  Where open space or other
infrastructure improvements are to be deeded to a homeowners' association or
other such nonprofit ownership, the developer shall file a declaration of the
covenants and restrictions that will govern the open space and the
association or nonprofit organization.  This declaration shall be submitted
with preliminary plat approval and shall include, but not be limited to, the
following: 



      (1)   The homeowners' association or the nonprofit
organization shall be established before any lots are sold;



      (2)   Membership shall be mandatory for each lot buyer and any
successive buyer;



      (3)   The association shall provide for liability insurance,
any taxes, and maintenance of grounds and facilities; and



      (4)   Any sums levied by the association that remain unpaid
shall become a lien upon the lot owner's property. 



   (H)   Other Development Standards.  All other development standards
in city ordinances and development specification shall be met.



(Ord. 08-12, passed 4-21-08; Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 11-21-16)



CHAPTER 92:  ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   92.001   Purpose



   92.002   Authority



   92.003   Short title



   92.004   Jurisdiction



   92.005   Boundaries of extraterritorial jurisdiction



   92.006   Bona-fide farms exempt



   92.007   Interpretation of terms



   92.008   Definitions



   92.009   Use of land and buildings



   92.010   Height and density; exception



   92.011   Lot size



   92.012   Lot of record



   92.013   Front yard setbacks for dwellings



   92.014   Visibility at intersections



   92.015   Yard use limitations



   92.016   Only one principal building on any lot



   92.017   Fence, wall and hedge limitations



   92.018   Conflict with other regulations



   92.019   Customary home occupations



   92.020   Group projects



   92.021   Nonconforming uses or structures



   92.022   Extension of nonconforming situations



   92.023   Recreational vehicles and campers



Signs



   92.025   Intent



   92.026   Definitions



   92.027   General provisions



   92.028   Prohibited signs



   92.029   Permit required



   92.030   Signs not requiring permits



   92.031   Signs permitted in residential districts (R10, R8, R8A, R4,
R0)



   92.032   Signs permitted in the Central Business District (CBD)



   92.033   Signs permitted in commercial and industrial districts
(GHBD, HMD, MUSCD, NBD, NSD, SCD, LID, HID, I-O)



   92.034   Nonconforming signs



   92.039   Subdivision and industrial park markers



   92.040   Industrial park group signs



Off-Street Loading and Storage



   92.047   Off-street loading and unloading space



Telecommunications



   92.067   Telecommunication towers and facilities



Zoning District Regulations



   92.070   Use districts



   92.071   District boundaries



   92.072   Rules governing boundaries



   92.073   [Reserved]



   92.074   R-10 Single-Family Residential District



   92.075   R-8 Two-Family Residential District



   92.076   R-8A Multi-Family Residential District



   92.077   R-4 High Density Residential District



   92.078   R-O Residential-Office District



   92.079   NBD Neighborhood Business District



   92.079A   NS Neighborhood Shopping District



   92.080   GHBD General Highway Business District



   92.081   SCD Shopping Center District



   92.081A   MUSCD Mixed Use Shopping Center District



   92.082   HMD Hospital-Medical Center District



   92.083   CBD Central Business District



   92.084   LID Light Industrial District



   92.085   HID Heavy Industrial District



   92.085A   Northeast Corridor Overlay District



   92.085B   Historic districts and landmark preservation



   92.085C   I-O Institutional and Office District



   92.086   Area, yard, and height requirements



   92.087   [Reserved]



   92.088   [Reserved]



   92.089   [Reserved]



   92.090   Bufferyard requirements



   92.091   Landscaping of parking lots



Administration



   92.095   Zoning Enforcement Officer



   92.096   Zoning permit required



   92.097   Application for zoning permit; expiration



   92.098   Certificate of occupancy required



   92.099   Remedies



   92.100   Procedure for amendments



   92.101   Procedure for conditional use permits



   92.102   Establishing a development moratorium



Board of Adjustment



   92.110   Variances and appeals



Site Specific Development - Zoning Vested Rights



   92.120   Purpose



   92.121   Definitions



   92.122   Establishment of a zoning vested right



   92.123   Approval procedures and approval authority



   92.124   Duration



   92.125   Termination



   92.126   Voluntary annexation



   92.127   Limitations



   92.128   Repealer



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.001  PURPOSE.



   Zoning regulations shall be designed to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare. To that end, the regulations may address, among
other things, the following public purposes: to provide adequate light and
air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire,
panic, and dangers; and to facilitate the efficient and adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public
requirements. The regulations shall be made with reasonable consideration,
among other things, as to the character of the district and its peculiar
suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the
city.



('58 Code, § 19-1)  (Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06)



§ 92.002  AUTHORITY.



   The City Council enacts this chapter in pursuance of the authority
granted by the General Statutes of North Carolina (G.S. 160-172 to 160-181.2).



('58 Code, § 19-2)



Editor's note:



   Zoning enabling statutes are now codified in G.S. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3.



§ 92.003  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as The Zoning Code of the
city.



('58 Code, § 19-11)



§ 92.004  JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits
of the city and within the territory beyond the corporate limits as now or
hereafter fixed, by agreement between the City Council and the Stanly County
Board of Commissioners.



('58 Code, § 19-30)



§ 92.005  BOUNDARIES OF EXTRA- TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.



   The boundaries, if any, established by the agreement referred to in §
92.004 are shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Albemarle,
North Carolina," adopted by City Council and on file and display in the
office of the Director of Community Development and by reference incorporated
herein.



('58 Code, § 19-30.1)



§ 92.006  BONA-FIDE FARMS EXEMPT.



   This chapter shall in no way regulate, restrict, prohibit, or otherwise
deter any bona-fide farm and its related uses within the extraterritorial
area as defined in §§ 92.004 and 92.005, except that any use of the
property for nonfarm purposes shall be subject to these regulations.



('58 Code, § 19-31)



§ 92.007  INTERPRETATION OF TERMS.



   For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words or terms
are used as herein defined.  Except as defined herein, all other words used
in this chapter shall have their customary dictionary definition.



   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.



   (B)   Words used in the singular number include the plural, and
words used in the plural number include the singular.



   (C)   The word "SHALL" is always mandatory and not merely directory.



('58 Code, § 19-40)



§ 92.008  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   “ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.” A building or use customarily located
on a lot in association with a principal building or use and incidental and
subordinate to the principal building or use.



   “ADULT ARCADE or PEEP SHOW.”  Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug- operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained
to show images or persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so
displaced depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”



   “ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.” A commercial establishment
which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for
any form of consideration any one or more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas;” or



      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with “specified sexual activities.”



   “ADULT CABARET.” A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial
establishment that regularly features, exhibits or displays as one of its
principal business purposes:



      (1)   Persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual
activities;” or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions which depict or describe “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”



   “ADULT GAMING ESTABLISHMENT.” Any establishment deemed legal by
state law, featuring more than two stand-alone electronic or conventional
gaming units, skill-based or otherwise, or serving more than two patrons in
such a capacity at any one time, which also rewards patrons with cash or
other monetary payments, goods or certificates for services which are
redeemable for cash or other monetary payment on or off premise and including
online redemptions, as well as any rewards which cannot be legally obtained,
consumed, or otherwise used by minors. Any use meeting this definition shall
be considered a primary use regardless of association or location in
conjunction with other permissible primary uses. State of North Carolina
sanctioned lottery functions shall not be considered as adult gaming
establishments for the purposes of this chapter.



   “ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.” A commercial establishment where,
for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown as one of
its principal business purposes that depict or describe “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”



   “ADULT THEATER.” A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features, exhibits, or displays, as
one of its principal business purposes, persons who appear in a state of
nudity or semi-nude, or live performances that expose or depict “specified
anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”



   “ALLEY.” A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means
of access to abutting property.



   “AUTOMOBILE JUNK YARD.” Open storage of more than five dismantled,
wrecked, inoperable, or unlicensed motor vehicles on a single parcel of
non-residential property shall constitute an “AUTOMOBILE JUNK YARD;”
however, open storage of no more than two such vehicles shall be allowed on
any residentially zoned parcel of property.



   “AUTOMOBILE TOWING AND TEMPORARY STORAGE SERVICES.” An
establishment that provides for the removal and temporary storage of vehicles
but does not include disposal, permanent disassembly, salvage or accessory
storage of junk, wrecked or inoperable motor vehicles.  The establishment
shall not:



      (1)   Contain more than 50 vehicles;



      (2)   Sell or offer for sale any part or parts from such
vehicle; and



      (3)   If is visible from a public street or residentially
zoned property shall be enclosed by an opaque fence not less than six feet in
height; for businesses in operation as of the effective date of this section,
providing however, that after the effective date of this section all opaque
fencing installed shall be eight feet in height.



   “BILLIARD HALLS.” An establishment that has five or more billiard
tables on site available for use by patrons of said establishment.



   “BOARDING KENNEL.” A facility or establishment which regularly
offers to the public the service of boarding dogs or cats or other household
pets for a fee. Such a facility or establishment may offer grooming or other
services for dogs and/or cats in addition to providing shelter, food, and
water. Optional outside areas used for grazing, exercising or training of
said animals shall be securely fenced and can only be used to exercise
animals for two non-consecutive hours per day. No odors greater than ambient
odors shall be detectable at the zoning lot boundaries of each lot containing
the kennel.



   “BREWERY.” A brewery that produces 15,000 or more U.S. beer barrels
(460,000 U.S. gallons) per year.



   “BUFFER STRIP.” A buffer strip shall consist of a wall, fence, or
planted strip approved by the Building Inspector, at least ten feet in width,
composed of deciduous or evergreen trees or a mixture of each, spaced not
more than 20 feet apart, and not less than one row of dense shrubs, spaced
not more than five feet apart, and five feet or more in height after one
growing season, which shall be planted and maintained in a healthy, growing
condition by the property owner.



   “BUILDING.” Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or
chattels.  “BUILDING” includes “STRUCTURE.”



   “BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.” A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.



   “BUILDING HEIGHT.” The vertical distance from the mean elevation of
the finished grade along the front of the building to the highest point of a
flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, gambrel, and bonnet roofs. See §
92.010, Height and Density; Exception, for height limit exemptions.



   “BUILDING LINE SETBACK.” A line establishing the minimum allowable
distance between the main wall of the building and the street or highway
right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto. Covered porches
whether enclosed or not shall be considered as part of the main building and
shall not project into the required yard.



   “CONFLICT OF INTEREST, CITY COUNCIL.” A City Council member shall
not vote on any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter
being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and
readily identifiable financial impact on the member. Members of appointed
boards providing advice to the City Council shall not vote on recommendations
regarding any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter
being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and
readily identifiable financial impact on the member.



   “CREMATORY or CREMATORIUM.” The building or buildings or portion of
a building on a single site that houses the cremation equipment, the holding
and processing facilities, the business office, and other parts of the
crematory business.  A crematory must comply with all applicable public
health and environmental laws and rules and must contain the equipment and
meet all of the standards established by the rules adopted by the Board.



   “CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.” Any use conducted for financial gain
within a dwelling or accessory building and carried on by the occupants of
the premises, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
premises for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof,
and in connection with which there is no display. No person not a resident of
the premises shall be employed specifically in connection with the activity;
no equipment shall be installed or used which would cause any nuisance
detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood; and off-street
parking shall be provided for all customers or the one assistant that may be
employed by the following professionals: lawyers, physicians, dentists, and
chiropractors.



   “DONATION DROP BOX.” Any box, bin, or other receptacle separate
from a building that is intended for use as a collection point for donated
clothing or other household materials at times when no employee or
representative of the organization is present to accept donations.



   “DWELLING, GROUP AND ASSISTED CARE.” Any facility with overnight
lodging or sleeping accommodations provided, either at the expense of the
patron or other parties, to specifically defined groups of people on a
transient, temporary or permanent basis, depending on further specified uses
defined herein. Such uses may include, but are not limited to the on-site
care, treatment and provision of meals and other services to the patrons.
Other group and assisted care uses not clearly defined herein shall be
considered as the closest associated use found herein along with any
restriction related to size, activity and location.



      (1)   “ASSISTED LIVING AND NURSING HOME.” Any fully
licensed group or assisted care facility that provides long term room and
board, on-site medical services, convalescent and hospice care, as well as
daily assistance and with other needs, specifically to individuals aged 55
and over, at the end of life, or mentally disabled. Such facilities shall be
managed by staff on a 24-hour basis. This shall exclude independent living
and other multi-family dwelling facilities associated with the aforementioned
groups, which do not include in-house medical care, 24-hour management, or
which provide those and other services as largely incidental to overall
function of the facility.



      (2)   “BATTERED GROUP CARE FACILITY.” Any group or
assisted care facility licensed by the state, or operated by a nonprofit
corporation chartered pursuant to G.S. Chapter 55, for the purpose of
providing room and board, personal care, and rehabilitation services for
battered individuals and families for an indefinite period of time.



      (3)   “CAMPS AND RETREATS.” Any parcel of land, ten acres
or greater, under single ownership by a commercial or registered non-profit
organization used for the purpose of providing to paying customers or
organizational members, spaces for tents or cabins for transient dwellings
strictly for recreational, educational and congregational use. No patrons
shall use said dwellings for longer than 30 days in any given year. Such
facilities shall include, at a minimum, developed parking areas for all
patrons and enclosed and complete on-site bathroom facilities with running
water and plumbing, but may include shared kitchen(s), communal and
congregational buildings and other associated spaces and buildings. All
permanent structures and the property itself must meet all applicable state
fire safety and building codes. This use excludes RV and camper parks and day
camps.



      (4)   “DORMITORY.” Any building(s) or portion thereof
functioning as a group home and living quarters for students of a college,
university or seminary on an indefinite basis that is owned and maintained by
the organization as a part of its main campus location. Such facilities will
typically contain shared sleeping spaces, baths, living areas and sometimes
kitchens. Common areas of such facilities shall be accessible to law
enforcement at all times.



      (5)   “FAMILY CARE ‘GROUP’ HOME.”  A group or
assisted care facility with support and supervisory personnel that provides
room and board, personal care and habitation services in a family environment
throughout the day and for an indefinite and generally long period of time
for not more than six resident handicapped persons. Such facilities shall
meet all state requirements in order to be considered under this definition.
Unless state statute deems otherwise, such uses are allowed in all districts
in which residential dwellings are permissible. However, no such home shall
be located within one-half mile of an existing family care home.



      (6)   “FRATERNITY AND SORORITY HOME.” Any building(s) or
portion thereof functioning as a group home and living quarters for college,
university, seminary students and other individuals on an indefinite basis
who are all members of a fraternal organization that is officially recognized
as such by their respective institution or otherwise by the state. Such homes
shall contain sleeping rooms, bathrooms, common rooms, and a central kitchen
and dining area maintained exclusively for members of the fraternity or
sorority. Common areas of such facilities shall be accessible to law
enforcement at all times.



      (7)   “HALFWAY HOUSE AND SOBER LIVING FACILITY.” Any group
or assisted care facility that provides sleeping accommodations for an
indefinite period of time for no more than ten related or unrelated people
who are recovering from substance abuse and addiction, have been recently
paroled from prison or juvenile detention facilities, released from mental
health facilities or are otherwise readjusting to society. Said facilities
shall be provided with or without personal care services, with or without
meals, and with or without private cooking and restroom facilities. A written
agreement between on-site management and tenants including rules and policies
is required and all facilities shall be properly licensed by the state when
required. Common areas of such facilities shall be accessible to law
enforcement at all times.



      (8)   “INPATIENT REHABILITATION AND CARE FACILITY.” Any
fully licensed group or assisted care medical facility, besides hospitals,
which provides on an indefinite basis, including room and board, personal
care, and medical services to individuals requiring treatment and/or
rehabilitation for substance abuse, mental health, developmental and physical
disabilities, or physical illnesses and injury. Such facilities shall be
managed by staff on a 24-hour basis.



      (9)   “ORPHANAGE AND ADOPTION CARE FACILITY.” Any fully
licensed group or assisted care facility with full time support and
supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care and
guardian services to multiple unrelated children in a family environment for
an indefinite period of time as part of a state regulated adoption program,
but excluding foster care of no less than six un-adopted and unrelated
children in residential dwelling units.



   “DWELLING, RESIDENTIAL.” Any building, or portion thereof,
available for use by the general public through lease or purchase and
providing separate, complete and permanent living facilities for no more than
one family per fully functional dwelling unit. Such dwellings are commonly
associated with primary residences for indefinite periods of time, but on
generally more than a temporary basis.



      (1)   “DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.” Any building(s), or
portion thereof, consisting of three or more fully functional residential
dwelling units per lot, including apartments or other similar styles of
housing, excluding manufactured and mobile homes and mobile home parks.



      (2)   “DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.” Any building or portion
thereof, consisting of only one fully functional residential dwelling unit
per lot, including detached houses, excluding manufactured and mobile homes.



      (3)   “DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.” Any building(s), or portion
thereof consisting of two fully functional residential dwelling units on one
lot, including duplexes and similar styles of housing, excluding manufactured
and mobile homes and mobile home parks.



      (4)   “MANUFACTURED HOME.” Any residential dwelling unit
that: 1) is not constructed in accordance with the standards of the North
Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code for one and two-family dwellings;
2) is composed of one or more components, each of which was substantially
assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home
site in its own chassis; and 3) exceed 40 feet in length and eight feet in
width.



         (a)   “CLASS A MANUFACTURED HOME.” A manufactured
home constructed after July 1, 1976, that meets or exceeds the construction
standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
that were in effect at the time of construction and that satisfies the
following additional criteria.



            1.   The manufactured home has a length not
exceeding four times its width, with length measured along the longest axis
and width measured at the narrowest part of the other axis.



            2.   The manufactured home has a minimum of 1,200
square feet of enclosed heated living area.



            3.   The pitch of the roof of the manufactured
home has a minimum vertical rise of 2.2 feet for each 12 feet of horizontal
run and the roof is finished with type of shingle that is commonly used in
standard residential construction.



            4.   All roof structures shall provide an eave
projection of no less than six inches, which may include a gutter.



            5.   The exterior siding consists predominantly of
vinyl or cedar horizontal lap siding.



            6.   The manufactured home is set up in accordance
with the standards set by the North Carolina Department of Insurance.



            7.   The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and
transporting lights have been removed (the moving hitch may be retained if
siting occurs within a manufactured home park).



            8.   A continuous, permanent, brick, stone face,
or stone curtain wall or foundation, unpierced except for ventilation and
access, is installed under the manufactured home.



            9.   A chimney covering resembling a brick chimney
shall be installed over any existing metal chimney.



            10.   The manufactured home meets or exceeds the
standards for Wind Zone 1 and Thermal Zone 2 as set forth in the Federal
Manufactured Home Construction Standards, Part 3280 and as shown on HUD Data
Plat affixed to the manufactured home.



         (b)   “CLASS B MANUFACTURED HOME.” A manufactured
home constructed after July 1, 1976 that meets or exceeds the constructions
standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
that were in effect at the time of construction, but which does not meet the
definition of a Class A manufactured home. The following criteria must also
be satisfied.



            1.   The manufactured home is set up in accordance
with the standards set by the North Carolina Department of Insurance.



            2.   A continuous, permanent, brick, stone face,
or stone curtain wall or foundation, unpierced except for ventilation and
access, is installed under the manufactured home.



            3.   The moving hitch, wheels and axles, and
transporting lights have been removed (the moving hitch may be retained if
siting within a manufactured home park).



            4.   The manufactured home meets or exceeds the
standards for Wind Zone 1 and Thermal Zone 2.



         (c)   “CLASS C MANUFACTURED HOME.” A manufactured
home that does not meet the definition of either a Class A or a Class B
manufactured home.



         (d)   “CLASS D MANUFACTURED HOME.” A manufactured
home built prior to July 1, 1976.



      (5)   “MOBILE HOME.” A trailer home, house trailer, house
car, camp car, or similar vehicle suitable for year-round occupancy as a
dwelling unit. “MOBILE HOME” includes any portable or movable vehicle
which is mounted, or designed to be mounted, on wheels, skids, or rollers,
either self-propelled or propelled by other means, including any dismounted
vehicle which has been placed on a temporary or permanent foundation, and
including structural additions to the vehicle. “MOBILE HOME” does not
include recreational vehicles, camping-type trailers which are parked and
unoccupied, those vehicles primarily designed for the transportation of
goods, or those otherwise unable to meet state and city requirements as
residential dwelling units.



      (6)   “MOBILE HOME PARK.” Any lot, tract, or parcel of
land used, maintained, or intended to be used, leased, or rented for
occupancy by two or more trailers together with accessory structures provided
in connection therewith. “MOBILE HOME PARK” shall not include trailer
sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for the purpose of
inspection and sale.



   “DWELLING, TEMPORARY.” Any overnight lodging or sleeping
accommodations provided, either at the expense of the patron or other
parties, to any member of the general public for a total of up to 180 days
per calendar year, unless otherwise provided herein. Such dwellings are
commonly used by guests or patrons transitioning between primary residences
and those traveling or living away from their primary residences for longer
periods of time and will commonly feature additional access to amenities,
such as living rooms and kitchens, not typically provided in transient
dwellings.



      (1)   “BOARDING HOUSE.” Any temporary dwelling space
providing up to five private rooms for lodging and sleeping accommodations
for to up to ten related or unrelated individuals from the general public and
which provides sufficient off-street parking for all guests and an
operator(s) or manager(s) on-site throughout all hours of operation. Each
room shall include, at a minimum, one private bed or sleeping area and access
to shared bathroom and kitchen facilities as well as additional shared living
or common spaces for patrons. Such facilities may provide patrons with meals
and other on-site amenities and may restrict use to individuals by age, sex
or association with specific organizations when permissible by Federal and
state fair housing laws, provided that said restrictions or services rendered
are not specifically associated with any other uses defined elsewhere in this
chapter. Common areas of such facilities shall be accessible to law
enforcement at all times.



      (2)   “EMERGENCY TEMPORARY HOUSING.” Any temporary
dwelling space providing lodging and sleeping accommodations to related or
unrelated people based upon the need of said individuals for accommodation
that would provide sleeping quarters to be available on a day to day basis to
be without charge to said individuals and to provide these accommodations
based on financial need and the lack of availability of adequate
accommodations which the occupants could afford. No single individual could
use these accommodations for more than a total of 120 days in any calendar
year unless state law deems otherwise. The building(s) provided for this must
meet state and city building and fire codes for individuals that are sleeping
overnight on the premises and must be have all required state licenses for
operation in order to meet this definition.



      (3)   “HOTEL/MOTEL, EXTENDED STAY.” Any building or
commercial establishment that offers more than five rooms or units as
temporary dwellings to the general public and which has an operator(s) or
manager(s) on-site throughout all hours of operation. Each room or unit shall
include, at a minimum, a bed or sleeping area and a private bath, but may
provide private kitchen and living spaces. Additional amenities and services
typically associated with overnight stays may be provided to the customer
on-site as incidental to the primary use provided that all other services
provided to non-guests are otherwise permissible in this chapter.



      (4)   “ROOMING HOUSE.” Any temporary dwelling space
providing up to five private rooms for lodging and sleeping accommodations
for to up to ten related or unrelated individuals from the general public and
which provides sufficient off-street parking for all guests and has, at a
minimum, an off-site owner(s) or operator(s) available and on call during all
hours of operation. Commonly associated with “Airbnb” and other online
rental listings, each room shall include, at a minimum, one private bed or
sleeping area and access to shared bathroom and kitchen facilities. Meals and
other on-site amenities may be provided to patrons. Common areas of such
facilities shall be accessible to law enforcement at all times.



   “DWELLING, TRANSIENT.” Any overnight lodging or sleeping
accommodations, with or without additional amenities, provided, either at the
expense of the patron or other parties, to any member of the general public
for a total of no more than thirty (30) consecutive days or sixty (60) total
days per calendar year, unless otherwise provided herein. Such dwellings are
commonly used on a short term basis by tourists, travelers and other guests
or patrons whose primary residence is elsewhere.



      (1)   “ADULT MOTEL/HOTEL.” Any hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that offers more than five rooms or units as
transient dwellings to the general public and which has an operator(s) or
manager(s) on-site throughout all hours of operation; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that depict or
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” as one of its principal purposes as a sexually oriented business; or
offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten
hours; or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of less than ten hours. Each room or unit shall include, at a
minimum, a bed or sleeping area and a private bath. Additional amenities and
services typically associated with overnight stays may be provided to the
customer on-site as incidental to the primary use provided that all other
services provided to non-guests are otherwise permissible in this chapter.



      (2)   “BED AND BREAKFAST HOME.” Any private residence that
offers up to five rooms as transient dwellings to no more than ten guests on
the owner(s) or operator(s)’s primary residence, which may also include
breakfast and additional meals to guests at no cost and which provides
sufficient off-street parking for all guests. Each room shall include, at a
minimum, one private bed or sleeping area and access to shared bathroom
facilities for patrons. Such facilities may also host occasional special
events, such as weddings, small business meetings and luncheons during
regular business hours provided said events are incidental to the primary use.



      (3)   “HOMESTAY.” Any private residence that offers up to
two rooms as transient dwellings to no more than four guests on the owner(s)
or tenant(s)’s primary residence where off-street parking is provided for
all guests. Each room shall include, at a minimum, one private bed or
sleeping area and access to shared bathroom facilities for patrons. Commonly
associated with “Airbnb” and other online rental listings, said use shall
be permissible in any residential dwelling unit for no more than 30 total
days in any calendar year with the consent of the owner(s), and may require
approval of additional permits prior to commencing said use as the City
Manager deems necessary.



      (4)   “HOTEL/MOTEL.” Any building or commercial
establishment that offers more than five rooms or units as transient
dwellings to the general public and which has an operator(s) or manager(s)
on-site throughout all hours of operation. Each room or unit shall include,
at a minimum, a bed or sleeping area and a private bath. Additional amenities
and services typically associated with overnight stays may be provided to the
customer on-site as incidental to the primary use provided that all other
services provided to non-guests are otherwise permissible in this chapter.



      (5)   “TENT CAMP.” Any portable or makeshift structure(s)
and associated furniture, cooking and other items, erected or installed to
provide a transient dwelling space for strictly recreational purposes. Such
uses shall be permitted to be erected and used by the owner or tenant of any
single or two-family residential dwelling unit in the rear yard of the
associated property along with their guests, for no more than three days of
any month.



   “ESCORT.” A person who, for tips or any other form of
consideration, agrees or offers to act as a date for another person, or who
agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a
striptease for another person.



   “ESCORT AGENCY.” A person or business that furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its principal business
purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



   “FAMILY.” Any number of persons related by blood or through
guardianship marriage or other legal method, and up to three additional
unrelated individuals, living together as a single housekeeping unit and
participating in various communal activities such as cooking and eating.



   “FLEA MARKET-OUTDOOR.” A sales area where merchandise, display
tables, chairs, tents, and other material and equipment are allowed during
periods when the facility is open for business, but where all merchandise,
display tables, tents, and other material and equipment must be stored in an
enclosed principal building or removed from the premises when flea market is
not in operation. During festivals or special events of no more than five
consecutive days and for a maximum of four times per calendar year, tables
and tents can remain out after normal business hours.  Trailers, pods, and
other temporary storage units shall not be allowed in the day-to-day
operation unless they can be screened so as to not be visible from any
street, road, or residential property. Trash and debris shall be picked up
daily. Any dumpster must be screened from public view. A permanent
on-premises building with handicap accessible restrooms built to state
building codes is required. No display of merchandise is allowed within
building line setbacks for the applicable zoning district. A site plan is
required and shall include parking, location and number of tables, tents, and
other display areas. Also, ingress and egress must be shown on the site plan,
which shall be forwarded to the DOT District Engineer and City Director of
Public Works for comment prior to the Planning Board meeting. The approved
site plan will be a part of the conditional use permit. If inside sales are
to be conducted on the same parcel, then a statement shall be provided
denoting the total square footage of all indoor retail space that is planned.
An adequate amount of parking for indoor retail space shall be reflected on
the site plan. Hours of operation shall be addressed in the conditional use
permit. Proximity to residential districts, churches, and other uses shall be
a consideration.



   “GENERAL GAMING ESTABLISHMENT.” Any establishment deemed legal by
state law, excluding billiards halls, adult gaming establishments and any
others similarly defined in this chapter, whose primary use is to provide
entertainment services to the general public in the form of electronic or
conventional gaming units which provide either no reward to patrons or
rewards of limited value such as children's toys, games, and novelties when
all of said rewards can be legally obtained and used by all ages and are not
redeemable for cash or any other kind of compensation or services on or off
premises, including online redemptions. Examples include, traditional video
game arcades and children's and family game centers, whether stand-alone or
in conjunction with a restaurant or other permissible uses. This shall be
considered a primary use when occupying more than 50% of the gross floor area
of an establishment or being used by more than 50% of the patrons at any time
or representing more than 50% of the total sales of the establishment.



   “GROSS FLOOR AREA.” The total area of all buildings in the project
including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, exclusive of stairways and
elevator shafts. It excludes separate service facilities outside the store
such as boiler rooms and maintenance shops.



   “GROUP BUSINESS DEVELOPMENTS.” Two or more business units or
buildings, each located on separate contiguous lots which are part of a
parcel of land designed and developed for common uses, including parking and
landscaping, for which there is an entity designated to be legally
responsible for the maintenance and control of the common land areas.



   “HANDICAPPED PERSON.” A person with a temporary or permanent
physical, emotional, or mental disability including but not limited to mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments,
emotional disturbances and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally
ill persons who are dangerous to others and defined in G.S. 122C-3(11)b.



   “LOT.” A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a
building or group of buildings. “LOT” includes “PLOT” or “PARCEL.”



   “LOT DEPTH.” Mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot
lines.



   “LOT OF RECORD.” A lot which is a part of a subdivision, a plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county,
or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded.



   “LOT WIDTH.” The distance between side lot lines measured at the
building line.



   “MAP,” “ZONING MAP,” or “ALBEMARLE ZONING MAP.” The
official zoning map of the city.



   “MICROBREWERY.” A brewery that produces less than 15,000 U.S. beer
barrels (460,000 U.S. gallons) per year.



   “NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE.” A structure or land lawfully
occupied by an existing use which does not conform with the permitted uses
for the zoning district in which it is situated, either at the effective date
of this chapter, or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter.



   “NUDE” or “A STATE OF NUDITY.”



      (1)   The appearance of a human anus, male genitals, or female
genitals; or



      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human
anus, male genitals, or female genitals.



   “NUDE MODEL STUDIO.” Any place where a person who appears nude or
semi-nude or who displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. “NUDE
MODEL STUDIO” shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State
of North Carolina or a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or in a structure:



      (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person
is available for viewing; and



      (2)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.



   “OCCUPIED.” See “USED.”



   “OPEN STORAGE.” An unroofed area for the storage of bulk materials
or discarded items, whether fenced or not.



   “PERSON.” Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
corporation, trust, and company, as well as an individual.



   “PROFIT CLUB.” Includes private clubs, nightclubs, taverns, bars,
lounges, and similar establishment serving alcoholic beverages for
consumption on premises and providing entertainment for patrons. Profit clubs
shall be determined according to current definitions for private clubs by the
North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission. All profit clubs shall
be in compliance with all local ordinances state and Federal regulations
including, but not limited to, North Carolina's Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission's requirements.



   “RVs or CAMPERS.” A mobile recreational vehicle for which the
Stanly County Inspection Department has issued a permit.



   “SEMI-NUDE.” A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than
the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   “SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.” A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex, or activities between male and female persons
and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state
of nudity or semi-nude.



   “SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.” An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel/hotel, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter
center, or any combination of the foregoing.



   “SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.” Human genitals in a state of sexual
arousal.



   “SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.” Means and includes any of the
following:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or



      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in (1) through (3) above.



   “STREET.” A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for
vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting
properties.



   “STRUCTURE.”  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached
to something having more or less permanent location on the ground.



   “TEA HOUSE.” May consist of intimate indoor and outdoor spaces, a
restaurant, bakery or garden where beverages and light meals are served in a
quiet, subdued atmosphere.  A "TEA HOUSE" may also include meeting rooms for
small, private gatherings.



   “TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES.” A structure or
structures (including any accessory structures required to house transmitting
or maintenance equipment) designed to support antennas used for transmitting
or receiving communications transmissions.



   “TRAILER” or “CAMPER.”  A vehicle with or without its own
motive power, equipped or used for living purposes and mounted on wheels or
designed to be so mounted and transported.



   “TRAILER PARK.”  See “MOBILE HOME PARK.”



   “USED” or “OCCUPIED.” As applied to any land or building,
includes the words “INTENDED,” “ARRANGED,” or “DESIGNED TO BE USED
OR OCCUPIED.”



   “WINERY AND TASTING ROOM.” An establishment for making and sampling
wine whereat the public is permitted or invited on site to observe the
operation and to taste the wine. The establishment shall be located on a site
as shown on a site plan submitted to and approved by the city Technical
Review Committee indicating:



      (1)   Parking areas;



      (2)   Loading zones;



      (3)   Delivery route of trucks;



      (4)   Signage;



      (5)   Public areas;



      (6)   Shall state the number of employees and days and hours
of operation; and



      (7)   Where required by state or Federal law, must obtain and
keep in force all required licenses and permits.



   “YARD.” A space on the same lot with a principal building open,
unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky
except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted.



      (1)   “YARD, FRONT.” An open unoccupied space on the same
lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and
situated between the street right-of-way line and the front line of the
building, projected to the side lines of the lot.



      (2)   “YARD, REAR.” An open, unoccupied space on the same
lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and
situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building
projected to the side lines of the lot.



      (3)   “YARD, SIDE.” An open, unoccupied space on the same
lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot
line and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of
the rear yard.



(‘58 Code, § 19-41)   (Ord. 79-4, passed 6-25-79; Am. Ord. 80-3, passed
3-3-80; Am. Ord. 82-16, passed - -  ; Am. Ord. 88-7, passed 2-15- 88; Am.
Ord. 92-31, passed 12-7- 92; Am. Ord. 95-2, passed 2-20- 95; Am. Ord. 96-28,
passed 11-18-96; Am. Ord. 97-08, passed 3-17-97; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed
1-5-98; Am. Ord. 98-27, passed 8-3-98; Am. Ord. 00-47, passed 12-18-00; Am.
Ord. 06-06, passed 2-6-06; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 07-15,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 08-03, passed 2-4-08; Am. Ord. 08-21, passed
6-16-08; Am. Ord. 08-27, passed 7-21-08; Am. Ord. 08-31, passed 9-15-08; Am.
Ord. 11-35, passed 12-19-11; Am. Ord. 12-33, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord 14-28,
passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord 14-34, passed 11-3-14; Am. Ord. 14-38, passed
12-1-14; Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 4-4-16; Am. Ord. 16-20, passed 6-6-16; Am.
Ord. 17-15, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 17-25, passed 8-7-17; Am. Ord. 18-31,
passed 9-4-18)



§ 92.009  USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS.



   No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building
or structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or structurally altered
except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter, or amendments
thereto, for the district in which it is located. However, in any district
defined in this chapter it shall be lawful to place temporarily a trailer on
the site of construction for use as an office of the builder, during the
construction period only, of any building or structure permitted in the
district upon first securing from the Building Inspector a permit to place
the trailer temporarily on the site.



('58 Code, § 19-50)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.010  HEIGHT AND DENSITY; EXCEPTION.



   No building shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to exceed the 
height limit, or to exceed the density regulations of this chapter for the
district in which it is located. However, the height limitations of this
chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not
intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers,
transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, radio
towers, television towers, masts, aerials, and similar structures, except as
otherwise provided in the vicinity of airports.



('58 Code, '§ 19-51 and 19-102) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.011  LOT SIZE.



   No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of
record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side,
or rear yards, lot area per family, or other requirements of this chapter are
not maintained.  This prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the
condemnation of narrow strips of land for public utilities or street right-
of-way purposes.



('58 Code, § 19-52)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.012  LOT OF RECORD.



   Where the owner of a lot of official record in any district at the time
of the adoption of this chapter or his successor in title thereto does not
have sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot
size requirements of this chapter, the lot may be used as a building site,
provided that the requirements of the district are complied with or a
variance is obtained from the Zoning Board of Adjustment.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing, whenever two or more adjoining vacant lots of record are in
single ownership at any time after the adoption of this chapter and the lots
individually have less area or width than the minimum requirements of the
district in which the lots are located, the lots shall be considered as a
single lot or several lots which meet the minimum requirements of this
chapter for the district in which the lots are located.



('58 Code, § 19-100)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.013  FRONT YARD SETBACKS FOR DWELLINGS.



   The front yard setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall
not apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located
wholly or partially within 100 feet on either side of the proposed dwelling
and on the same side of the same block and use district and fronting on the
same street as the lot, is less than the minimum required front yard depth. 
In this case, the setback on the lots may be less than the required setback,
but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned
lots, or a distance of ten feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever
is greater.



('58 Code, § 19-101)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.014  VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   On a corner lot in any district other than the Central Business
District, no planting, structure, sign, fence, wall, or obstruction to vision
more than three feet in height measured from the center line of the street
shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the
intersecting street center lines, and a straight line connecting points on
the street center lines, each of which is 75 feet, or 150 feet for major
streets, distant from the point of intersection.



('58 Code, § 19-103)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.015  YARD USE LIMITATIONS.



   No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for
another building.



('58 Code, § 19-53)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.016  ONLY ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING ON ANY LOT.



   Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may
hereafter be erected on any residential lot, except as authorized by §
92.020, and no building shall be erected on any residential lot which does
not abut at least 35 feet on a publicly dedicated or maintained street.



('58 Code, § 19-54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.017  FENCE, WALL AND HEDGE LIMITATIONS.



   Fences or walls consisting of either masonry, rock, wire, vinyl,
wrought iron or wooden material, and hedges may be installed on the
boundaries of any residential lot, except that the height of the fencing or
screening shall be limited to a maximum height of four feet between the
street right-of-way line and the normal building setback line for the section
of the yard adjacent to a street on the front, side or rear of the lot. 
This includes corner lots and lots with a road on the back property line. 
If the fence is above 30 inches, the fence must be set back from the corner
in accordance with Section 40.51-52.  Fencing and hedges on all other
boundaries of residential property and fences behind the building setback
line shall be limited to a maximum of eight feet, provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall prohibit chain-link fences up to ten feet in
height for tennis courts.



('58 Code, § 19-55)  (Am. Ord. 90-39, 12-17-90; Am. Ord. 11-23, passed
7-18-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.018  CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or
size of yards, courts, or other open spaces, or require a lower height of
buildings or lesser number of stories, or require a greater percentage of the
lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other more restrictive standards than
are required in or under any other statutes or agreements, the regulations
and requirements of this chapter shall govern.  Whenever the provisions of
any other statute or agreement require more restrictive standards than are
required by this chapter, the provisions of the statute or agreement shall
govern.



('58 Code, § 19-140)



§ 92.019  CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   Customary home occupations may be established in a dwelling or
accessory building in any residential district. The following requirements
shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements of this chapter
for the residential district in which the uses are located.



   (A)   The home occupation shall be clearly identical and subordinate
to the residential use of the dwelling or accessory building and shall not
change the residential character of the premises.



   (B)   Residents of the premises only may be engaged in the home
occupation, except that not more than one assistant may be employed by the
following professional persons: lawyers, physicians, dentists, and
chiropractors.



   (C)   No display of products shall be visible from the street, and
only products made on the premises or used as incidental to the occupation
may be sold on the premises.



   (D)   No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the
residential use of the building shall be permitted.



   (E)   No mechanical, electrical, electronic, or chemical equipment
may be used which would cause any noise, odor, vibration, smoke, radio, or
television interference or any other nuisance detrimental to the residential
character of the neighborhood.



   (F)   Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be
permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupations.



   (G)   Off-street parking shall be provided for all customers or the
one assistant that may be employed by the following professionals:  lawyers,
physicians, dentists, and chiropractors.



('58 Code, § 19-65) (Ord. 80-3, passed 3-3-80)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.020  GROUP PROJECTS.



   In the case of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of
ground of at least two acres not subdivided into the customary streets and
lots and which will not be so subdivided, the application of the terms of
this chapter may be varied by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in a manner that
will be in harmony with the neighborhood, provided the following conditions
exist.



   (A)   The uses are limited to those permitted within the zoning
district in which the project is located.  In no case shall the Board
authorize a use not permitted in the district in which the project is to be
located.



   (B)   The overall intensity of land use is no higher, and the
standard of open space is no lower than that permitted in the district in
which the project is located.



   (C)   The distance of every building from the nearest property line
shall meet the front yard setback and side yard requirements of the district
in which the project is located.



   (D)   The building heights do no exceed the height limits permitted
in the district in which the project is located.



   (E)   If the property lies within or abuts on a residential
district, and is to be used for a nonresidential purpose, there shall be a
densely planted buffer strip at least ten feet in height along the rear or
side lot lines abutting the residential properties.  No buffer shall,
however, extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established
building line of the adjoining residential lot.



('58 Code, § 19-104)



§ 92.021  NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES.



   Any building, structure, or use of land existing at the time of the
enactment of this ordinance or any amendment thereto may be continued subject
to the following provisions of § 92.022, provided, however, they shall not
be:



   (A)   Changed to another nonconforming use.



   (B)   Enlarged or extended except in conformity with this ordinance.



   (C)   Reestablished after discontinuance of 180 days.



   (D)   Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding 60% of
its fair market value immediately prior to damage.



   (E)   Replacements of any Class C or Class D manufactured home unit
in a manufactured home park existing at the time of Ord. 98-27 or any
amendment thereto that does not meet the Wind Zone 1 and the Thermal Zone 2
standards which is hereafter replaced shall be with a unit meeting the Class
A or Class B definition (with the exception of foundation walls).



   (F)   Manufactured home parks in existence at the time of Ord. 98-27
shall be considered nonconforming and shall not be allowed to expand.



(Am. Ord. 91-19, passed 8-19-91; Am. Ord. 98-27, passed 8-3-98)



§ 92.022 EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS.



   (A)   Except as specifically provided in this section, no person may
engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of a
nonconformity situation.



   (B)   A nonconforming use may be extended throughout any portion of
a  completed building that, when the use was made nonconforming by this
chapter, was manifestly designed or arranged to accommodate such use. 
However, a nonconforming use may be extended to additional buildings or to
land outside the original building only in accordance with division (E) of
this section.



   (C)   A nonconforming use of open land may not be extended to cover
more land than was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming only in
accordance with division (E) of this section.



   (D)   The volume, intensity, or frequency of use of property where a
nonconforming situation exists may be increased and the equipment or
processes used at a location where a nonconforming situation exists may be
changed if these or similar changes amount only to changes in the degree of
activity rather than changes in kind and no violations of other divisions of
this section occur.



   (E)   Subject to division (F) of this section, the following
conditional use is permitted when authorized by the City Council after the
Council holds a public hearing.  Each request must be reviewed by the
Planning Board and the Board's recommendations and comments will be presented
in writing at the public hearing and included in the minutes of the meeting.



      (1)   A structure within which a nonconforming use is
conducted to be enlarged; or



      (2)   Additional structures to be built on the lot where the
non-conforming use is located, with in which structures the nonconforming use
can be enlarged; or



      (3)   A nonconforming use of land to be extended beyond
geographical bounds in which it has been conducted.



   (F)   The City Council may issue the permit described in division
(E) only if it finds that:



      (1)   The action authorized would not adversely affect the
health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
nonconforming use; and



      (2)   The action authorized would not substantially impair the
value of nearby properties; and



      (3)   No useful purpose would be served by the strict
application of the provisions or requirements of this chapter to which the
use does not conform.



(Ord. 91-19, 8-19-91)



§ 92.023  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND CAMPERS.



   (A)   During emergencies, whenever the principal occupied structure
located on a lot in a residential district has been rendered uninhabitable by
fire, flood, or other natural disaster thereby displacing the occupants,
recreational vehicles or campers for which the Stanly County Inspection
Department has issued a permit may be located, whenever possible, in the rear
yard of the lot on which the residence is under repair or construction;
provided however, the Stanly County Inspection Department permit shall expire
upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the residence or within one
year from the date of issuance of the permit, whichever event shall first
occur.



   (B)   Keeping unoccupied recreational vehicles and/or campers on a
residential lot.



      (1)   These vehicles cannot be used as temporary dwelling
units except during emergencies as set forth in division (A) above.



      (2)   For a single-family residential property, a maximum of
two unoccupied recreational vehicles and/or campers may be stored in the
rear, side yard or driveway. Recreational vehicles and campers shall be
placed at least ten feet from property lines.



      (3)   For duplexes, a maximum of one unoccupied recreational
vehicle and/or camper for each dwelling unit may be stored in the rear, side
yard or driveway. Recreational vehicles and campers shall be placed at least
ten feet from property lines.



      (4)   For developments with three or more dwelling units per
parcel, a maximum of one unoccupied recreational vehicle and/or camper per
dwelling unit may be allowed if the property has a designated parking area
with gravel or pavement that is at least ten feet from property lines.



(Ord. 08-31, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 16-10, passed 4-4-16)



SIGNS



§ 92.025  INTENT.



   (A)   In pursuance of authority granted by the General Assembly of
North Carolina in G.S. § 160A-381-192, the following regulations are hereby
adopted as a supplement to the existing regulating ordinance.  The purpose
of this subchapter is to adapt policies and regulations concerning the
placement of outdoor signs in the zoning jurisdiction of the city.



   (B)   The city recognizes that signs are a legitimate use of private
property, and in order to maximize their advertisement potential for local
businesses, promote driving safety, encourage orderly and effective display
of advertising, and maintain uncluttered roads and visually attractive
streetscapes, the placement of such signs should be regulated.



   (C)   The intent of such regulation is to increase local property
values, protect the natural environment, and enhance the image of the
community.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 02-06, passed 2-16-02)



§ 92.026  DEFINITIONS.



   "AWNING."  A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed
to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted
from a building to a flat position against the building, but not a canopy.



   "BANNER."  A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame,
possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to
plastic or fabric of any kind excluding flags and emblems of political,
professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations.



   "CANOPY. SERVICE STATION."  A structure made of metal, aluminum, or
other material intended to be free standing or affixed to a building that
serves as an overhang intended to shield persons from the elements while
using the service station.



   "GRADE."  The height of the top of the curb or, if no curb exists, the
height of the edge of pavement in the lane of travel adjacent to the sign.



   "HISTORICAL SIGN."  An existing or the replacement of a once existing
sign installed or existing more than 30 years ago, which does not or would
not meet the standards set forth in this subchapter, can be maintained and/or
replaced upon a finding by the Albemarle Community Appearance Commission that
the historic significance of the sign outweighs the intent of this
subchapter.  The City Council shall have final approval of all historic
signs. Examples are the Morgan Motor's Pontiac sign and Whispering Pines BBQ.



   "OUTPARCEL."  A parcel of land associated with and located within a
shopping center or multi-tenant nonresidential development, which is
designated on an approved site plan as a location for a structure with an
intended use, such as but not limited to banks, savings and loans, dry
cleaners, service stations, vehicle repair garages, offices, restaurants,
retail establishments, or combination of uses thereof.



   "PARAPET."  That portion of a building wall or false front that
extends above the roofline.



   "PREMISES."  A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct
number and designation shown on a recorded plat, record of survey, parcel
map, subdivision map, or a parcel legally created or established pursuant to
applicable zoning.  Outparcels of shopping centers shall be considered on
the premises of the shopping center for the purpose of these regulations.



   "ROOF LINE."  The highest point of a flat roof and mansard roof and
the highest point of a pitched roof, excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or
other minor projections.



   "SETBACKS, SIGN."  The shortest horizontal distance from the line or
right-of-way to the nearest point (leading edge) of the sign or its
supporting member, whichever is nearest to the property line or right-of-way.



   "SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE."  The restrictions set forth shall apply to
all of the following triangles of land:



      (1)   That triangle bounded by the curb edges (or edges of
pavement where there is no curb) 50 feet from the midpoint of the radius of
the curb edge (or edge of pavement where there is no curb) in each direction
and the diagonal line connecting the further ends of such 50-foot lengths: and



      (2)   That triangle bounded by the right-of-way lines measured
35 feet from the point of their intersection in each connecting the further
ends of such 35-foot lengths.



      (3)   The North Carolina Department of Transportation standard
10 feet  70 feet sight distance triangle.



   "SIGN."  Any object, display, or structure or part thereof situated
outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images.  The
term does not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization of
nations, state, political subdivision thereof, or any fraternal, religious,
or civic organization; works of art which in no way identify a product or
business; scoreboards located on athletic fields; or religious symbols.



   "SIGN, ADVERTISING."  A sign, other than a directional sign, which
directs attention to or communicates information about a business, commodity,
service, or event that exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or
provided at a location other than the premises where the sign is located. 
Advertising signs are not allowed.



   "SIGN, ARM."  A sign whose face is suspended from a support arm at a
right angle from a ground-mounted pier, pillar, column, or pole.  The face
of such sign shall not be more than three feet from the ground.



   "SIGN, CAMPAIGN OR ELECTION."  A sign that advertises a candidate or
issue to be voted upon on a definite election day.



   "SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING."  A sign attached to or painted or printed
onto a canopy or awning.  For the purposes of this subchapter, the permitted
size of a canopy or awning sign will be calculated on the basis of the size
of the building wall to which the canopy is attached.  It will, for
measuring purposes, be considered a wall sign.



   "SIGN, CONSTRUCTION."  A sign placed at a construction site
identifying or announcing the project or the name of the architect, engineer,
contractor, financier, or others involved in the development of the project.



   "SIGN, DIRECTIONAL."  A sign fronting on a road that contains only the
name of the principal use, directional arrow, and mileage to the principal
use.  Such principal use shall not be visible to the motorist at the
location at which the sign is placed.



   "SIGN, DIRECTORY."  A sign on which the name and location of occupants
or the use of a building or property are identified.



   SIGN, ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE FACE SIGN (ECF).  A sign, display or
device, or portion thereof, which electronically changes the fixed display
screen composed of a series of lights, including light emitting diodes
(LED’s) fiber optic, or other similar new technology where the message
change sequence is accomplished immediately.  ECF signs include computer
programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic if digital displays that
display electronic, static images, static graphics, or static pictures, with
or without textural information.  EFC signs do not include animated or
scrolling images, graphics, or video active images (similar to television
images).  ECF signs (1) continuously show one message a minimum of five
seconds in time before switching to other message, (2) do not dim, flash,
fade or scroll messages, (3) has no moving, rotating, fluttering, blinking or
flashing elements, (4) has no animation, video, audio, pyrotechnic
components, or blue casting technology.  The maximum percentage of total
sign area for ECF signs shall not exceed 30% under § 92.033 or the maximum
allowance for ground mounted signs under § 92.031 for non-residential uses.



   "SIGN, FLASHING."  A sign that uses an intermittent or flashing light
source or windblown and/or mechanically moved reflective material to attract
attention is prohibited, except, for messages, which shall continuously show
one message a minimum of five seconds in time before switching to another
message.



   "SIGN, FREE-STANDING."  Any sign that is not affixed to a building and
is securely and permanently mounted in the ground.  Such sign may include a
ground, pole, or monument sign.



   "SIGN, GOVERNMENT."  Any temporary or permanent sign erected and
maintained for any government purposes other than signs placed on the
premises of a publicly owned building, structure, or other land use, designed
to identify to the public and land use.  Examples of government signs
include speed limit signs, city limit signs, street name signs, and traffic
signs.  Conversely a sign placed on a public building such as library,
school, or public safety building which identifies the building shall not be
considered a government sign.



   "SIGN, GROUND MOUNTED."  Any sign which extends from the ground or
which has supports which places the bottom thereof less than two feet from
the ground directly beneath the sign.



   "SIGN, IDENTIFICATION."  A sign which displays only the name, address,
and/or crest, or insignia, trademark, occupation, or profession of an
occupant, or the name of any building on the premises.



   "SIGN, INCIDENTAL."  A sign used in conjunction with equipment or
other functional elements for a use or operation.  These shall include but
not be limited to drive-through window menu boards, and signs on automatic
teller machines, gas pumps, vending machines, or newspaper delivery boxes.



   "SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL."  An on- premises sign designed to guide
[vehicles] and/or pedestrian traffic by using such words as "Entrance,"
"Exit," "Parking," "One Way," or similar directional instruction, but not
including any advertising message.  The name or logo of the business or use
to which the sign is giving direction may also be included on the sign.



   "SIGN, LIGHTED."  A sign illuminated only by light cast upon the sign
from an external light source.



   "SIGN, LOGO."  A sign used by the North Carolina Department of
Transportation on limited access highways that directs motorists to nearby
businesses and services.



   "SIGN, LUMINOUS."  A sign illuminated through the use of
phosphorescent or luminescent paint or materials.



   "SIGN, MONUMENT."  A nonmetallic sign in which the bottom of the sign
is flush with the ground and the vertical dimension is greater than the
horizontal dimension.



   "SIGN, OFF-PREMISES."  A sign that draws attention to or communicates
information about a business, service, or commodity, that exists or is
conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided at a location other than
the premises where the sign is located.  Off-premises signs are not allowed.



   "SIGN, ON-PREMISES."  A sign that draws attention to or communicates
information about a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction,
or other enterprise or activity that exists or is conducted, sold, offered,
maintained or provided on the premises where the sign is located.



   "SIGN, PEDESTAL."  A sign supported by an architectural support or
base and not permanently attached to the ground.



   "SIGN, POLE."  A detached sign erected and maintained on a
freestanding frame, mast, or pole and not attached to any building but not
including ground-mounted or monument signs.  The bottom of such signs shall
be greater than three feet from the ground directly beneath the sign.



   "SIGN, PORTABLE."  A sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, including those signs which may be transported to
the site on wheels or a truck; signs constructed as or converted to an
A-frame sign; streams of flags, pennants, streamers, umbrellas, box type
signs, or banners used for advertising purposes.  Such sign, whether or not
bolted to the ground, shall nonetheless be deemed to be a portable sign.
Portable signs are not allowed except where specifically provided for
elsewhere in this chapter.



   "SIGN, PROJECTING."  Any sign other than a wall, awning, canopy, or
marquee sign, which is affixed to a building and is supported only by the
wall on which the sign is mounted.



   "SIGN, PUBLIC INTEREST."  A sign on private property that displays
information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the general
public, such as "Warning" and "No Trespassing" signs.



   "SIGN, REAL ESTATE."  Signs that are used to offer for sale, lease, or
rent the premises upon which such sign is placed.



   "SIGN, ROOF."  A sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon
or over the roof or parapet of a building.



   "SIGN, SPECIAL PROMOTION."  A temporary sign erected to inform the
public about events such as grand openings, going out-of-business, annual
membership drives, pledge drives, new program announcements and other similar
situations as determined by the Planning Director or his designee.



   "SIGN, VEHICULAR."  Signs on parked vehicles visible from the public
right- of-way where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a
product or to direct people to a business or activity located on the same or
nearby property and road.  The vehicle is not used in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business.  For the purposes of this subchapter, vehicular
signs shall not include business logos, identification, or advertising on
vehicles primarily used for other transportation purposes.



   "SIGN, WALL."  Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a
building or dependent upon a building for its support, with its exposed face
parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building or structure
on which it is placed.  Signs directly painted on walls shall be considered
wall signs.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 04-52, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord.
08-14, passed 4-21-08; Am. Ord. 13-01, passed 1-22-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.027  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Districts established.  For the purposes of this chapter, the
city and its extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction is hereby divided into 14
districts and 14 corresponding conditional use districts designated as
follows:



R-10      Single-Family Residential District-Low Density



R-8      Two-Family Residential District-Medium Density



R-8A      Multi-Family Residential District -High Density



R-4      High Density Residential District



R-O      Residential Office District



NBD      Neighborhood Business District



NSD      Neighborhood Shopping District



GHBD      General Highway Business District



SCD      Shopping Center District



MUSCD   Mixed Shopping Center District



HMD      Hospital-Medical Center District



CBD      Central Business District



LID      Light Industrial District



HID       Heavy Industrial District



   (B)   Sign illumination.



      (1)   All lighted signs shall have their lighting directed in
such a manner as to illuminate only the face of the sign.  All lighted signs
shall meet North Carolina Electrical Codes.



      (2)   No commercial sign (other than a ground-mounted sign)
within 100 linear feet of a preexisting residential structure may be
illuminated between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.  A residence
shall be deemed "pre-existing" for purposes of this section if it has a valid
building permit in effect for construction of the structure or if
construction of the structure was complete on or prior to the effective date
of this provision.



   (C)   Unsafe signs.  Its owner shall immediately remove any sign
determined by the Director of Planning and Community Development or his or
her designee to be insecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise endangering
the public safety, unless it is repaired and made to otherwise comply with
the requirements of this subchapter.



   (D)   Sign area.



      (1)   (a)   Sign surface area:  The area of a geometric
shape enclosing any message, logo, symbol, name, photograph, or display face.



            (b)   Sign frame area:  The dimensions of a
geometric shape formed by all supports, frames, braces, bordering, and
embellishments, which extend beyond the sign surface area and which enclose
the sign surface area.



      (2)   All area provisions in this subchapter are calculated
from the following sign surface area dimensions as defined in division (D)(1)
of this section.



      (3)   All height provisions in this subchapter are calculated
from the sign frame area dimensions as defined in division (D)(1) of this
section.



      (4)   In the case of signs mounted back-to-back, only one side
of the sign is to be used for computation of the area.  Back-to-back signs
shall be defined as double-faced signs. Otherwise, the surface area of each
sign is to be separately computed.  In the case of cylindrical signs, signs
in the shape of cubes, or other signs which are substantially three-
dimensional with respect to their display surfaces, the entire display
surface or surfaces is included in computations of area.  If a sign is
attached to an entrance wall or fence, only that portion of that wall or
fence onto which the sign face or letters are placed shall be calculated in
the sign area onto which the sign face or letter.



   (E)   Sign height.  The height of a sign shall be measured from the
highest point of a sign to the point of ground surface beneath it.



   (F)   Construction standards.  All signs shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with the applicable standards of the North Carolina
State Building Code.



   (G)   Maintenance of signs.  All signs shall be maintained in good
structural and aesthetic condition.  Deficiencies such as chipped paint,
broken plastic, missing letters and exposed light bulbs shall be evidence of
a lack of maintenance.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 10-02, passed 11-15-10) Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 92.028  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   (A)   Any sign, which the Director of Planning and Community
Development or his or her designee determines, obstructs the view of
bicyclists or motorists using any street or approach to any street
intersection, or which interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures any
traffic sign, device, or signal shall be prohibited.



   (B)   Specifically prohibited are:



      (1)   Illuminated highly reflective signs or spotlights, which
hamper the vision of motorists or bicyclists.



      (2)   Signs which contain lights, rotating disks, words, and
other devices not erected by a public authority which may be erroneously
construed as government signs or emergency warning signs.  An example of
this is a sign which contains a picture of a traffic sign plus the word
"Stop," "Yield," etc.



      (3)   Any sign located outdoors which interferes with free
passage from or obstructs any fire escape, downspout, window, door, stairway,
ladder, or opening intended as a means of ingress or egress or providing
light or air.



      (4)   Any sign (other than a government sign), banner, or
display placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, or
other surface located on, over, or across any public street or right-of-way,
or any banner, placed on stakes on a property, unless otherwise permitted.



      (5)   Any sign located in such a way as to intentionally deny
an adjoining properly owner visual access to an existing sign.



      (6)   Flashing signs, signs with flashing or reflective disks,
signs with flashing lights or lights of changing degree of intensity or
color, or signs with electrically scrolled messages (except government signs,
signs which give time and temperature and other information, and open signs
in windows). If a time and temperature sign alternates between a time message
and temperature message, it shall continuously show one message a minimum of
five seconds in time before switching to the other message. Open signs in
commercial windows may only flash as a whole word; they may not have
transitions or other lighting features that change.



      (7)   Portable signs (unless otherwise expressly permitted in
subsequent sections).



      (8)   Vehicular signs



      (9)   Rotating signs.



      (10)   Roof signs that extend above the highest point of a
pitched roof, mansard roof, or parapet.



      (11)   Off premises advertising signs, i.e. billboards.



      (12)   Signs placed on a piece of property without permission
of its owners or agent.



      (13)   Other signs not expressly permitted in this subchapter.



      (14)   Any sign whose sign face was initially constructed and
designed to be placed and/or transported on wheels, regardless if the sign
face is removed from its base and placed on or in the ground so as to
otherwise classify the sign as a Afreestanding@ sign as herein defined
excepting however, the changeable face signs permitted under § 92.029(B)(6).



      (15)   Flag poles whose height exceeds 50 feet.



      (16)   Signs closer than ten feet to any conductor or the
requirements of the National Electric Safety Code (NESC), whichever is more
restrictive.



      (17)   Electronic changeable face (ECF) signs as a wall sign;
or located directly across the street from, or within, a historic district or
in CBD Central Business District.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 02-06, passed 2-16-02; Am. Ord. 02-32,
passed 7-15-02; Am. Ord. 04-52, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 08-14, passed
4-21-08; Am. Ord. 09-42, passed 12-21-09; Am. Ord. 15-12, passed 5-4-15) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.029  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, it
shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, or
replace any sign or cause the same to be done, without first having obtained
a sign permit for such sign from the Director of Planning and Community
Development or his or her designee as required by this subchapter.  A fee,
in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City Council, shall be
charged for each sign permit issued.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the division (A)(1) of this section,
changing or replacing the copy on an existing lawful sign shall not require a
permit, provided that the copy change does not change the nature of the sign
such as to render the sign in violation of this subchapter.



      (3)   Direction signs shall be permitted for government
offices and installations, non-profit secular organizations such as museums,
Chamber of Commerce, etc. and for established religious facilities (churches)
on or near city R/W at least ten feet off the pavement.  In the case of NC
DOT R/W that agency will control location on state R/W.



         (a)   The signs must be directional only (no
advertisement) and may contain the name of the facility (church name) and a
direction arrow and the distance (not more than 0.5 miles).



         (b)   Only two directional signs are allowed for each
non-profit organization or church.



         (c)   The signs may not be more than eight square feet
in area, located not more than six feet above the natural ground level to the
bottom of the sign and not block sight of traveling public in any manner.



         (d)   Such signs and their design and location must be
approved by the Planning Director before they are erected.  Any sign not
approved prior to erection shall be removed immediately by the Planning
Director or his representative.



         (e)   The color of the sign shall be white background
with black letters or brown background with white letters or blue background
with white letters.



   (B)   Specific types of signs.



      (1)   Wall sign.



         (a)   The maximum permitted aggregate area of wall signs
per premises shall be 20% of the wall or walls facing a public street, unless
otherwise specified.



         (b)   No wall sign shall project more than 18 inches
from the building wall.  Further, no wall sign or its supporting structure
shall cover any window or part of a window, nor shall it extend beyond the
highest point of a roofline, parapet, or mansard roof.



         (c)   Canopy and awning signs may be substituted for
part or all of the allowable wall signage per premises.  Signs may be
painted or printed onto a canopy or awning.  In no instance shall a canopy
or awning sign extend into a street right-of-way.  This subdivision shall
not apply to the CBD/Central Business District.  For canopy and awning sign
regulations for the CBD/Central Business District, see § 92.032(B).



         (d)   A projecting sign may be substituted for part or
all of the allowable wall signage per premises.  A projecting sign shall not
project more than six feet from a building. In no instance shall a projecting
sign extend into a street right-of-way.



         (e)   Some of the wall signage allowed on sides of a
building facing a public street may be moved to sides or rear of the building.



      (2)   Ground mounted signs.



         (a)    Ground-mounted signs shall be located a minimum
of ten feet behind the street right-of-way, except for the CBD/Central
Business District wherein no setback will be required and the R-O/Residential
Office District wherein setbacks shall be ten feet from the curb line or edge
of pavement if there is no curb. For each of these exceptions, the sign must
also be outside of the public right-of-way.



         (b)   No ground mounted sign greater than five square
feet in area shall be located closer than ten feet to any adjacent lot
line.  A 15-foot side-yard setback shall be required if the side lot line
abuts a residential district.  Greater setbacks shall be provided if
otherwise required.



         (c)   An arm sign may be substituted for a
ground-mounted sign but shall meet all height and area requirements as
provided.



      (3)   Pole signs.  All pole signs shall be located 25 feet
from the curb or ditch line and not be on city or Department of
Transportation right-of- way.



      (4)   Service station canopies.  Service stations shall be
permitted the use of a canopy, provided that the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The features, materials, colors, and designs used
in a canopy shall be similar to the principle structure.



         (b)   The maximum letter height shall not exceed 18
inches.



         (c)   The canopy shall not encroach upon any publicly
dedicated rights-of-way.



      (5)   Special promotion signs.



         (a)   Sign permit fee of $15.00 is required prior to
display of sign.



         (b)   Each business may locate special event signs of
their property outside public right-of-way. The maximum number of days
allowed during a calendar year is 60 and these days may be divided into a
maximum of four different intervals (i.e. 15-day intervals).



         (c)   Types of signs allowed include metal, wood and
plastic.  Streamers, streams of flags and temporary cardboard signs are not
allowed.



         (d)   If a banner is used, it must be attached to the
building and only commercial logos for the organization obtaining the permit
shall be allowed.



         (e)   No such sign shall exceed 32 square feet.  The
maximum height will be eight feet unless attached to a building.



         (f)   New businesses are allowed a "coming soon" or
"grand opening" sign for a maximum of 60 days with a sign permit but without
a permit fee.



      (6)   Changeable face signs.  An old changeable face sign
described in § 92.028 (B)(14) or a similar new changeable face sign can be
used only if it is integrated into a new ground-mounted or pole sign by
covering the outer frame with the frame of a new sign or by removing the two
changeable faces from the old frame and using one or both of them in a newly
permitted sign.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 04-52, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord.
05-32, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord. 09-34, passed 10-19-09; Am. Ord. 09-42,
passed 12-21-09; Am. Ord. 10-02, passed 11-15-10; Am. Ord. 15-12, passed
5-4-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.030  SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS.



   (A)   The following types of signs are exempt from permit
requirements of this subchapter and may be placed in any zoning district
subject to the provisions of this subchapter.  Such signs shall otherwise be
in conformance with all applicable requirements contained in this
subchapter.  There shall be no limit as to the number of such signs on any
lot, except as herein prescribed.  All such signs (except government signs)
shall be located outside a road right-of-way.  Except where specifically
provided for, portable signs shall be prohibited.



   (B)   Specific signs not requiring permits:



      (1)   Government signs and logo signs, including way-finding
signs that are approved, installed, and maintained by the City of Albemarle
or designee.



      (2)   Memorial signs, plaques, or grave markers that are
noncommercial in nature.



      (3)   Flags, pennants, insignia, or religious symbols of any
government, non-profit or not-for-profit organization when not displayed in
connection with a commercial promotion.  Flags may be permitted as an
advertising device, provided that they do not exceed 32 square feet.



      (4)   Integral decorative or architectural features of
buildings and works of art, so long as such features or works do not contain
letters, trademarks, moving parts, or lights.



      (5)   Public interest signs.



      (6)   On-premises directional and instructional signs not
exceeding six square feet in area apiece.



      (7)   Identification signs for residential uses not exceeding
four square feet in area, one only per premises.



      (8)   Incidental signs; however, in no case shall a drive-in
window menu board be oriented to a public right-of- way or exceed 32 square
feet in area.  Any such drive-in window menu board containing a loud speaker
shall be located at least 50 feet from any pre- existing residential unit
located in a residential district.



      (9)   Campaign and election signs, provided that:



         (a)   Each sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.



         (b)   All such signs shall be removed within three days
after the election for which they were made.



      (10)   Temporary real estate signs advertising a specific
property for sale, lease, rent, or development shall be located as follows:



         (a)   One sign per street frontage advertising real
estate "For Sale," "For Rent," "For Lease," or "For Development," not greater
than ten square feet in area in a residential district and 64 square feet in
area in non-residential districts may be located on the property being
advertised so long as the sign is located behind the street right-of-way line.



         (b)   If the property so advertised lies on a corner lot
or double frontage lot, then a second sign may be oriented along the second
street so long as the two signs are at least 100 feet apart as measured by
the shortest straight line.



      (11)   Temporary construction signs, provided that:



         (a)   Signs in conjunction with any residential use
shall not exceed ten square feet each.



         (b)   Signs in conjunction with all other uses shall
have a maximum area of 50 square feet each.



         (c)   Only one such sign oriented per street front per
premises shall be erected.  Any two such signs located on the same premises
shall be located at least 100 feet apart as measured by using a straight line.



         (d)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.



         (e)   Such signs shall only appear at the construction
site.



         (f)   Such signs shall be removed within seven days
after a completion of the project.



      (12)   Temporary special event signs for religious,
charitable, civic, fraternal, or similar non-profit or not-for-profit
organizations, provided that:



         (a)   Signs shall be on premises and removed no later
than two days after the event.



         (b)   No such sign shall exceed 32 square feet.



         (c)   No such sign shall be illuminated.



         (d)   Commercial logos shall not be allowed.



         (e)   Types of signs allowed include metal, wood and
plastic.  Streamers, streams of flags and temporary cardboard signs are not
allowed.



      (13)   Temporary displays as part of a Christmas, holiday, or
civic event, so long as any such displays are not located within a street
right-of- way, unless the city or the North Carolina Department of
Transportation first grants permission for such.



      (14)   Bulletin boards and signs which contain information of
a non- commercial nature.  Such bulletin boards and signs may have a maximum
area of 42 square feet.



      (15)   Directional signs for public uses only.



      (16)   Other signs containing non- commercial copy messages,
provided that:



         (a)   Such signs have an area of no greater than 32
square feet.



         (b)   Such signs do not fit under the category of
prohibited as listed in § 92.028.



         (c)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.



      (17)   Directory signs, provided that:



         (a)   No sign is located in a road right-of-way.



         (b)   The maximum sign area shall be 36 square feet or
one-half the area of the largest freestanding sign permitted for the use,
whichever is less.



         (c)   Letters do not exceed six inches in height.



         (d)   Height of sign does not exceed six feet.



      (18)   Window signs.



      (19)   "Warning," "No Trespassing," and similar informational
signs.



      (20)   Signs located within a stadium that are intended to be
read only by persons seated within the stadium.



      (21)   Permanent municipal, school, recreational, and civic
club sponsored signs, schedules of events, and rules and regulations signs. 
Such signs shall not include identification signs.



      (22)   Any sign inside a building, not attached to or placed
within an external window or piece of glass that is not legible more than
three feet beyond the building in which it is located.



      (23)   Signs placed on newspaper boxes designed for placement
of delivered newspaper to a particular location.



      (24)   Historic plaques, provided that they do not exceed four
square feet in area.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 05-32, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord. 15-12,
passed 5-4-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.031  SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R10, R8, R8A, R4, R0).



   (A)   Signs in residential districts should be directional and/or
informational in nature.  The features, materials, colors, and designs used
in a sign should be similar to the building or buildings that it denotes.



   (B)   The following signs may be placed in such districts subsequent
to the issuance of a permit by the Zoning Administrator. All other signs
shall be prohibited.  Additional specifications for sign placement are found
in § 92.027.



 


Use

 

Type of Sign

 

Maximum Area (Wall)

 

Maximum Area (Ground- Mounted)

 

External or Internal Illumi- nation

 

Maximum Height (Ground- Mounted)

 

Total Number



Bed and breakfast inn, day care center, dwelling, mixed- use family home,
rooming and boarding houses
 
Wall or ground- mounted
 
10
square
feet
 
16
square
feet
 
External
 
5 feet
 
1 per street front; ground- mounted signs may be no closer than 200 feet


Cemetery, country club, multi-family development, public safety station
(police, fire, rescue), Recreation facilities (parks, playgrounds, pools,
clubs, and lodges)
 
Ground- mounted only
 
N/A
 
32
square
feet
 
External
 
5 feet
 
1 per street front; ground- mounted signs may be no closer than 200 feet


Church, library, school
 
Wall and ground- mounted
 
10% of façade area
 
32
square
feet
 
External or internal
 
6 feet
 
1 per street front; ground- mounted signs may be no closer than 200 feet


Doctor's office
 
Wall or ground- mounted
 
6
square
feet
 
24
square
feet
 
External
 
5 feet
 
1 per establish- ment


Neighborhood
 
Ground- mounted only
 
N/A
 
32
square
feet
 
External
 
6 feet
 
1 per street entrance; signs may be no closer than 200 feet



 



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.032  SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD).



   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by this subchapter, signs in the
CBD/Central Business District shall be limited to wall, canopy, awning, and
certain ground-mounted signs.



   (B)   Regulations governing these signs are as follows:



      (1)   Wall signs and projecting signs.  A projecting sign,
wall sign, or combination of both may be located on any building wall of a
structure so long as the maximum sign surface area of all signs on one wall
does not exceed 10% of the area of the building wall to which the sign or
signs are attached up to a maximum of 120 square feet.



   Projecting signs are attached to the building and extend perpendicular
to the building.



   Projecting signs are allowed with the following provisions:  minimum
of nine feet from grade/sidewalk to the lowest edge of the sign; maximum of
six feet from the side of the building to the outside edge of the sign;
maximum of 10% of the wall area for size of signage, up to 120 square feet;
the sign cannot extend vertically above the natural roof line or parapet wall.



 


General Location

 

Specific Location

 

Maximum Number

 

Maximum Area

 

Maximum Height*




Façades facing a public street

 
Between first window and window sill of second floor, or on sign frieze area
or building if original to building or sign if advertising different business
than first floor, be allowed above first floor window for Historic District
only.  The maximum number of signs above the first floor window shall be one.
 
1
 
10% of the building wall(s) facing a public street
 
16 feet


Façades facing an alley or parking lot
 
Above or beside doorway
 
1
 
8 square feet
 
12 feet


Windows
 
First floor windows
 
2
 
20% of total window space
 
8 feet


Outside entrance to upper floors
 
Above or beside
 
1
 
8 square feet above entrance; 2 square feet beside entrance
 
12 feet


Windows
 
Upper floor windows, if different business
 
1
 
50% of window size
 
N/A



*As measured from the top of the sign to the sidewalk.




 



      (2)   Canopy and awning signs.



         (a)   A sign message on a canopy or awning shall contain
only the name of the business, street address, and/or the type of business;
type of goods sold; or services rendered.



         (b)   Each business is permitted one sign hanging under
a canopy or awning, provided that the message on the sign is perpendicular to
the building, and the sign is at least seven feet above the surface of the
sidewalk and is no more than eight square feet in size.



         (c)   Signage on the canopy or awning sign shall be
limited to no greater than 1/2 of the area bounded by the edges of the canopy
or awning, not including any drip-flap or vertical fascia surface.  If
signage is only found in the fringe drip-flap portion of the canopy, the
entire portion of the area might be utilized for signage.



      (3)   Ground-mounted signs.  Businesses with a minimum
building setback of 20 feet from the fronting right-of-way may be permitted
the use of a ground-mounted sign in addition to any other permitted
signage.  The maximum height of such signs shall not exceed five feet.  The
maximum area for such signs shall be 32 square feet.



      (4)   One A-frame sign.  Sign area not to exceed six square
feet on each side.



      (5)   One flag sign that does not exceed 15 square feet or one
non-traditional flag sign (e.g. feather flag, flutter flag, bowhead banner)
that does not exceed three feet in width and that has a pole with a maximum
height of ten feet above the ground.



      (6)   Pole signs. Signs suspended from or mounted on poles. 
Pole signs are allowed if: the setback of the building exceeds 20 feet from
the right- of-way; minimum of nine feet from grade/sidewalk to the lowest
edge of the sign; maximum height of 20 feet to the highest edge of the sign
or pole; maximum of 10% of the wall area for size of signage to be divided by
wall, projecting or pole signs; not to exceed a cumulative total of 120
square feet; existing poles will be allowed to remain in their present
location.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 04-52, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord.
08-14, passed 4-21-08; Am. Ord. 10-02, passed 11-15-10; Am. Ord. 15-12,
passed 5-4-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.033  SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (GHBD,
HMD, MUSCD, NBD, NSD, SCD, LID, HID, I-O).



   (A)   The intensity of commercial development in the commercial and
industrial districts are established by the traffic-carrying capacity of the
fronting thoroughfare.  Signs may be illuminated internally or externally,
subject to the requirements in the various districts.



   (B)   The Director of Planning and Community Development or his or
her designee may place the following signs in such districts subsequent to
the issuance of a permit.  All other signs shall be prohibited.  Additional
specifications for sign placement are found in § 92.027.



 


District

 

Use

 

Type of Sign

 

Maximum Area (Wall)

 

Maximum Area (Ground- Mounted)

 

External or Internal Illumi- nation

 

Maximum Height

 

Total Number





  HMD
 
Medical
 
Wall and ground- mounted
 
20%
 
120 square feet (32 square feet)
 
External or Internal
 
7 feet
 
1 per street front


SCD
NSD
 
Shopping center directory
 
Ground- mounted or pole
 
N/A
 
120 square feet
 
External or Internal
 
35 feet
 
1 per street front; no closer than 100 feet


SCD
NSD
 
Shopping center out- parcels
 
Wall; ground- mounted or pole
 
20%
 
120 square feet (120 square feet)
 
External or Internal
 
35 feet
15 feet
 
1 per street front


GHBD
MUSCD
 
General
 
Wall; ground- mounted or pole
 
20%
 
120 square feet (120 square feet)
 
External or Internal
 
40 feet
 
1 per street front or 1 per business per 100 feet


NBD
 
General
 
Wall; ground- mounted or pole
 
20%
 
120 square feet (120 square feet)
 
External or Internal
 
40 feet
 
1 per street front


LID
HID
 
General
 
Wall; ground- mounted or pole
 
20%
 
120 square feet (120 square feet)
 
External or Internal
 
35 feet
 
1 per street front


I-O
 
 
Wall; ground- mounted
 
80 square feet
 
80 square feet
 
External or Internal
 
8 feet
 
1 per street front




 



Note: Distance set-back right-of-way will apply.



   (C)   (1)   The aggregate area of all wall signs per premises may
be increased based on the distance the principle building is set back from
the existing right-of-way.  No increase shall be permitted if used in
conjunction with a ground-mounted sign.



      (2)   The increase shall be in accordance with the following
table:



 


Principal Building Distance Setback from Existing Right-of-Way

 

Allowed Aggregate Wall Sign Area Increase




  0 - 99 feet

 

0%




100 - 249 feet

 

50%




250 - 349 feet

 

75%




350 feet +

 

100%




 



   (D)   One A-frame or pedestal sign or other similar sign.  Sign
must be at least five feet from the road right-of- way.  Sign area not to
exceed 12 square feet on each side and total height must be less than five
feet from the ground.



   (E)   One A-frame or pedestal sign or similar sign.  Sign must be
at least five feet from road right-of-way.  Sign area not to exceed 32
square feet on each side and total height must be less than five feet from
the ground.  In addition, the following must be met:



      (1)   Five-lane highway.



      (2)   Speed limit of 45 mph or greater.



      (3)   Minimum lot width of 200 feet.



   (F)   One flag sign that does not exceed 15 square feet or one
non-traditional flag sign (e.g. feather flag, flutter flag, bowhead banner)
that does not exceed three feet in width and that has a pole with a maximum
height of ten feet above the ground.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01; Am. Ord. 04-52, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord.
05-30, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord. 06-22, passed 8-21-06; Am. Ord. 11-24, passed
7-18-11; Am. Ord. 13-01, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 15-12, passed 5-4-15) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.034  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   Except as herein provided, nonconforming signs that were
otherwise lawful on the effective date of this subchapter may be continued.



   (B)   No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase
in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming sign or causes a previously
conforming sign to become nonconforming.



   (C)   A nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to
bring the sign into complete conformity with this subchapter.  Once a
nonconforming sign is removed from the premises or otherwise taken down or
moved, the sign may only be replaced with a sign that is in conformance with
the terms of this subchapter.



   (D)   Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs necessary
to keep a nonconforming sign for a particular use in sound condition are
permitted so long as the nonconformity is not in any means increased.



   (E)   If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it may
not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced except in conformity
with all the provisions of this subchapter, and the remnants of the former
sign structure shall be cleared from the land.  For purposes of this
section, a nonconforming sign shall be considered "destroyed" if it receives
damage to an extent of more than 50% of the sign's value immediately prior to
the sign having received the damage.



   (F)   Notwithstanding other provisions contained in this section,
the message of a nonconforming sign may be changed so long as this does not
create any new nonconformities.



   (G)   (1)   If a nonconforming on- premises sign that advertises
a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction, or other
enterprise or activity has for a period of at least 180 days not been
operated, conducted, or offered, that sign shall be deemed abandoned and
shall be removed or brought into compliance by the sign owner, property
owner, or other party having control over such sign within 30 days after the
180-day period has expired.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the above, if there is a change of name
of business on a particular piece of property, and there were one or more
on-premises nonconforming signs which advertised the former business or use,
any new signs used, and all new sign faces for the new use or business, must
meet all sign requirements for the underlying zoning district.



   (H)   (1)   If a nonconforming sign remains blank for a
continuous period of 180 days, that sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall,
within 30 days after such abandonment, be altered to comply with this
subchapter or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the
sign is located, or other person having control over such sign.



      (2)   For purposes of this subchapter, a sign shall be deemed
"blank" if:



         (a)   It advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodations, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer
operating or being offered or conducted; or



         (b)   The advertising message it displays becomes
illegible in whole or substantial part; or



         (c)   It does not contain an advertising message.  (For
such purposes, the terms "Sign For Rent," "Sign For Lease," "Sign for Sale,"
etc. shall not be deemed to be an advertising message).



   (I)   All nonconforming signs shall be removed within ten years
following the effective date of this subchapter.



(Ord. 01-44, passed 12-17-01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.039  SUBDIVISION AND INDUSTRIAL PARK MARKERS.



   Name markers may be constructed and maintained within street
rights-of-way at the entrance of the street leading into the subdivision or
industrial park upon the following conditions:



   (A)   Location of the marker shall be approved by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and shall be constructed and maintained in a manner that
will not obstruct the line of sight of motorists approaching the street with
which the entrance street intersects or impede the customary and usual
maintenance of either street.



   (B)   The marker must meet all zoning and sign requirements.



   (C)   Where a marker involves a state maintained street or road, the
developer of the subdivision or industrial park shall first obtain the
approval in writing of the State Department of Transportation.



   (D)   The cost of maintaining the marker and the area surrounding
the marker shall be the responsibility of the developer of the subdivision or
industrial park. Failure to maintain the marker or the area surrounding the
marker shall be cause for the Zoning Enforcement Officer to require the
marker to be removed, the cost of which shall be borne by the developer of
the subdivision or industrial park. Any person aggrieved by an order of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer to remove a marker may appeal the decision to the
City Council within 20 days from the date of service of the notice of removal.



(Ord. 89-5, passed 5-15-89)



§ 92.040  INDUSTRIAL PARK GROUP SIGNS.



   A sign may be placed at the entrance of an industrial park consisting
of the individual businesses located within the park regardless of current
ownership of industrial lots. The sign shall not exceed 120 square feet.



(Ord. 94-02, passed 2-21-94)



OFF-STREET LOADING AND STORAGE



§ 92.047  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE.



   Every building or structure used for business, trade, or industry
hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated below for the loading and
unloading and maneuvering space of vehicles off the street or public alley. 
The space shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a
street.  For the purposes of this section, an off-street loading space
(exclusive of adequate access drives and maneuvering space) shall have
minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 40 feet and an overhead clearance of 14 feet
in height above the alley or street grade.  Space requirements are as
follows.



Retail      One space for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.



Wholesale   One space for each10,000 square feet of gross floor area.



('58 Code, § 19-64)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TELECOMMUNICATIONS



§ 92.067  TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND FACILITIES.



   Telecommunication towers and facilities are permitted as a conditional
use in all zoning districts established under the City Zoning Ordinance
provided the following conditions are met in addition to any applicable
regulations set forth for the district:



   (A)   All telecommunication towers must be of a monopole design and
construction.  All monopoles must be designed to "telescope" or collapse
inward unless documentation can be provided to prove such design is not
feasible.  Towers of the lattice variety may be used if documentation is
provided by the applicant that demonstrates that a monopole tower cannot
adequately serve the area.



   (B)   The maximum allowable height of a tower is 199.9 feet.  No
variance to the height may be granted unless the applicant can prove the
maximum height will not allow for the provision of adequate service levels
(i.e. cannot meet reasonable service coverage area). The maximum tower height
may be increased by a ratio of one foot for every one linear foot of distance
beyond 1,000 linear feet between the base of the proposed tower and any
residential districts or platted subdivisions.  In such instances, the
maximum tower height shall be 240 feet.



   (C)   The placement of telecommunication towers on existing public
utility structures such as water towers whenever feasible is encouraged.  No
tower may be located within 3,000 linear feet (as measured using the shortest
straight line distance between each tower) of a water tower unless the
applicant can prove that locating on the water tower is not feasible.



   (D)   Towers which are completely concealed within an architectural
feature of a building or structure so that the tower is architecturally
indiscernible as a separate entity are encouraged. Height and setback
requirements may be waived when placed on public utility structure or built
as concealed towers.



   (E)   Providers are encouraged to co-locate facilities in an effort
to reduce the number of telecommunication towers in the city. The city may
require telecommunication providers to negotiate in good faith with other
telecommunication providers space at a reasonable lease cost, and to
publicize the fact that space is available on a lease basis as part of the
conditional use process. No tower may be located within 1,500 lineal feet of
an existing tower unless the applicant can prove co-location is not a viable
option.



   (F)   Where a telecommunication tower is located on a lot with an
existing non-residential principal use. The tower must be located in the rear
or side yards. If the principal use is residential, the tower must be located
in the rear yard only.



   (G)   An applicant must provide documentation establishing that the
proposed tower complies with the Federal Radio Frequency Emission Standards.



   (H)   Wherever feasible, all accessory structures on the ground
which contain switching equipment or other related equipment must be designed
to closely resemble the neighborhood's basic architecture or the architecture
and style of the principal use on the property.



   (I)   Screening is required along all sides of the perimeter of the
telecommunication tower site as defined in § 92.008 under "Buffer Strip". In
addition, a minimum eight foot high fence is required immediately around the
tower and any equipment building(s), with the screening to be located on the
outside of the fenced area. The telecommunication provided is to be
responsible for keeping all landscaping material free from disease and
properly maintained in order to fulfill the purpose for which it was
established. The owners of the property, and any tenant on the property where
screening is required, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
maintenance of all screen materials. Such maintenance shall include all
actions necessary to keep the screened area free of litter and debris, to
keep plantings healthy, and to keep planting areas neat in appearance. Any
vegetation that constitutes part of the screening shall be replaced in the
event it dies. Applicants that are building new towers with co-location
opportunities shall plan the fence and screening to accommodate future
telecommunication providers on the site such that the fence and screening
surrounds all future structures and the tower.



   (J)   Telecommunication towers may be denied on the basis of
negative influence on property values or on aesthetic concerns provided that
there is evidence to prove the impact on adjacent property owners will be
significant. If a request is denied because of negative influence on property
values or on aesthetic concerns, the city must clearly state the reasoning
and available evidence of the impact on adjacent property values.



   (K)   A minimum setback requirement, on all sides of the property
shall be one foot for every one foot of actual tower height. For the purpose
of establishing setbacks, the measurements shall be from the perimeter
fencing which surrounds the equipment shelters, and tower base. No habitable
structures shall be within the required setback area. Minimum setback
requirements may be reduced by the city if warranted.



   (L)   Towers having a height of 200 feet or less, shall not contain
lights or light fixtures at a height exceeding 15 feet. Furthermore, lighting
of all towers in any district shall be directed toward the tower and/or
accessory uses to reduce the effect of glare.



   (M)   Towers and related facilities no longer used for its original
intent for a period of 90 consecutive days shall be abandoned and must be
removed by the applicant and/or property owner. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to notify the city when the tower has been
abandoned for greater than 90 days.



   (N)   A telecommunication provider must apply for a new review and
approval process by the Planning Board and City Council of any planned
increase in tower height to an existing telecommunication tower. Normal
maintenance and repair of the structure can be completed without the issuance
of a new permit at the discretion of the Zoning Officer. Co-location of
additional telecommunication providers to an existing, approved tower
requires review and approval by the Zoning Officer, unless an increase in
tower height is proposed, which would require the telecommunication provider
to apply for a conditional use permit, which includes review and approval by
the Planning Board and the City Council.



   (O)   Free-standing signs are prohibited. Wall signs limited to
identification area allowed on equipment structures on fences surrounding the
telecommunication tower provided it does not exceed nine square feet in size.
Any signage must be specifically addressed in the conditional use permit.



   (P)    The telecommunication provider must show proof of adequate
insurance coverage for any potential damage caused by or to the tower prior
to the issuance of a conditional use permit. Once approved, documentation of
adequate insurance must be provided to the city every 12 months.



   (Q)    Outdoor storage of equipment or other related items is
prohibited.



   (R)    All applications for a conditional use permit for a
telecommunication tower must include the following information in addition to
any other applicable information required in the Zoning Ordinance: 



      (1)   Identification of intended  telecommunication
provider(s);



      (2   Documentation by a professional engineer that the tower
has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate more than one user, if 
applicable;



      (3)   A statement from the provider indicating intent to allow
shared use of the tower and how others will be accommodated, if applicable;



      (4)   Evidence that the property owners of residentially zoned
property within 300 feet of the site in addition to adjacent property owners
if applicable, have been notified by the applicant of the proposed tower
height and design;



      (5)   Documentation that the telecommunication tower complies
with the Federal Radio Frequency Emission Standards;



      (6)   Documentation that towers over 199.9 feet are necessary
for a minimal level of service;



   (S)   The provisions of 92-60 shall not apply to radio transmission
facilities having a height of 100 feet or less and which, at a height of 50
feet above the base, have a maximum horizontal measurement of 18 inches, nor
to towers erected and maintained by a public authority for public safety or
emergency communication purposes, nor to antennas or antenna structures used
by individuals or groups licensed in the Amateur Radio Service by the Federal
Communication Commission. (Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98)



§ 92.070 USE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   (1)   The city has divided its territorial jurisdiction
into districts that have been deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of
this part; and within those districts it regulates and restricts the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of
buildings, structures, or land. Such districts include, but shall not be
limited to, general use districts, in which a variety of uses are permissible
in accordance with general standards; overlay districts, in which additional
requirements are imposed on certain properties within one or more underlying
general or conditional use districts in which uses are permitted only upon
the issuance of a conditional use permit for which site plan is required.



      (2)   Property may be placed in a conditional use district
only in response to a petition by the owners of all the property to be
included. Specific conditions applicable to these districts may be proposed
by the petitioner or the city or its agencies, but only those conditions
mutually approved by the city and the petitioner may be incorporated into the
zoning regulations or permit requirements. Conditions and site specific
standards imposed in a conditional use district shall be limited to those
that address the conformance of the development and use of the site to city
ordinances and an officially adopted comprehensive or other plan and those
that address the impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the
development or use of the site.



      (3)   A statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed
rezoning shall be prepared for each petition for a rezoning to a conditional
use district or other small scale rezoning. Except as authorized by the
foregoing, all regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of
building throughout each district, but the regulations in one district may
differ from those in other districts.



   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the city and its
extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction are hereby divided into 14 districts
designated as follows.



R-10      Single-Family Residential District.



R-8      Two-Family Residential District - Medium Density.



R-8A      Multi-Family Residential District - High Density.



R-O      Residential-Office District.



NBD      Neighborhood Business District.



NS      Neighborhood Shopping District.



GHBD      General Highway Business District.



SCD      Shopping Center District.



MUSCD   Mixed Shopping Center District.



HMD      Hospital-Medical Center District.



CBD      Central Business District.



LID      Light Industrial District.



HID      Heavy Industrial District.



NEC      Northeast Corridor Overlay District



   (B)   Conditional Use District. In addition to the 14 districts
herein established for general use, there are hereby established conditional
use districts with the following aforesaid general use districts:



R-10 (CU)   Single-Family Residential District



R-8 (CU)   Two Family Residential District - Medium Density



R-8A (CU)   Multi-Family Residential District - High Density



R-O (CU)   Residential Office District



NBD (CU)   Neighborhood Business District



NS (CU)   Neighborhood Shopping District



GHBD (CU)   General Highway Business District



SCD (CU)   Shopping Center District



MUSCD (CU)   Mixed Shopping Center District



HMD (CU)   Hospital Medical Center District



CBD (CU)   Central Business District



LID (CU)   Light Industrial District



HID (CU)   Heavy Industrial District



NEC (CU)   Northeast Corridor Overlay District



   (D)   Election of General or Conditional Use District. A person
seeking to rezone a tract of land may either elect to petition for a general
use or conditional use district zoning. General use zoning allows the
petitioner to pursue any of the permitted uses for that district. Conditional
use district zoning allows the petitioner to pursue any one of the listed
permitted uses for that district.



('58 Code, § 19-70)  (Ord. 79-12, passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. 90-10, passed
8-6-90; Am. Ord. 98-01, passed 1-20-98; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06)



§ 92.071  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries of the districts designated in § 92.070 are hereby
established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of
Albemarle, North Carolina," adopted by the City Council and certified by the
City Clerk. The map and all explanatory matter thereon accompany and are
hereby made a part of this chapter. The map shall be retained in the office
of the Director of Community Development.



('58 Code, § 19-71)  (Am. Ord. 87-1, passed 1-19-87)



§ 92.072  RULES GOVERNING BOUNDARIES.



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
districts designated in § 92.070 as shown on the official zoning map, the
following rules shall apply.



   (A)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the center lines of streets or highways, street lines, or railroad
right-of-way lines, or those lines extended, the center lines, street lines,
or railroad right-of-way lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.



   (B)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundaries.



   (C)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways, or
railroads, or rights-of-way of them, the district boundaries shall be
construed as being parallel thereto and at a distance therefrom as indicated
on the zoning map. If no distance is given, the dimension shall be determined
by use of the scale shown on the zoning map.



   (D)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single
ownership, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of the
lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that the
extensions shall not include any part of a lot more than 35 feet beyond the
district boundary line.



   (E)   Each permitted use shall conform to the dimensional
requirements of the district in which it is located. For example, within a
R-10 SingleFamily Residential District, rest homes are permitted uses. The
rest homes shall meet the dimensional requirements set forth for that
district.



('58 Code, § 19-72)



§ 92.073 [RESERVED].



§ 92.074 R-10 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)    The R-10 Single-Family Residential District is a low-density
neighborhood consisting of single family residences along with limited home
occupations and private and public community uses. This district will
accommodate residences with access to both public water and sewerage.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted by right:



      (1)    Accessory buildings or structures, including
greenhouses not exceeding 300 square feet and swimming pools, provided they
shall be permitted in the rear yard and shall (must) not be less than ten
feet from the property line, and such buildings and structures shall (must)
be set back at least 22 feet from any side yard street right-of-way line;
provided further however, that the construction of carports shall be allowed
on a side yard if they extend no farther onto the front yard than the
residence; provided further however that not with finding the foregoing in
those instances where a parcel is five acres or more, accessory structures
may be constructed in the front or side yard if the structures are located at
least 200 feet from the street right-of-way.



         (a)    All swimming pools to be constructed or which are
already constructed shall (must) be enclosed by a fence which shall (must) be
at least four feet in height and which shall (must) be of a type not readily
climbed by children.  Gates shall (must) be of a self-closing and latching
type with a latch on the inside of the gate, not readily available for
children to open.  If the entire premises of the residence is enclosed, then
this provision may be waived by the Building Inspector upon inspection and
approval of the residence enclosure.



         (b)    Above-ground pools may be exempt from the fence
requirement if they met the following additional requirements: the ladder
shall (must) be raised or removed when the pool is not in use.



      (2)    Single family dwellings.



      (3)    Two-family dwellings may be constructed only on a
corner lot within a subdivision.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing.



      (1)    Churches and their customary related uses, including
cemeteries, provided that all buildings and graves shall be set back at least
20 feet from any property line. Services to be conducted temporarily in a
tent shall be allowed on church property as a customary related use when
off-street parking is provided and a permit is obtained from the City Fire
Department as required by § 29.1 of the Fire Prevention Code. Any person or
organization desiring to conduct tent services shall first file an
application with the City Clerk stating the location, date, time, duration,
and size and capacity of the tent.



      (2)    Colleges, universities, public elementary and secondary
schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as
ordinarily given in public schools, provided, however, a conditional use
permit is not required for new additions thereto not in excess of 10% of the
total building square footage for the campus, and the addition is not closer
than 50 feet of an adjoining property line. Including dormitories when
located on the campus of any of the above.



      (3)    Golf courses, parks, playgrounds, community centers,
libraries, swimming pools, and similar recreational uses.



      (4)    Public safety facilities such as fire and police
stations, rescue headquarters, ambulance service, and civil defense centers,
provided that all vehicles are stored indoors.



      (5)    Public works and pubic utility facilities such as
transformer stations, transmission lines, pumping stations, water towers, and
telephone exchanges, provided:



         (a)    The facilities are essential to the service of
the immediate area.



         (b)    No vehicles or materials shall be stored on the
premises, and no offices shall be permitted.



         (c)    All buildings shall be set back at least 20 feet
from all property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as
to blend in with the surrounding area.



         (d)    All dangerous apparatus shall be enclosed by a
chain-link fence at least eight feet in height.



      (6)    Nursery schools and kindergartens, provided that at
least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is provided for each child; adult
day care centers.



      (7)    Telecommunication towers and facilities complying with
the provisions of § 92.067.



      (8)    Residential cluster developments provided for in §
91.20.



      (9)    A detached guest/pool house shall be permitted as a
conditional use as an accessory to a detached single family dwelling unit in
accordance with the requirements hereinafter set forth:



         (a)    The guest/pool house should be clearly
subordinate to the principal structure.



         (b)    The minimum lot size for the lot on which the
guest/pool house is located shall be at least 2.1 acres or larger.



         (c)    Guest/pool house shall have floor area no greater
than 50% of the principal structure.



         (d)    No more than one housing unit serving as a
guest/pool house shall be located on a lot.



         (e)    Guest/pool houses shall be owned by the same
person who owns the principal dwelling.



         (f)    Guest/pool houses shall not be served by a
driveway separate from that serving the principal dwelling.



         (g)    Guest/pool houses shall be located in the rear
yard and not be any closer than 30 feet to a rear property line or 15 feet
along any side property line of 22 feet along a side street; and that a type
II bufferyard shall be installed as required by § 92.090(B).



         (h)    Guest/pool houses shall be no taller than the
principal dwelling as measured from grade.



      (10)    Funeral homes, excluding crematoriums.



      (11)    Camps and retreats.



(‘58 Code, § 19-81)  (Ord. 80-28, passed 11-17-80; Am. Ord. 92-30, passed
12-7-92; Am. Ord. 94-20, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98; Am.
Ord. 98-27, passed 8-3-98; Am. Ord. 99-27, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 99-43,
passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 04-02, passed 1-20-04; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed
9-20-04; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 08-17, passed 5-19-08; Am.
Ord. 09-29, passed 9-21-09; Am. Ord. 10-21, passed 6-8-10; Am. Ord. 17-24,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.075  R-8 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)    The R-8 Two-Family Residential District is established to
provide a quiet, medium-density district in which the principal use of land
is for single-family and two-family residences. The regulations of this
district are intended to discourage any use which, because of its character,
would substantially interfere with the development of single-family and
two-family residences in the district and which would be detrimental to the
quiet residential nature of the areas included within this district.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted by right.



      (1)    All uses permitted in the R-10 Residential District,
including conditional uses subject to § 92.073(C), except camps and retreats.



      (2)    Two-family dwellings.



      (3)    Class A manufactured homes on a single lot.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing.



      (1)    Nursery schools and kindergartens, provided that at
least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is provided for each child; adult
day care centers.



      (2)    Telecommunication towers and facilities complying with
the provision of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances.



(‘58 Code, § 19-82) (Ord. 79-12, passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. 86-25, passed
11-3-86; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98; Am. Ord. 98-27, passed 8-3-98; Am.
Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 92.076  R-8A MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)    The R-8A Multi-Family Residential District is established as
a high-density district in which the principal use of the land is for
single-family, two-family, and multi-family residences. The regulations of
this district are intended to provide areas of the community for those
persons desiring small residences and multi-family structures in relatively
high-density neighborhoods.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted.



      (1)    All uses permitted in the R-8 Residential District,
including conditional uses subject to Board of Adjustment approval.



      (2)    Multi-family dwellings; provided, however, that the
site plan for eight or more multi-family units must be approved by the
Planning Board and City Council; that two driveways are required where
property fronts on two public streets; and that a traffic study is required
for all properties over four acres lying in R-8A/Multi-Family District.



      (3)    Townhouse developments wherein there is the development
of two or more dwelling units or buildings, each of which is located on its
own individual lot, plus land developed and designated for the common use and
benefit of the occupants of the townhouse lots, and the gross land area of
the commonly held land shall be not less than 10% of the development's total
gross land area, provided an entity is designated to be legally responsible
for maintenance and control of the common land areas. The individual lots in
townhouse developments shall be exempt from minimum lot width and setback
requirements, but the entire development shall meet the exterior setback
requirements of § 92.086.



      (4)    Class A manufactured  homes on a single lot.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after Council holds a public hearing. Each request must
be reviewed by the Planning Board and the Boards's recommendations and
comments will be presented in writing at the public hearing and included in
minutes of the meeting.



      (1)    Bed and breakfast homes when located not less than 500
feet from the same use.



      (2)    Telecommunication towers and facilities complying with
the provisions of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances.



      (3)    Battered group care facilities.



      (4)    Fraternity and sorority houses when located not less
than 500 feet from the same use.



(‘58 Code, § 19-83)   (Ord. 79-4, passed 6-25-79; Am. Ord. 79-12,
passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. 80-28, passed 11-17-80; Am. Ord. 87-20, passed
8-17-87; Am. Ord. 89-7, passed 6-5-89; Am. Ord. 96-28, passed 11-18-96; Am.
Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98; Am. Ord. 98-27, passed 8-3-98; Am. Ord. 01-18,
passed 4-16-01; Am. Ord. 01-35, passed 7-16-01; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed
4-3-06; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.077  R-4 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)    Purpose. The R-4 High Density Residential District is created
for the purpose of promoting attractive, more compact development as an
alternative to fewer houses on larger lots.



   (B)    Conditional uses.



      (1)    Single family homes (zero lot line homes).



      (2)    Townhouses (as cluster developments).



   (C)    Yards and dimensions.



      (1)    Minimum width: 60 feet.



      (2)    Minimum side yard: 14 feet.



      (3)    Minimum rear yard: ten feet.



      (4)    Minimum front yard: ten feet.



      (5)    Minimum lot size: 4,000 square feet.



      (6)    Minimum development size: five acres.



   (D)    Note. For cluster townhouses, there are no minimum yard or
dimensional requirements. After the amount of land given to roadways and the
building areas have been established, the remainder shall be maintained as
open space by the Homeowners' Association.



(Ord. 99-43, passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 18-31,
passed 9-4-18)



§ 92.078  R-O RESIDENTIAL-OFFICE DISTRICT.



   (A)    The regulations of the R-O Residential-Office District are
intended to provide for new structures or the conversion of older homes into
office or apartment structures where they are appropriate, and to provide a
buffer between purely business and purely residential areas.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted.



      (1)    All uses permitted in the R-8A Residential District,
except Class A manufactured homes on a single lot, including conditional uses.



      (2)    Adult day care center.



      (3)    Automobile parking lots and structures.



      (4)    Banks and other financial institutions including loan
and financial companies.



      (5)    Barber and beauty shops.



      (6)    Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, art
schools, music and dance studios, and similar facilities, but excluding
industrial trade schools.



      (7)    Clubs, lodges, social, civic, and other similar
organizations operated on a nonprofit basis as evidenced by an Internal
Revenue Service tax exemption granted under the provisions of § 501(C)(3)
and (4) of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (8)    Customary accessory uses and structures when located on
the same lot as the principal structure, excluding, however, open storage.
Furthermore, accessory structures may be used for home occupations or other
permitted uses in this district.



      (9)    Floral and gift shops, but excluding commercial
greenhouses.



      (10)    Funeral homes and mortuaries.



      (11)    Libraries, museums, and art galleries.



      (12)    Mental health clinics and outpatient rehabilitation
facilities.



      (13)    Assisted living and nursing homes.



      (14)    Offices, business, professional, and public.



      (15)    Opticians and optical goods stores.



      (16)    Orthopedic supply houses.



      (17)    Pharmacies and apothecary stores, without fountains.



      (18)    Photographic studios.



      (19)    Physical culture and reducing salons.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing.  Permitted
conditional uses in the district include telecommunication towers, facilities
complying with the provisions of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances,
battered group care facilities,  and recycling collection points, tea
houses, orphanages and adoption care facilities, boarding houses and rooming
houses with management and operation plans approved by Council and when
located at least 500 feet from other establishments of either use, and
fraternity and sorority houses when located not less than 500 feet from the
same use.



(‘58 Code, § 19-85)   (Ord. 79-4, passed 6-25-79; Am. Ord. 79-12,
passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. 81-3, passed 3-16-81; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98;
Am. Ord. 01-18, passed 4-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-31, passed 7-18-05; Am. Ord.
06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 08-03, passed 2-4-08; Am. Ord. 14-22, passed
7-7-14; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.079  NBD NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)    The regulations of the NBD Neighborhood Business District are
intended to provide for the retailing of goods and services for convenience
to the nearby residential neighborhoods in such a way as to protect abutting
areas from blighting influences.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted.



      (1)    Bakeries, where the products are sold exclusively at
retail on the premises.



      (2)    Banks and other financial institutions, including loan
and finance companies.



      (3)    Barber and beauty shops.



      (4)    Bicycle sales and repair shops.



      (5)    Churches and their related uses, except cemeteries.
Services to be conducted temporarily in a tent shall be allowed on church
property as a customary related use when off-street parking is provided and a
permit is obtained from the City Fire Department as required by § 29.1 of
the Fire Prevention Code. Any person or organization desiring to conduct tent
services shall first file an application with the City Clerk stating the
location, date, time, duration, and size and capacity of the tent.



      (6)    Clubs, lodges, social, civic, and other similar
organizations operated on a nonprofit basis as evidenced by an Internal
Revenue Service tax exemption granted under the provisions of § 501(C)(3)
and (4) of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (7)    Customary accessory uses and structures when located on
the same lot as the principal structure, excluding open storage.



      (8)    Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail sales
on the premises only.



      (9)    Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations and dry
cleaning plants operated in conjunction with a retail service counter,
provided there is no processing of clothes collected at other stations, and
that only noninflammable liquids are used in the cleaning processes.



      (10)    Floral and gift shops, but excluding commercial
greenhouses.



      (11)    Food stores, retail only, but excluding the killing
and dressing of any flesh and fowl.



      (12)    Jewelry repair shops.



      (13)    Launderettes and laundromats.



      (14)    Libraries, museums, and art galleries.



      (15)    Locksmiths and gunsmiths.



      (16)    Nursery schools and kindergartens.



      (17)    Offices, business, professional, and public.



      (18)    Photographic studios.



      (19)    Public safety facilities such as fire and police
stations, rescue squad headquarters, and civil defense centers, provided that
all vehicles are stored indoors.



      (20)    Public works and public utility facilities, subject to
conditions listed under § 92.073(C)(6) relating to public works and public
utility facilities.



      (21)    Radio and TV repair shops, electric shops.



      (22)    Service stations, but not including major repair work,
provided that gasoline pump islands shall be located at least 15 feet behind
the property line, and that pump island canopies may be constructed to extend
to the street right-of-way. On all sides where the stations abut residential
districts, a six-foot high fence and suitable landscaping shall be provided.



      (23)    Shoe repair and shine shops.



      (24)    Tailor, dressmaker, and millinery shops.



      (25)    Adult day care centers.



      (26)    Retail establishments such as department, clothing,
fabric, shoe, variety, notion, drug, hardware, furniture, appliance, floor
covering, paint, antique, art goods, jewelry, gift, music, toy, sporting
goods, books and stationary, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet, and hobby and
craft stores but not excluding similar retail outlets.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing: colleges,
universities, technical institutes, public elementary and secondary schools,
private schools having curricula substantially the same as offered in public
schools and including dormitories when located on the campus of any of the
above, and single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multi-family
dwellings not to exceed four units, telecommunication towers and facilities
complying with the provision of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances,
restaurants, orphanages and adoption care facilities, halfway houses and
sober living facilities when located not less than one half mile from the
same use, bed and breakfast homes when located not less than 500 feet from
the same use, and boarding houses and rooming houses with management and
operation plans approved by Council and when located at least 500 feet from
other establishments of either use, and fraternity and sorority houses when
located not less than 500 feet from the same use.



(‘58 Code, § 19-86)   (Ord. 79-1, passed 1-15-79; Am. Ord. 79-4, passed
6-25-79; Am. Ord. 79-12, passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. 81-3, passed 3-16-81; Am.
Ord. 86-26, passed 11-3-86; Am. Ord. 87-8, passed 5-11-87; Am. Ord. 91-1,
passed 1-22-91; Am. Ord. 93-21, passed 5-17-93; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed
1-5-98; Am. Ord. 98-26, passed 7-20-98; Am. Ord. 05-11, passed 3-21-05; Am.
Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 14-34, passed 11-3-14; Am. Ord. 18-31,
passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.079A  N-S NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT.



   (A)    The N-S Neighborhood Shopping District is established to
provide an aesthetically attractive environment in which a limited number of
businesses can provide goods and services for nearby neighborhoods.



   (B)    (1)    The following uses are permitted:



         (a)    Auto parts store.



         (b)    Banks and savings and loan companies.



         (c)    Camera shops and photographic studios.



         (d)    Child care facilities.



         (e)    Clothing stores.



         (f)    Drug stores.



         (g)    Fitness centers.



         (h)    Gift shops and floral shops.



         (i)    Hair stylist shops (includes barber and beauty
shops).



         (j)    Hardware stores.



         (k)    Jewelry stores.



         (l)    Optical services.



         (m)    Pet supply stores.



         (n)    Professional offices.



         (o)    Restaurants (no drive-throughs or fast food).



         (p)    Specialty stores.



         (q)    Sporting goods stores.



         (r)    Toy stores.



         (s)    Travel agencies.



         (t)    Video stores.



      (2)    Note: None of these uses can occupy more than 10,000
square feet within a single building.



   (C)    Procedure for rezoning to neighborhood shopping district. The
owner or owners of the tract(s) must present at a minimum a five acre tract
(exclusive of road right-of-way) for consideration.



(Ord. 99-43, passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18)



§ 92.080  GHBD GENERAL HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)    The GHBD General Highway Business Districts are designed to
serve those commercial activities which function relatively independent of
intense pedestrian traffic and which should not be located in the Central
Business District or in the Neighborhood Business District. The General
Highway Business Districts shall be located along state and federal highways
or other highways designated as major streets, and should be established in
zones of two acres or larger.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted.



      (1)    Alcoholic beverages, packaged, retail stores.



      (2)    Veterinary facilities, provided no pens or kennels are
located closer than 20 feet to any property line, and there are no open
kennels.



      (3)    Assembly halls, coliseums, ballrooms, and similar
structures.



      (4)    Auction houses where all sales are conducted within an
enclosed structure and no goods or wares are stored or displayed on the
premises outside the auction house and there is provided one space of
off-street parking for each four seats of patron use plus one space for each
100 square feet of floor space not containing seats.



      (5)    Automobile parking lots and structures.



      (6)    Automobile parts and supplies, new.



      (7)    Automobile repair garages, including body works.



      (8)    Automobile sales, new and used, including related
repair services.



      (9)    Automobile washing establishments.



      (10)    Bakery product distributing facilities.



      (11)    Banks, drive-in.



      (12)    Barber and beauty shops.



      (13)    Bicycle sales and repair



      (14)    Boat works and sales.



      (15)    Bottling works.



      (16)    Bowling alleys, skating rinks, baseball and golf
driving ranges, miniature and par-3 golf courses, mechanical rides, riding
stables, and other commercial recreation facilities.



      (17)    Building materials and equipment sales, including open
storage when fenced.



      (18)    Bus repair and storage terminals.



      (19)    Bus stations.



      (20)    Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, art
schools, music and dance studios, and similar uses.



      (21)    Cabinet, woodworking, and upholstery shops.



      (22)    Chiropractic and dental clinics.



      (23)    Churches and their related uses.



      (24)    Clubs and lodges operated on a nonprofit basis as
evidenced by an Internal Revenue Service tax exemption granted under the
provisions of § 501(c)(3) and (4) of the Internal Revenue Code and which
cater exclusively to members and their guests.



      (25)    Contractor's offices and storage yards.



      (26)    Crematories, as defined in G.S. § 90-210.121(11), to
wit:



            “CREMATORY” or “CREMATORIUM.” The building or
buildings or portion of a building on a single site that houses the cremation
equipment, the holding and processing facilities, the business office, and
other parts of the crematory business. A crematory must comply with all
applicable public health and environmental laws and rules and must contain
the equipment and meet all of the standards established by the rules adopted
by the Board.



      (27)    Curio and souvenir shops.



      (28)    Customary accessory uses and structures, including
open storage, provided the areas devoted to open storage are enclosed by a
solid fence not less than eight feet in height.



      (29)    Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail
sales on the premises only.



      (30)    Dairy products processing and distributing facilities.



      (31)    Developmental group care facility, defined as a
facility licensed by the state, or operated by a nonprofit corporation
chartered pursuant to G.S. Ch. 55, which provides personal care and
rehabilitation services for persons having developmental disabilities. Such
facilities may have accessory uses conducted on the premises, including but
not limited to daycare schooling of residents, training programs in
occupational fields, and production of goods and crafts to be sold off
premises.



      (32)    Dry cleaning and laundry plants.



      (33)    Electrical supplies and equipment, sales and service.



      (34)    Farm machinery assembly, sales, and repairs.



      (35)    Feed and seed stores.



      (36)    Floral shops.



      (37)    Food stores and meat markets, retail only, but
excluding the killing or dressing of flesh or fowl.



      (38)    Freezer lockers and ice plants.



      (39)    Fruit stands and grocery stores housed in reasonably
permanent structures.



      (40)    Funeral homes and mortuaries.



      (41)    Furriers and fur storage.



      (42)    Glass and mirror shops, venetian blind and awning
shops, tile companies, and similar building specialties outlets.



      (43)    Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries.



      (44)    Industrial supplies and equipment, sales, and service.



      (45)    Industrial trade schools, research laboratories.



      (46)    Jewelry repair and pawn shops.



      (47)    Launderettes and Laundromats.



      (48)    Libraries, museums, and art galleries.



      (49)    Locksmiths and gunsmiths.



      (50)    Lumberyards, building materials storage and sales,
including open storage when fenced.



      (51)    Machine and welding shops.



      (52)    Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.



      (53)    Manufactured and mobile home and recreation equipment
display lots.



      (54)    Monument works and sales.



      (55)    Hotels/motels.



      (56)    Motorcycle, lawnmower, and power saw sales and service.



      (57)    Newspaper offices and printing plants incidental to
the offices.



      (58)    Offices, business, professional, and public.



      (59)    Opticians and optical goods stores.



      (60)    Photographic studios and camera supply stores.



      (61)    Physical culture and reducing salons excluding massage
parlors and related businesses subject to the provisions of Chapter 63 of
this code.



      (62)    Plumbing and heating supply houses.



      (63)    Printing, publishing, and reproducing establishments.



      (64)    Profit clubs, any structure in which a profit club is
in operation shall be at least 400 feet from any residential use, residential
district, place of worship, school, or licensed child day care and located
not less than 1,500 feet from any other existing profit club and billiard
hall. Measurements of location shall be a straight line from nearest point of
property line to nearest point of property line.



      (65)    Public safety facilities, subject to the conditions of
§ 92.073(C)(5) relating to public safety facilities.



      (66)    Public works and public utility facilities, subject to
the conditions of § 92.073(C)(6) relating to public works and public utility
facilities.



      (67)    Radio and television repair shops, electric shops.



      (68)    Radio and television stations and towers.



      (69)    Railroad stations and yards.



      (70)    Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants, provided
the drive-in restaurants are fenced on all sides which abut residential
districts. The fences shall be solid from the ground to a height of six feet.



      (71)    Retail establishments such as department, clothing,
fabric, shoe, variety, notion, drug, hardware, furniture, appliances, floor
covering, paint, antique, art goods, jewelry, gift, music, toy, sporting
goods, books and stationery, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet, hobby, and craft
stores, but not excluding similar retail outlets.



      (72)    Secondhand stores and swap shops.



      (73)    Service stations, provided that gasoline pump islands
shall be located at least 15 feet behind the property line; provided that
pump island canopies may be constructed to extend to the street right-of-way;
provided further that on all sides where such stations abut residential
districts, a six foot high fence and suitable landscaping shall be provided.



      (74)    Sexually oriented business subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:



         (a)    Spacing from other sexually oriented business. No
such business shall locate within 1,200 feet of any other adult oriented
business, as measured in a straight line from property line to property line;



         (b)    Spacing from other uses. No sexually oriented
business shall be located within 1,000 feet of a church, public or private
elementary school, child day care, nursery school, public park or
residentially zoned property, or within 250 feet of any establishment with an
on premises ABC license, as measured in a straight line from property line to
property line;



         (c)    Maximum area. The gross floor area of any adult
oriented establishment shall not exceed 3,000 square feet;



         (d)    Prohibition of sleeping quarters. Except for an
adult motel/hotel, no adult oriented business may have sleeping quarters;



         (e)    Restriction of uses on the same property or in
the same building, structure, or portion thereof. There shall not be more
than one adult oriented business in the same building, structure or portion
thereof. No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same building,
structure, property, or portion thereof with any adult oriented business;



         (f)    No exceptions from the location requirement of
sexually oriented businesses. The Albemarle Zoning Board of Adjustments shall
have no authority to grant a variance from the separation standards set forth
in (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) above.



      (75)    Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing, heating, and
refrigeration shops.



      (76)    Shoe repair and shine shops.



      (77)    Shops for grooming pet animals, provided that there
are no open kennels.



      (78)    Sign painting and fabricating shops.



      (79)    Tailoring, dressmaking, and millinery shops.



      (80)    Tattoo parlors.



      (81)    Taxicab stands.



      (82)    Telephone and telegraph offices.



      (83)    Tent services conducted by church. Church services
conducted temporarily in a tent when off-street parking is provided and a
permit is obtained from the City Fire Department as required by § 29.1 of
the Fire Prevention Code. Any person or organization desiring to conduct tent
services shall first file an application with the City Clerk stating the
location, date, time, duration, and size and capacity of the tent.



      (84)    Theaters, drive-in, subject to the following
conditions.



         (a)    No part of any theater screen, projection booth,
or other building shall be located closer than 500 feet to any residential
district or closer than 50 feet to any property line of the public
right-of-way; and no parking space shall be located closer than 100 feet to
any residential district.



         (b)    The theater screen shall not face a major street
or highway, and reservoir parking space off the street shall be provided for
patrons awaiting admission in an amount of not less than 30% of the vehicular
capacity of the theater.



      (85)    Theaters housed in permanent indoor structures.



      (86)    Tire recapping shops.



      (87)    Trucking terminals, transfer companies.



      (88)    Vending companies.



      (89)    Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products,
including bottled gas and oxygen.



      (90)    Winery and tasting room.



      (91)    Pilot plant manufacturing not involving chemical
process, noise, odor, smoke, or other environmental pollution, and not
employing more than 50 people, to be conducted in an existing building
originally constructed for other permitted uses in this district but no
longer suitable for the commercial uses; provided that off-street parking is
provided for all employees, visitors, and loading operations.



      (92)    Nursery schools and kindergartens; provided that at
least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is provided for each child.



      (93)    Skateboarding (indoor and outdoor except upon any
public sidewalk and street as prohibited by G.S. § 82-37.1).



      (94)    Inflatables (indoor and outdoor).



      (95)    Paintball (indoor and outdoor).



      (96)    Fitness gym (indoor).



      (97)    Batting cages (indoor and outdoor).



      (98)    Zip-line (indoor and outdoor).



      (99)    Rock climbing (indoor and outdoor).



      (100)    Laser-tag (indoor and outdoor).



      (101)    Micro-brewery.



      (102)    Brewery.



      (103)    Tasting room (accessory use for retail beer or wine
store - indoors, if allowed by state regulations.



      (104)    Automotive rental (car and truck).



      (105)    Boarding kennel, provided no outdoor kennels are
allowed.



      (106)   General gaming establishment.



      (107)    Extended stay hotel/motels when located not less than
one half mile from the same use.



      (108)    Inpatient rehabilitation facilities when located at
least one half mile from the same use.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing.



      (1)    Wholesale and warehousing establishments.



      (2)    Pilot plant manufacturing not involving chemical
processes, noise, odor, smoke, or any other environmental pollution and not
employing more than 150 people, to be conducted in an existing building
originally constructed for other permitted uses in this district but no
longer suitable for the commercial uses. The permit granted shall be for no
longer than two years, and off-street parking shall be provided for all
employees, visitors, and loading operations.



      (3)    Coal and wood sales.



      (4)    A building or group of buildings that contain varying
sizes of individual, compartmentalized, controlled, and exterior-accessed
stalls or lockers for the dead storage of non-hazardous materials; provided,
however, that the storage units shall be enclosed by a fence not less than
six feet in height. No business activities other than the rental of storage
units shall be conducted on the premises.



      (5)    Light manufacturing not involving chemical processes,
noise, odor, smoke, or other environmental pollution and not employing more
than 50 people. The operation shall be conducted in an existing building
originally constructed for other permitted uses in this district but no
longer suitable for those uses; and provided that the manufacturing process
has been operated as a pilot plant operation as a conditional use as provided
in division (2) above and an environmental impact report is prepared at the
expense of the applicant based on the pilot operation. The manufacturing
process may not be changed to any other than that used during the pilot
project and covered by the environmental impact report, nor shall this permit
be transferable to another owner. Off-street parking shall be provided for
all employees, visitors, and loading operations.



      (6)    The collection of nonhazardous recyclable materials
such as aluminum cans, glass, and paper, provided that adequate packing be
provided, no litter or trash be allowed, and there be no outside storage.



      (7)    Beach bingo as defined in G.S. § 309.6(6), provided
that at each establishment where operated there shall be one parking space
for each four seats provided for patron use, plus one parking space for each
100 square feet of floor or ground area used for amusement or assembly, but
not containing fixed seats.



      (8)    Telecommunication towers and facilities complying with
the provision of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances.



      (9)    Billiard halls provided that they shall be located not
less than 1,500 feet from any other existing profit club or billiard hall.
Measurements of location shall be a straight line from nearest point of
property line to nearest point of property line.



      (10)    Go-cart tracks.



      (11)    Flea market - outdoor.



      (12)    Emergency temporary housing when located not less than
one half mile from the same use.



      (13)    Donation drop boxes, trailers, accessory buildings or
any other method of collection for donated items including but not limited to
clothing that is located outside the principal structure on the property
shall meet all of the following:



         (a)    Operated by a nonprofit group [IRS § 501(c)(3)];



         (b)    Display the owner's name and phone number in
prominent location on the donation drop box and a list of charitable
activities that will benefit from donation;



         (c)    Located on a developed lot that is owned or
leased by the nonprofit group who maintain the boxes;



         (d)    Located no closer than 20 feet to any public
street right-of-way;



         (e)    Constructed of noncombustible material and be
watertight and properly maintained;



         (f)    Removal of any donations left outside the box
within 36 hours;



         (g)    Not be located within any parking space or within
any landscaped area required by regulations of the City of Albemarle Code;



         (h)    Obtain a City of Albemarle conditional use permit
prior to placement.



   (D)    Any donation box placed in the zoning jurisdiction of the
city without an approved conditional use permit will be impounded on city
property and the owner of the box must pay an impoundment fee of $100 per
box. If boxes have a telephone number or email information on them, city
staff will attempt to make contact and advise that contact that they will
have 72 hours from the time of contact to remove the box prior to impoundment.



   (E)    After a box is impounded, the owner must contact the Planning
Department to arrange payment and show proof of ownership before the box is
returned. Boxed left in impoundment over 60 days will be disposed of by the
city.



   (F)    The uses allowed under this § 92.080 may be carried on in
group business developments as defined in § 92.008.



(‘58 Code, §§ 19-87 and 19-91) (Ord. 79-1, passed 1-15-79; Am. Ord. 79-4,
passed 6-25-79; Am. 79-12, passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. 80-9, passed 5-19-80; Am.
Ord. 81-3, passed 3-16-81; Am. 81-8, passed 4-21-81; Am. Ord. 83-28, passed -
- ; Am. Ord. 86-8, passed 5-19-86; Am. Ord. 87-8, passed 5-11-87; Am. Ord.
88-9, passed 4-18-88; Am. Ord. 88-17, passed 6-12-88; Am. Ord. 89-4, passed
4-3-89; Am. Ord. 89-15, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 93-23, passed 6-21-93; Am.
Ord. 94-17, passed 8-15-94; Am. Ord. 94-30, passed 12-19-94; Am. Ord. 97-08,
passed 3-17-97; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98; Am. Ord. 99-23, passed
6-21-99; Am. Ord. 00-36, passed 10-16-00; Am. Ord. 00-47, passed 12-18-00;
Am. Ord. 17-01, passed 4-16-01; Am. Ord. 01-34, passed 7-16-01; Am. Ord.
02-48, passed 10-21-02; Am. Ord. 06-06, passed 2-6-06; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed
4-3-06; Am. Ord. 07-21, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 08-21, passed 6-16-08; Am.
Ord. 08-27, passed 7-21-08; Am. Ord. 11-35, passed 12-19-11; Am. Ord. 12-09,
passed 3-19-12; Am. Ord. 12-14, passed 4-16-12; Am. Ord. 12-33, passed
10-15-12; Am. Ord. 13-23, passed 6-17-13; Am. Ord 14-28, passed 10-6-14; Am.
Ord. 17-15, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.081  SCD SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT.



   (A)    The purpose of a Shopping Center District is to provide an
orderly arrangement of convenience and comparison shopping outlets along with
adequate off-street parking and other amenities.



   (B)    In a Shopping Center District, land shall be used hereafter,
and buildings when constructed, altered, extended, or used, shall be used for
one or more of the following uses, and according to the conditions herein
specified for approval prior to use.



      (1)    Accessory and related uses.



      (2)    Adult gaming establishment.



         (a)    Adult gaming establishments shall not be located
in the same building or property where any place of worship, any public or
private school, any licensed child day care facility, or any other existing
adult gaming establishment is located. Adult gaming establishments shall also
not be placed on properties within 500 feet of any of the aforementioned
uses, measured by a straight line from nearest point of property line to
nearest point of property line.



         (b)    Access. All adult gaming establishments shall be
open and visible from the front interior of the establishment. At all times
while open for business and while patrons are on the premises, adult gaming
establishments shall be open for direct, unobstructed access by police
officers, fire department personnel, development services department Staff
and emergency response personnel. Entrance doors shall remain unlocked at all
times while patrons are on the premises. Police officers, fire department
personnel, development services and emergency response personnel shall have
direct access to the premises without requiring assistance from an employee,
agent, or owner of the establishment.



         (c)    Hours of operation. No person or entity engaged
in adult gaming establishments shall engage in the business before 10:00 a.m.
or after 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday and shall not engage in
business before 1:00 p.m. or after 12:00 midnight on Sundays. No playing on
any device shall be allowed during the times when computer gaming
establishments are required by this chapter to remain closed.



         (d)    Age restrictions. No adult gaming establishment
shall allow, permit, or condone any person under the age of 18 to engage in
adult gaming operations or supervise operation of machines.



         (e)    Signage. Adult gaming establishments shall
prominently post the rules of their games.



         (f)    Maximum number. The maximum number of
terminals/computers/ machines/gaming stations or total number of patrons
using gaming apparatus at one time within an adult gaming establishment is 20.



         (g)    In addition to all applicable enforcement
procedures permissible by city code, any violation of the aforementioned
conditions shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000 for the first
violation and $5,000 for each subsequent violation. Each successive day a
particular violation occurs shall be considered a unique violation incident.
Notice of violation and citation shall be sent to parties in accordance with
notification procedures in Chapter 10. When more than five violation
incidents occur in any calendar year the use shall be terminated and shall be
prohibited anywhere on the property for one year from date of closure.
Closure shall be enforceable by the Albemarle Police Department.



      (3)    Alcoholic beverages, packaged, retail sales.



      (4)    Automobile parking lots and structures.



      (5)    Bakeries, where the products are sold exclusively at
retail on the premises only.



      (6)    Banks and other financial institutions, including loan
and finance companies.



      (7)    Barber and beauty shops.



      (8)    Bowling alleys.



      (9)    Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail sales
on the premises only.



      (10)    Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations and dry
cleaning plants as described in § 92.079(B)(9).



      (11)    Floral shops, but not commercial greenhouses.



      (12)    Food stores, retail only, but excluding the killing
and dressing of any flesh or fowl.



      (13)    General gaming establishment.



      (14)    Jewelry repair shops.



      (15)    Launderettes and laundromats.



      (16)    Libraries, museums, and art galleries.



      (17)    Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.



      (18)    Offices, business, professional, and public.



      (19)    Office supplies and equipment, sales and service.



      (20)    Opticians and optical goods stores.



      (21)    Photographic studios and camera supply stores.



      (22)    Physical culture and reducing salons or similar
establishments, excluding massage parlors and related businesses subject to
the provisions of Chapter 63 of this code.



      (23)    Printing and reproduction establishments.



      (24)    Radio and television repair shops.



      (25)    Restaurants, but not drive-in restaurants.



      (26)    Retail establishments such as department, clothing,
fabric, shoe, variety, notion, drug, hardware, furniture, appliance, floor
covering, paint, antique, art goods, jewelry, gift, music, toy, sporting
goods, books and stationery, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet and hobby, and
craft stores, but not excluding similar retail outlets.



      (27)    Service stations, but not including major repair work,
provided that gasoline pump islands shall be located at least 15 feet behind
the property line, and that pump island canopies may be constructed to extend
to the street right-of-way.



      (28)    Sexually oriented business subject to the following
conditions and restrictions:



         (a)    Spacing from other sexually oriented business. No
such business shall locate within 1,200 feet of any other adult oriented
business, as measured in a straight line from property line to property line;



         (b)    Spacing from other uses. No sexually oriented
business shall be located within 1,000 feet of a church, public or private
elementary school, child day care or nursery school, public park,
residentially zoned property, or any establishment with an on premise ABC
license, as measured in a straight line from property line to property line;



         (c)    Maximum area. The gross floor area of any adult
oriented establishment shall not exceed 3,000 square feet;



         (d)    Prohibition of sleeping quarters. Except for an
adult motel/hotel, no adult oriented business may have sleeping quarters;



         (e)    Restriction of uses on the same property or in
the same building, structure, or portion thereof. There shall not be more
than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or
portion thereof. No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same
building, structure, property, or portion thereof with any sexually oriented
business;



         (f)    No exceptions from the location requirement of
sexually oriented businesses. The Albemarle Zoning Board of Adjustments shall
have no authority to grant a variance from the separation standards set forth
in (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) above.



      (29)    Shoe repair and shine shops.



      (30)    Skating rinks.



      (31)    Tent services conducted by church. Church services
conducted temporarily in a tent when off-street parking is provided and a
permit is obtained from the City Fire Department as required by § 29.1 of
the Fire Prevention Code. Any person or organization desiring to conduct tent
services shall first file an application with the City Clerk stating the
location, date, time, duration, and size and capacity of the tent.



      (32)    Tailoring, dressmaking, and millinery shops.



      (33)    Theaters.



      (34)    Churches and related uses.



      (35)    Pilot plant manufacturing not involving chemical
process, noise, odor, smoke, or other environmental pollution, and not
employing more than 50 people, to be conducted in an existing building
originally constructed for other permitted uses in this district but no
longer suitable for the commercial uses, provided, that off-street parking is
provided for all employees, visitors, and loading operations.



   (C)    Area requirements for shopping center districts are as
follows.



      (1)    No SCD shopping center shall contain less than four
acres.



      (2)    No land in an SCD category shall be across a street
from the commercially-zoned land to which it is added.



      (3)    Where a planned shopping center is proposed for a
location not already designated as a Shopping Center District, the procedure
for obtaining a rezoning of the area to SCD shall require the submission of a
development plan as described in division (D) below, as well as the regular
amendment procedure set forth in § 92.100.



   (D)    In a Shopping Center District, the owner or developer shall
submit a development plan at a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet,
to the Planning Board, showing the following.



      (1)    Dimensions of the property and adjacent lots and
streets.



      (2)    Location and proposed use of all buildings with
dimensions and ground area thereof.



      (3)    The parking area with spaces, channelization, and
ratios shown.



      (4)    Service areas, off-street loading facilities, service
drives, and dimensions thereof.



      (5)    All pedestrian ways and canopies.



      (6)    Title, giving the names of the developers, the date,
scale of the plan, and the person or firm preparing the plan.



      (7)    Landscaping and proper buffers between adjacent uses.



   (E)    No building permit shall be issued for any building in a
Shopping Center District until a development plan is approved by the City
Council. No building permit shall be issued for any building not shown first
on the approved development plan unless changes have been submitted to the
Planning Board and the Council for approval, at which time the Building
Inspector may issue building permits based on the revised development plan.
Actual construction shall begin within one year from the date final approval
is granted. In the event the Planning Board and the Council find that the
intent of this section has not been met or construction has not begun within
one year, resubmission of the development plan shall be required. It is not
the intent of this section to prohibit a reasonable extension of the one year
limit by the Council.



   (F)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing: colleges;
universities; technical institutes; public elementary and secondary schools;
private schools having curricula substantially the same as offered in public
schools and including dormitories when located on the campus of any of the
above; the collection of nonhazardous materials such as aluminum cans, glass,
and paper, provided that adequate packing is provided, no litter or trash is
allowed, and there is no outside storage; beach bingo as defined in G.S. §
309.6(6), provided that at each establishment where operated there shall be
one parking space for each four seats provided for patron use plus one
parking space for each 100 square feet of floor or ground area used for
amusement or assembly, but not containing fixed seats; auto sales, new and
used; telecommunication towers and facilities complying with the provision of
§ 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances, and billiard halls and they shall
be located not less than 1,500 feet from any other existing profit club or
billiard hall measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the
property line to nearest point of the property line; and battered group care
facilities.



(‘58 Code, § 19-88)    (Ord. 79-1, passed 1-15-79; Am. Ord. 79-4,
passed 6-25-79; Am. Ord. 79-12, passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. 80-9, passed
5-19-80; Am. Ord. 87-16, passed 7-20-87; Am. Ord. 88-9, passed 4-18-88; Am.
Ord. 88-17, passed 6-12-87; Am. Ord. 89-4, passed 4-3-89; Am. Ord. 91-3,
passed 1-28-91; Am. Ord. 92-24, passed 8-19-92; Am. Ord. 93-23, passed
6-21-93; Am. Ord. 97-08, passed 3-17-97; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98; Am.
Ord. 98-24, passed 6-15-98; Am. Ord. 99-40, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 00-47,
passed 12-18-00; Am. Ord. 01-18, passed 4-16-01; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed
4-3-06; Am. Ord. 17-15, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.081A  MUSCD MIXED USE SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT.



   (A)    The purpose of a Mixed Shopping Center District is to provide
an adaptive reuse for existing shopping centers in single ownership.



   (B)    In a Mixed Use Shopping Center District, land shall be used
hereafter, and buildings when constructed, altered, extended, or used, shall
be used for one or more of the following uses:



      (1)    All uses permitted in SCD Shopping Center District.



      (2)    Bowling alleys, skating rinks, and other commercial
recreation facilities.



      (3)    Business colleges, barber and beauty shops, art
schools, music, and dance studios.



      (4)    Electric shops.



      (5)    Pawn shops.



      (6)    Secondhand stores and swap



      (7)    Pilot plant manufacturing not involving chemical
process, noise, odor, smoke, or other environmental pollution, and not
employing more than 50 people, to be conducted in an existing building
originally constructed for other permitted uses in this district but no
longer suitable for the commercial uses; provided, that off street parking is
provided for all employees, visitors, and loading operations.



   (C)    Area requirements for Mixed Use Shopping Center Districts are
as follows: where a planned Mixed Use Shopping Center is proposed, the
procedure for obtaining a rezoning of the area to MUSCD shall require the
submission of a development plan as described in division (D) below, as well
as the regular amendment procedure set forth in § 92.100.



   (D)    In a Mixed Use Shopping Center District, the owner or
developer shall submit a development plan drawn to scale, to the Planning
Board, showing the following:



      (1)    Dimensions of the property.



      (2)    Location of all buildings with dimensions.



      (3)    Parking area with spaces and ratios.



      (4)    Internal traffic flow.



      (5)    Current and proposed driveways.



   (E)    No building permit shall be issued for any building in a
Mixed Use Shopping Center District until a development plan is approved by
the City Council. No building permit shall be issued for any building not
shown first on the approved development plan unless changes have been
submitted to the Planning Board and the Council for approval, at which time
the Building Inspector may issue building permits based on the revised
development plan. Actual construction shall begin within one year from the
date final approval is granted. In the event the Planning Board and the
Council find that the intent of this section has not been met or construction
has not begun within one year, resubmission of the development plan shall be
required. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit a reasonable
extension of the one-year limit by the Council.



   (F)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing: all conditional
uses permitted in the GHBD/General Highway Business District and the
SCD/Shopping Center Districts and according to the conditions therein
specified for approved prior to use, including telecommunication towers and
facilities complying with the provisions of § 92.067 of the City Code of
Ordinances.



(Ord. 90-10, passed 8-6-90; Am. Ord. 93-23, passed 6-21-93; Am. Ord. 97-58,
passed 1-5-98; Am. Ord. 00-47, passed 12-18-00; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed
4-3-06; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18)



§ 92.082  HMD HOSPITAL-MEDICAL CENTER DISTRICT.



   (A)    The regulations of the HMD Hospital-Medical Center District
are intended to provide for a restricted Hospital-Medical Center District and
related facilities.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted.



      (1)    Accessory and related uses.



      (2)    Churches and their customary related uses, except
cemeteries. Services to be conducted temporarily in a tent shall be allowed
on church property as a customary related use when off-street parking is
provided and a permit is obtained from the City Fire Department as required
by § 29.1 of the Fire Prevention Code. Any person or organization desiring
to conduct tent services shall first file an application with the City Clerk
stating the location, date, time, duration, and size and capacity of the tent.



      (3)    Floral shops.



      (4)    Hospitals, sanitariums, and health centers, and their
related uses.



      (5)    Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.



      (6)    Opticians and optical services.



      (7)    Optometrists and chiropractors.



      (8)    Pharmacies, and apothecary stores with fountains.



      (9)    Level IV treatment facilities for mental rehabilitation
for minor children up to 17 years of age.



      (10)    Specialized community residential center for
individuals with developmental disabilities, with lodging facilities for
visitors.



      (11)    Restaurants.



      (12)    Event center/assembly hall.



      (13)    Inpatient rehabilitation facilities when located at
least one half mile from the same use.



      (14)    Orphanages and adoption care facilities.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing: colleges,
universities, technical institutes, public elementary and secondary schools,
and private schools having curricula substantially the same as offered in
public schools and including dormitories when located on the campus of any of
the above; and telecommunication towers and facilities complying with the
provision of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances.



(‘58 Code, § 19-89)    (Ord. 79-1, passed 1-15-79; Am. Ord. 79-4,
passed 6-25-79; Am. Ord. 79-5, passed 4-23-79; Am. Ord. 79-12, passed
8-20-79; Am. Ord. 87-8, passed 5-11-87; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98; Am.
Ord. 05-11, passed 3-21-05; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 92-082,
passed 8-17-09; Am. Ord. 16-09, passed 4-4-16 ; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed
9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.083  CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)    The regulations of this district are intended to permit the
convenient performance of functions requiring a location near the
transportation and population center of a large trade area and to provide the
City of Albemarle with a compact and efficient retail shopping, consumer
services, financial and governmental center.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted:



      (1)    Accessory buildings and uses.



      (2)    Alcoholic beverages, packaged, retail sales.



      (3)    Assembly halls, armories, and similar facilities.



      (4)    Automobile parking lots and structures.



      (5)    Automobile parts and supplies, new.



      (6)    Automobile repair garages.



      (7)    Automobile sales and display of new vehicles.



      (8)    Automobile washing establishments.



      (9)    Bakeries, where the products are sold exclusively at
retail on the premises.



      (10)    Banks and other financial institutions, including loan
and finance companies.



      (11)    Barber and beauty shops.



      (12)    Bicycle shops.



      (13)    Bowling alleys and skating rinks.



      (14)    Building material outlets.



      (15)    Bus stations.



      (16)    Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, art
schools, music and dance studios, and similar uses.



      (17)    Churches and their customary related uses, except
cemeteries. Services to be conducted temporarily in a tent shall be allowed
on church property as a customary related use when off-street parking is
provided and a permit is obtained from the City Fire Department as required
by § 29.1 of the Fire Prevention Code. Any person or organization desiring
to conduct tent services shall first file an application with the City Clerk
stating the location, date, time, duration, and size and capacity of the tent.



      (18)    Clubs and lodges operated on a nonprofit basis as
evidenced by an Internal Revenue Service tax exemption granted under the
provisions of § 501(C)(3) and (4) of the Internal Revenue Code and which
cater exclusively to their members and their guests.



      (19)    Chiropractic and dental clinics.



      (20)    Curio and souvenir shops.



      (21)    Customary accessory uses and structures when located
on the same lot as the principal structures, except open storage.



      (22)    Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail
sales on the premises only.



      (23)    Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations and dry
cleaning plants, having less than 2,000 square feet of floor space, provided
the emission of steam and other obnoxious by-products is controlled.



      (24)    Farm and industrial equipment sales and display of new
equipment.



      (25)    Farm machinery dealers.



      (26)    Feed and seed stores.



      (27)    Floral shops.



      (28)    Food stores and meat markets, retail only, but
excluding the killing or dressing of flesh or fowl.



      (29)    Freezer lockers.



      (30)    Fruit stands.



      (31)    Furriers and fur storage.



      (32)    Glass and awning shops.



      (33)    Golf courses, parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, and
community centers.



      (34)    Greenhouses and truck gardens (private).



      (35)    Greenhouses, commercial.



      (36)    Hotels/motels.



      (37)    Industrial supply houses.



      (38)    Industrial trade schools.



      (39)    Jewelry repair and pawn shops.



      (40)    Laundromats.



      (41)    Libraries, museums, and art galleries.



      (42)    Locksmiths and gunsmiths.



      (43)    Medical and dental clinics and laboratories.



      (44)    Multi-family residences.



      (45)    Newspaper offices and printing plants incidental to
the offices.



      (46)    Nursery schools and kindergartens.



      (47)    Off-street parking lots, but a special use permit.



      (48)    Office supplies and equipment, sales and service.



      (49)    Offices, business, professional and public.



      (50)    Opticians and optical goods stores.



      (51)    Orthopedic supply houses.



      (52)    Photographic studios and camera supply stores.



      (53)    Physical culture and reducing salons, or similar
establishments, excluding massage parlors and related businesses subject to
the provisions of Chapter 63 of this Code.



      (54)    Plumbing and heating supply houses.



      (55)    Printing, publishing, and reproducing establishments.



      (56)    Public safety facilities, subject to the conditions
listed under § 92.073(C)(5) relative to public safety facilities.



      (57)    Public works and public utility facilities, subject to
the conditions listed under § 92.073(C)(6) relative to public utility
facilities.



      (58)    Radio and television repair shops, electric shops.



      (59)    Research labs.



      (60)    Restaurants, both drive-ins and those which are not
drive-ins.



      (61)    Retail establishments such as department, clothing,
fabric, shoe, variety, notions, drug, hardware, furniture, appliance, floor
covering, paint, antique, art goods, jewelry gift, music, toy, sporting
goods, book and stationery, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet and hobby, and
craft stores, but not excluding similar retail outlets.



      (62)    Saw shops and the like (contained in building).



      (63)    Schools and colleges, public and private, elementary
and secondary.



      (64)    Secondhand stores.



      (65)    Service stations, but not including major repair work,
provided the stations have a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet with a
frontage of not less than 100 feet. No portion of a service station building
nor any of its equipment shall be nearer than 15 feet to the street
right-of-way. A canopy may be erected over the pump island which may extend
to the street right-of-way. Minor engine repairing, tune-up, and tire
repairing shall be permitted if conducted wholly inside a structure.



      (66)    Shoe repair and shine shops.



      (67)    Single-family residences.



      (68)    Tailoring, dressmaking, and millinery shops.



      (69)    Taxicab stands.



      (70)    Telephone and telegraph offices.



      (71)    Theaters housed in a permanent indoor structure.



      (72)    Tire shops, but excluding recapping establishments.



      (73)    Two-family residences.



      (74)    Vending companies.



      (75)    Adult day care centers.



      (76)    Funeral homes and mortuaries.



      (77)    Pilot plant manufacturing not involving chemical
process, noise, odor, smoke, or other environmental pollution, and not
employing more than 50 people, to be conducted in an existing building
originally constructed for other permitted uses in this district but no
longer suitable for the commercial uses; provided, that off-street parking is
provided for all employees, visitors, and loading operations.



      (78)    Farmer's markets and related uses.



      (79)    Inflatables (indoor).



      (80)    Fitness gyms (indoor).



      (81)    Batting cages (indoor).



      (82)    Skateboarding (indoor and outdoor except upon any
public sidewalk or street as prohibited by G.S. § 82-37.1).



      (83)    Laser-tag (indoors).



      (84)    Rock climbing (indoor).



      (85)    Specialty food and drink shop.  Coffee or tea shop,
smoothie bar, ice cream or frozen yogurt shop.



      (86)    Microbrewery.



      (87)    Tasting room (accessory use for retail beer or wine
store - indoors, if allowed by state regulations).



      (88)    Automotive sales of new and used vehicles.



      (89)    Automotive rental (car and truck).



      (90)    General gaming establishment.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing:



      (1)    Colleges, universities, technical institutes, public
elementary and secondary schools, and private schools having curricula
substantially the same as offered in public schools and including dormitories
when located on the campus of any of the above.



      (2)    Light manufacturing not involving chemical process,
noise, odor, smoke, or other environmental pollution, and provided that the
operation be conducted in an existing building originally constructed for
other permitted uses in this district but no longer suitable for the uses;
and further provided that the manufacturing process has been operated as a
pilot plant operation as a conditional use as provided in division (3) below,
and not employing more than 50 people; that an environmental impact report is
prepared at the expense of the applicant based upon the pilot operation. The
manufacturing process may not be changed to any other than that used during
the pilot project and covered by the environmental impact report, nor shall
this permit be transferable to another owner. Off-street parking shall be
provided for all employees, visitors, and loading operations.



      (3)    Pilot plant manufacturing not involving chemical
process, noise, odor, smoke, or other environmental pollution, and not
employing more than 150 people, to be conducted in an existing building
originally constructed for other permitted uses in this district but no
longer suitable for the commercial uses. The permit granted under this
division shall be for no longer than two years; provided that off-street
parking is provided for all employees, visitors, and loading operations.



      (4)    The collection of non-hazardous recyclable materials
such as aluminum cans, glass, and paper provided that: adequate parking is
provided; no litter or trash is allowed; and there is no outside storage.



      (5)    Bed and breakfast homes when located not less than 500
feet from the same use.



      (6)    Telecommunication towers and facilities complying with
the provision of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances.



      (7)    Billiard halls and they shall be at least 1,500 feet
from any other existing profit club or billiard hall. Measurements of
location shall be a straight line from the nearest point of the property line
to the nearest point of the property line.



(‘58 Code, § 19-90)    (Ord. 79-1, passed 1-15-79; Am. Ord. 79-4,
passed 6-25-79; Am. Ord. 79-12, passed 8-20-79; Am. Ord. 80-9, passed
5-19-80; Am. Ord. 81-3, passed 3-16-81; Am. Ord. 86-8, passed 5-19-86; Am.
Ord. 86-26, passed l1-3-86; Am. Ord. 86-28, passed 11-18-86; Am. Ord. 87-8,
passed 5-11-87; Am. Ord. 90-4, passed 3-6-90; Am. Ord. 93-23, passed 6-21-93;
Am. Ord. 96-28, passed 11-18-96; Am. Ord. 96-31, passed 11-18-96; Am. Ord.
97-58, passed 1-5-98; Am. Ord. 99-40, passed 8-2-99; Am. Ord. 00-47, passed
12-18-00; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 07-21, passed 7-16-07; Am.
Ord. 12-33, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 17-15, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 18-31,
passed 9-4-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.084  LID LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)    The LID Light Industrial District is designed to accommodate
industries and warehousing operations which can be operated in a relatively
clean and quiet manner and which will not be obnoxious to adjacent
residential and business districts.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted.



      (1)    A building or group of buildings that contain varying
sizes of individual, compartmentalized, controlled, and exterior-accessed
stalls or lockers for the dead storage of non-hazardous materials. No
business activities other than the rental storage units shall be conducted
premises; provided however, that storage units shall be enclosed by a fence
not less than six feet in height.



      (2)    Aluminum can and glass bottle collection, crushing, and
distribution.



      (3)    Automobile sales, new and used.



      (4)    Automobile parking lots and structures.



      (5)    Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing
prepared food products for wholesale distribution.



      (6)    Boat works and sales.



      (7)    Bottling works.



      (8)    Building materials and equipment sales, including open
storage when fenced.



      (9)    Cabinet, woodworking, and upholstery shops.



      (10)    Circuses and carnivals.



      (11)    Clothing and textile manufacturing.



      (12)    Contractors' offices and storage yards, provided open
storage is enclosed by a fence of at least eight feet in height.



      (13)    Customary accessory uses and structures including open
storage, provided the area devoted to open storage is enclosed by a fence at
least eight feet in height.



      (14)    Dairy products processing and distributing facilities
including dairy bars.



      (15)    Dry cleaning and laundry plants.



      (16)    Electrical appliances and electronic equipment
manufacturing.



      (17)    Electrical supplies and equipment sales, and service.



      (18)    Farm machinery, assembly, sales, and repairs.



      (19)    Furniture manufacturing.



      (20)    Glass and mirror shops, venetian blind and awning
shops, tile companies, and similar building specialties outlets.



      (21)    Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries.



      (22)    Industrial supplies and equipment, sales, and service.



      (23)    Industrial trade schools, research laboratories.



      (24)    Light manufacturing or processing not otherwise named
herein, provided no operations are carried on, or are likely to be carried on
which will create smoke, fumes, noise, odor, or dust which will be
detrimental to the character of the district or to the health, safety, or
general welfare of the community.



      (25)    Leather products and luggage manufacturing.



      (26)    Lumberyards, building materials storage, and sales,
including open storage when fenced.



      (27)    Paper goods manufacturing and distributing.



      (28)    Pharmaceutical manufacturing and distributing.



      (29)    Plumbing and heating supply houses, including open
storage when fenced.



      (30)    Precision instrument manufacturing.



      (31)    Printing, publishing, and reproducing establishments.



      (32)    Public safety facilities, subject to the conditions
listed under § 92.073(C)(5), relative to public safety facilities.



      (33)    Public works and public utility facilities subject to
the conditions listed under § 92.073(C)(6), relative to public utility
facilities.



      (34)    Railroad stations and yards.



      (35)    Service stations and automobile repair garages,
including body works, but excluding open storage of wrecked vehicles.
However, no portion of a service station building nor any of its equipment
shall be nearer than 15 feet to the street right-of-way.



      (36)    Sign painting and fabricating shops.



      (37)    Trucking terminals, transfer companies.



      (38)    Vending companies.



      (39)    Wholesale and warehousing establishments, except for
the storage of dangerous or offensive items such as uncured hides and
explosives.



      (40)    Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products,
including bottled gas and oxygen.



      (41)    Church services conducted temporarily in a tent when
off-street parking is provided and a permit is obtained from the City Fire
Department as required by § 29.1 of the Fire Prevention Code. Any person or
organization desiring to conduct tent services shall first file an
application with the City Clerk stating the location, date, time, duration,
and size and capacity of the tent.



      (42)    Bowling alleys.



      (43)    Skating rinks.



      (44)    Baseball and golf driving ranges.



      (45)    Miniature and par-three golf courses.



      (46)    Mechanical rides.



      (47)    Riding stables.



      (48)    Commercial recreational facilities.



      (49)    Offices, business, professional and public.



      (50)    Auction houses where all sales are conducted within an
enclosed structure and non goods or wares are stored or displayed on the
premises outside the auction house and there is provided one space of
off-street parking for each four seats of patron use plus one space for each
100 square feet of floor space not containing seats.



      (51)    Feed and seed stores.



      (52)    Garden centers and produce markets.



      (53)    Secondhand stores and swap shops.



      (54)    Skateboarding (indoor and outdoor except upon any
public sidewalk and street as prohibited by G.S. § 82-37.1.



      (55)    Inflatables (indoor and outdoor).



      (56)    Paintball (indoor and outdoor).



      (57)    Batting cages (indoor and outdoor).



      (58)    Zip-line (indoor and outdoor).



      (59)    Rock climbing (indoor and outdoor).



      (60)    Laser tag (indoor and outdoor).



      (61)    Micro-brewery.



      (62)    Brewery.



      (63)    Tasting room (accessory use for retail beer or wine
store - indoors, if allowed by state regulations).



      (64)    Automotive rentals (car and truck).



      (65)    Boarding kennel, provided no outdoor kennels are
allowed.



      (66)    Crematory.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing: colleges,
universities, technical institutes, public elementary and secondary schools,
and private schools having curricula substantially the same as offered in
public schools and including dormitories when located on the campus of any of
the above; automobile towing and temporary storage services; go-cart tracks;
flea market - outdoor; and telecommunication towers and facilities complying
with the provision of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances.



(‘58 Code, § 19-92) (Ord. 79-1, passed 1-15-79; Am. Ord. 79-12, passed
8-20-79; Am. Ord. 80-3, passed 3-3-80; Am. Ord. 81-3, passed 3-16-81; Am.
Ord. 87-8, passed 5-11-87; Am. Ord. 90-13, passed 7-17-90; Am. Ord. 94-30,
passed 12-19-94; Am. Ord. 96-23, passed 9-16-96; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed
1-5-98; Am. Ord. 00-36, passed 10-16-00; Am. Ord. 06-06, passed 2-6-06; Am.
Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 07-15, passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 09-35,
passed 10-19-09; Am. Ord. 12-33, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed
10-6-14; Am. Ord. 14-38, passed 12-1-14; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18)
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.085  HID HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)    The HID Heavy Industrial District is designed to accommodate
all but the most obnoxious industries. However, it is expected that
industries permitted here by right will minimize their emission of smoke,
dust, fumes, glare, noise, and vibrations.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted.



      (1)    Any use permitted in the LID Light Industrial District.



      (2)    A building or group of buildings that contain varying
sizes of individual, compartmentalized, controlled and exterior-accessed
stalls or lockers for the dead storage of nonhazardous materials. No business
activities other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the
premises.



      (3)    Airports.



      (4)    Aluminum can and glass bottle collection, crushing, and
distribution.



      (5)    Veterinary facilities.



      (6)    Automobile junkyards and scrap metal dealers, provided
that the premises are enclosed by a solid fence not-less than ten feet in
height.



      (7)    Automobile repair garages, including body works, but
excluding open storage of wrecked cars unless they are enclosed by a fence
not less than ten feet in height.



      (8)    Bedding and carpet manufacturing and cleaning
establishments.



      (9)    Brick, tile, and pottery yards.



      (10)    Bus repair and storage terminals.



      (11)    Chemical manufacturing, household or industrial.



      (12)    Coal and wood yards, pole treating plants.



      (13)    Cotton gins, cotton waste, and rag processing.



      (14)    Customary accessory uses and structures including open
storage.



      (15)    Feed and seed stores.



      (16)    Fertilizer manufacturing.



      (17)    Flour and feed mills.



      (18)    Foundries producing iron, steel, copper, brass, and
aluminum products.



      (19)    Hatcheries.



      (20)    Ice and cold storage plants, freezer lockers.



      (21)    Livestock sales barns.



      (22)    Machine and welding shops.



      (23)    Machine tool manufacturing.



      (24)    Manufacturing uses not otherwise named herein upon the
review by the Planning Board and approval by the City Council, provided that
no use shall be permitted in this district which is likely to be dangerous,
offensive, or detrimental to the health, safety, welfare, or general
character of this zoning district, or of the community by reason of the
emission of dust, smoke, gas, noise, fumes, odors, vibration, glare, or usual
threat of fire or explosion. However, potentially obnoxious uses may be
allowed in this district, provided the applicant submits detailed plans
indicating proposed control methods.



      (25)    Meat packing and poultry processing plants.



      (26)    Metal fabricating plants, including boiler and tank
works.



      (27)    Mixing plants for concrete or paving materials, the
manufacturing of concrete products.



      (28)    Monument works and sales.



      (29)    Plastics, rubber, and glass products manufacturing.



      (30)    Public works and public utilities facilities,
including service and storage yards.



      (31)    Quarries.



      (32)    Radio and television stations and towers.



      (33)    Sawmills, planing mills, and wooden box factories.



      (34)    Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing, heating, and
refrigeration shops.



      (35)    Tire recapping shops.



      (36)    Crematory.



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing: colleges,
universities, technical institutes, public elementary and secondary schools,
and private schools having curricula substantially the same as offered in
public schools and including dormitories when located on the campus of any of
the above; automobile towing and temporary storage services; flea market -
outdoor; and telecommunication towers and facilities complying with the
provision of § 92.067 of the City Code of Ordinances.



(‘58 Code, § 19-93) (Ord. 79-1, passed 1-15-79; Am. Ord. 79-12, passed
8-20-79; Am. Ord. 81-3, passed 3-16-81; Am. Ord. 97-58, passed 1-5-98; Am.
Ord. 06-06, passed 2-6-06; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 07-15,
passed 5-21-07; Am. Ord. 14-28, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 14-38, passed
12-1-14 ; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.085A  NORTHEAST CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The Northeast Corridor (NEC) Overlay
District (defined as a set of zoning requirements, described in the text,
mapped, and imposed in addition to those of the underlying district) provides
additional requirements along the Northeast Corridor which are designed to
promote, preserve, and protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents
and property owners, enhance the aesthetics of subsequent development, and
move vehicular traffic around the City of Albemarle. These provisions are
based, in part, on the following findings:



      (1)   Corridor development should not detract from development
opportunities downtown;



      (2)   The standards will encourage new buildings, promote
landscaping intended to beautify the corridor, and add a source of pride to
the community's development efforts; and



      (3)   The standards will help to ensure that travelers and
residents who use this corridor will find the view aesthetically pleasing
while enjoying minimal traffic disruptions, note the added landscaping helps
beautify the corridor, and appreciate the tree preservation efforts in
conjunction with development, all in an effort to promote neighborhood pride.



   (B)   The Northeast Corridor Area.



      (1)   Existing development. Existing single-family homes with
access to the NEC are exempt from these regulations; moreover, expansions and
reconstruction after demolition or destruction of residential uses are also
exempt. Expansions and reconstruction after demolition or destruction of any
other uses with comparable access must comply with the standards.



      (2)   New Development.



         (a)   All new development shall submit site plans,
landscaping plans, and buildings plans for review by the Staff Review
Committee prior to being forwarded for a recommendation by the Albemarle
Planning Board and approval by the City Council. The Staff Review Committee
will evaluate the design of new structures in terms of the degree to which
they enhance the attractiveness of development and preserve the view along
the corridor. Particular attention shall be paid to projects proposed in
heavily wooded existing areas to ensure that subsequent development is
compatible with tree preservation efforts.



         (b)   Projects that lie within the corridor, that are
more than 200 feet from the corridor centerline, and are provided with access
from properties to the rear of the proposal are exempt from these provisions.
Projects that lie within the corridor, are less than 200 feet from the
corridor centerline, and are provided with access from properties to the rear
of the proposal shall come under these provisions. Projects that lie within
the corridor, have some portion of the development within 200 feet of the
corridor centerline and the remainder beyond 200 feet, and are provided
access to the corridor, shall come under these provisions.



      (3)   Permitted uses.



         (a)   Permitted uses in the underlying R-10
Single-Family Residential District are allowed. However, potential new
individually sited single-family residential development with possible access
to the corridor is strongly encouraged to consider the merits of only one
entrance/exit way (i.e., a modest sized subdivision) so as to control the
number of curb cuts along the corridor and thus contribute to the unimpeded
movement of traffic. Otherwise, single-family residential development is
exempt. More intensive development, as in the possible rezoning to N-S
Neighborhood Shopping District (available to the developer with certain
developmental intentions) is required to meet minimum acreage requirements to
create a campuslike development with access unavailable off the corridor.
Property owners contemplating property development near an existing or
possible intersection of the NEC are encouraged to consolidate landholdings
to quality for the N-S (Neighborhood Shopping) zoning classification.



         (b)   Permitted uses in the underlying HI and LI
Districts are allowed. However, due to the nature of this type of
development, the Staff Review Committee may make any reasonable departure
recommendations from this section to the Planning Board.



      (3A)   Conditional uses.  The following conditional uses are
permitted when authorized by the City Council after the Council holds a
public hearing: The conditional uses allowed the underlying R-4 High Density
Residential Districts.



      (4)   Architectural Design.



         (a)   Building scale. Buildings shall promote the
following architectural characteristics:



            (i)   Display windows on ground level;



            (ii)   The use of cornice canopies, balconies, and
arcades to delineate between the ground level and upper levels; and



            (iii)   Medium sized buildings to be broken into
smaller scale components at the ground level.



         (b)   Building materials. Brick, wood, stone or
substantially complementary materials; shingles are the preferred roofing
materials;



         (c)   Roofs. New construction shall have sloped or
pitched roofs. The roof shape may be gable, hip, gambrel, or mansard. Flat
roofs are prohibited.



         (d)   The front facade. It shall enhance the pedestrian
environment and scale by use of features as porches, columns, and cornices.
Solid walls and blank exteriors are prohibited.



         (e)   Windows. Reflective glass and band windows are
prohibited. The sidewalls of buildings on comer lots shall have windows
similar to the front facade.



         (f)   Maximum Building Height. Two and a half (two 1/2)
stories except for churches, which must comply with the underlying district
requirements.



         (g)   Entrances. The main entrances to all buildings
shall be oriented to the street frontage. Where impractical, the front facade
is expected to be "welcoming" in appearance, i.e., attractive windows,
canopies, awnings, cornices, and other architectural details. Solid walls and
blank exteriors are prohibited.



         (h)   Color. The predominant color of the building shall
be of a tone which is compatible with surrounding buildings. Earth tones are
encouraged and bright colors shall only be used as accents to the overall
buildings, unless the company theme utilizes contrasting colors.



      (5)   Landscape Features and Exterior Structures.



         (a)   Exterior Improvements. Features such as decorative
fences, utilities, outdoor furniture, signs, and displays shall be compatible
with the mass and scale of such other improvements elsewhere in the area.
Chain link fences are expressly prohibited except where adequately screened.



         (b)   Service Areas and Utilities. Service areas are to
be to the rear or side of buildings in a visually unobtrusive location and
are to be appropriately screened by decorative fencing, walls, or landscape
materials.



         (c)   Parking. All parking must be located to the side
or rear of buildings. The NEC shall be considered as the "front" for where
such is oriented toward the corridor; otherwise, development far enough off
the NEC shall be considered to "front" on another street. For landscaping,
see City of Albemarle's Landscaping of Parking Lots ordinance.



         (d)   Utilities. All service lines to new structures
shall be placed underground except where prohibited by the utility provider.
Should that be the case, every effort will be made to have the service lines
placed along the rear of the buildings so as to minimize their visual impact.



         (e)   Signs Prohibited:



            (i)   Exterior neon signs;



            (ii)   Off-premises signs; and



            (iii)   Flashing or moving message signs.



         (f)   Neighborhood Shopping District Restrictions:



            (i)   Only one shopping center identification
sign, not to exceed 200 square feet (on which the names of all businesses
within are placed) is permitted; the sign height (from ground level to the
upper most dimension), shall not exceed 15 feet;



            (ii)   Only one on the following signs is
permitted for each tenant per each exposed wall, awning, projecting, or wall;



            (iii)   Total face of wall sign area shall not
exceed 125 percent of the area of the copy area; and



            (iv)   The material and design of a sign shall be
in keeping with the character of the principal use of the site.



         (g)   Driveway Connections. Where practicable, shared
driveway connections to new residential and commercial properties along the
NEC with cross access agreements are encouraged. When, in the subsequent
purchase of lots along the NEC, two or more contiguous lots are created,
accessibility shall be provided by one curb cut. Any subsequent sale of a
portion of the tract shall encompass a shared driveway. Note: This is
intended to ensure that due diligence will be paid to the desired standard of
500 feet between new curb cuts.



         (h)   Stub street connections to adjacent properties may
be required.



         (i)   Lighting. Free standing exterior lights, higher
than 12 feet in height shall be of the "shoe box" type or otherwise shielded
to eliminate direct glare to adjacent properties.



         (j)   Parking Lots. All offstreet parking lots shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within
the area, in accordance with the design standards of the City of Albemarle
Engineering Department. For landscaping requirements, see the City of
Albemarle's Landscaping of Parking Lots ordinance.



         (k)   Building Setbacks. Applicable properties within
the corridor overlay zone that are under the NS District provisions must
maintain front building setbacks equal to or greater than ten feet; all other
setbacks are the same as the underlying zoning district.



         (l)   Acceleration and Deceleration Lanes. Depending
upon the size of the project and its expected impact upon traffic flow along
the corridor, the Staff Review Committee may require of the developer the
addition of a deceleration lane approaching the project and/or an
acceleration lane leaving.



      (6)   Tree Preservation and Care During Construction.



         (a)   Existing trees shall be preserved whenever
feasible. Prior to any clearing of the property, a grading permit must be
obtained from the Enforcement Officer. A tree preservation plan (required to
be submitted by the developer prior to grading of the site and reviewed by
the Staff Review Committee) must show that there will be no disturbance in
the Critical Root Zone (CRZ). A disturbance is considered trenching, placing
backfill in the CRZ, driving or parking equipment in the CRZ, and dumping of
trash, oil, paint or other materials detrimental to plant health in close
proximity of the tree(s). When selecting which trees to preserve, the
following shall be considered: existing and proposed grading; age, condition,
and type of tree; and location of site improvements and utility connections.
Minimum size requirement to qualify for tree preservation is four inches in
diameter at breast height (DBH).



         (b)   Should any tree designated for preservation in the
tree preservation plan which is removed without a tree removal permit or
which dies at anytime after approval of the plan or issuance of a Certificate
of Occupancy, the owner shall replace the removed tree(s) 60 days, in
accordance with the schedule below. In the event of a restricted site, the
owner shall request review by the Staff Review Committee as to the most
appropriate action to take.



         (i)   Trunk Size:



 


Trunk Size of  Removed Tree
(in inches)

 

Number of Replacement Trees

 

Trunk Size of Replacement Tree at DBH




4-9

 

3

 

2 1/2"




10-15

 

5

 

2 1/2"




16-21

 

7

 

2 1/2"




22-27

 

9

 

2 1/2"




28-33

 

11

 

2 1/2"




34+

 

13

 

2 1/2"









         (ii)   Replacement Trees. Replacement trees shall be
healthy and of a quality and species approved by the Department of Public
Works and planted in accordance with accepted landscaping practice or in
accordance with planting guidelines adopted by the city from time to time. A
list of approved species of trees shall be kept and made available by the
Department of Public Works.



         (c)   Failure to Replace Trees.



         (i)   If replacement trees are not planted within 60
days after the removal of a tree without a permit, or in violation of a
permit, the city may, at its option, replace the trees. All costs associated
with purchasing and planting the replacement trees shall be charged to the
owner or other person or entity causing the unpermitted removal of the tree.
Any such charge to a property owner which remains unpaid 60 days after the
invoice date shall constitute a lien against the property, which may be
recorded and foreclosed in accordance with standard procedures;



         (ii)   In addition to the replacement requirements
above, for each tree which is preservable or designated for preservation
which is removed without, or in violation of a tree removal permit, the
person or entity removing the tree shall pay compensation to the city in the
amount of the assessed value of the tree. If the property owner replaces the
tree, the assessed value payment, shall be reduced by the costs associated
with replacing the tree. The money shall be used by the city to plant trees
on parkways or elsewhere within the city; and



         (iii)   In addition to providing or paying for trees,
violators of this section may be fined up to $500 for each tree removed
without, or in violation of, a permit or preservation plan.



         (d)   Fees. A fee to be established by the City Council
shall be charged for each tree removal permit to cover the cost of staff
review and prior identification. A single permit may authorize the removal of
more than one tree, but shall only apply to a single parcel of land.



      (7)   Landscaping and Design Standards for Street Yards.



         (a)   A street yard consists of the buffer area parallel
to the NEC designed to provide continuity of vegetation along the
right-of-way and to soften the impact of development by providing a pleasing
view from the road. The planting of trees within this yard shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.



         (b)   Street yards shall have a depth of 30 feet from
the NEC R-O-W.



         (c)   Street yards shall contain one shade tree/35
linear feet or one ornamental tree/25 linear feet, except in the case of a
conflict with utility lines. These trees shall be generally equally
distributed along the street frontage, but they are not required to be at
absolute equal intervals. This will allow for some flexibility in design
while discouraging long intervals without trees.



         (d)   Shrubbery may be planted in clusters where trees
are not practical.



         (e)   Not more than 20 percent of the street yard may be
used for walkways.



         (f)   Parking, merchandise display and off-street
loading are prohibited in the street yard.



         (g)   No tree or shrub shall be planted within the Sight
Triangle without the prior approval of the City Engineering Division.



      (8)   Site Plan Submittal Requirements. In order for a plan to
be reviewed, a site plan at no greater than 1"= 20' scale, containing the
following information must be submitted to the Staff Review Committee:



         (a)   General location, type, and quantity of existing
plant materials;



         (b)   Existing plant materials and areas to be left in
natural state;



         (c)   Methods and details for protecting existing plant
materials during construction and the approved erosion control plan, if
required;



         (d)   Locations, size and labels for all proposed plants;



         (e)   Plants lists with common name, quantity, and
spacing and size of all proposed landscape material at the time of planting;



         (f)   Location and description of other landscape
improvements, such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures,
fountains, street furniture, lights, and courtyards or paved areas;



         (g)   Planting and installation details as necessary to
ensure conformance with all required standards;



         (h)   Location and type of irrigation system, if
applicable;



         (i)   Location of any proposed buildings;



         (j)   Layout of parking and traffic patterns;



         (k)   Location of overhead and underground utilities;



         (l)   Location of signage;



         (m)   Connections to exiting streets;



         (n)   Zoning designation of adjacent properties; and



         (o)   Site plan shall be drawn to scale and include a
North arrow and necessary interpretive legends.



      (9)   Landscaping Definitions.



The following definitions shall apply to the regulation and control of
landscaping within this article:



         (a)   Caliper. A standard trunk diameter measurement for
nursery grown trees taken six inches above the ground up to and including
four inch Caliper size, and twelve inches above the ground for larger sizes.



         (b)   Critical Root Zone (CRZ).  A circular region
measured outward from a tree trunk representing the essential area of the
roots that must be maintained in order for the tree's survival. The critical
root zone is one foot of radial distance for every inch of tree DBH, with a
minim of eight feet.



         (c)   DBH.  Diameter-at-breast height is the tree trunk
diameter measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above the
ground.



         (d)   Deciduous.  Those plants that annually lose their
leaves.



         (e)   Drip Line.  A vertical line extending from the
outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground.



         (f)   Landscapinq.  The process or product of site
development including grading, installation of plant materials, and seeding
of turf.



         (g)   Ornamental tree.  A small to medium tree, growing
15 to 40 feet in height at maturity, that is planted for aesthetic purposes
such as colorful flowers, interesting bark, or fall foliage.



         (h)   Plantinq Area.  The area prepared for the purpose
of accommodating the planting of trees, shrubs, and goundcovers.



         (i)   Plantinq Yard.  The required installation of
landscaping and screening material between zoning district and sometimes
individual uses.



         (j)   Shade tree.  A large tree growing to over 40 feet
in height at maturity, usually deciduous, that is planted to provide canopy
cover shade.



         (k)   Staff Review Committee.  A committee consisting
of a minimum of three staff members, designated by the City Manager, to
review and approve plans submitted for alternate methods of compliance.



         (l)   Street Tree.  A tree planted along the street
behind the right-of-way.



         (m)   Street Yard.  A buffer area parallel to the NEC
designed to provide continuity of vegetation along the right-of-way and to
soften the impact of development by providing a pleasing view from the road.



      (10)   Landscape Standards and Specifications.



         (a)   The developer shall furnish and install all plant
materials listed on the plan schedule.



         (b)   Plant materials shall conform to the requirements
described in the latest edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock, which
is published by the American Association of Nurserymen.



         (c)   Plant materials must be from an approved species
list or approved by the City of Albemarle Director of Public Works or his
designee.



         (d)   Shade trees must be a minimum of two inches in
caliper. Ornamental trees must be a minimum of six feet in height at the time
of planting (six feet from top of root ball to top of tree).



         (e)   No tree may be planted in the Sight Triangle
without the prior approval of the Director of Public Works.



         (f)   Do not use staking materials unless it is
absolutely necessary. If staking is necessary, then the developer/property
owner must remove the staking material after one growing season.



         (g)   Property owners will ensure the survival and
health of required trees in perpetuity. If any plant material dies, it must
be replaced by the property owner within 60 days. The City of Albemarle
Director of Public Works or his designee may be consulted to determine the
proper time to move and install plant material so that stress to the plant is
minimized. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued when extremes
in weather or soil conditions are not favorable to landscaping.



         (h)   The developer shall ensure that all plant pits,
vine pits, hedge trenches, and shrub beds are excavated as follows:



            (i)   All pits shall be generally circular in
outline, with vertical sides. The tree pit shall be deep enough to allow
one-eighth of the ball to be above existing grade. Soil within the planting
areas shall be free of rock, debris, inorganic compositions and chemical
residues detrimental to plant life. Soil shall be compatible with the
composition of the existing sub-soil and sufficiently blended to ensure
adequate exchange of air and water between the planting area and the adjacent
soil strata. Plants shall rest on well-compacted surface. The tree pit shall
be a minimum of nine inches larger on every side than the ball of the tree;
and



            (ii)   If areas are designated as shrub beds or
hedge trenches, they shall be cultivated to at least 18 inches in depth.
Areas designated for ground covers and vines shall be cultivated to at least
12 inches in depth.



         (i)   Each tree, shrub, or vine shall be pruned in an
appropriate manner, in accordance with accepted standard practice.



         (j)   All trenches and shrub beds shall be edged and
cultivated to the lines shown on the drawings. The areas around isolated
plants shall be edged and cultivated to the fall diameter of the pit.



         (k)   Existing trees shall be preserved whenever
possible.



         (l)   All planting areas shall be mulched with a
two-to-three inch layer of bark, pine needles or other similar material to
cover the complete planting area.



      (11)   Overlay Boundary. Being the area lying within the
corporate limits of the City of Albemarle,



         (a)   Bounded on the north side and on the south side by
lines measuring the lesser distance of 400 feet or the rear lot line of the
parcels of land abutting on the north side and abutting on the south side of
the Northeast Connector, of the centerline herein below described; and



         (b)   Bounded at the beginning point and at the ending
point by lines perpendicular to the center line and intersecting the north
boundary and the south boundary at a right angle, said center line being
described as follows:



   Beginning at a point 539.02 feet east of the point of intersection of
the center line of U.S. Highway 52 North with the center line of the
Northeast Connector and runs eastwardly with the centerline of the Northeast
Connector to the point of intersection of the aforesaid center and the Badin
Road in the City of Albemarle. (See a copy of the Official Zoning Map of the
City of Albemarle.)



(Ord. 99-43, passed 9-7-99; Am Ord. 02-01, passed 1-22-02; Am. Ord. 06-08,
passed 4-3-06)



§ 92.085B HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND LANDMARK PRESERVATION.



   (A)   Purpose.  The historical heritage of City of Albemarle is one
of our most valued and important assets. The conservation of and preservation
of historic districts and landmarks stabilize and increase property values in
their areas and strengthen the overall economy of the city. The purpose of
establishing a local historic preservation program is:



      (1)   To safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving any
district or landmark therein that embodies important elements of its culture,
history, architectural history, or prehistory; and



      (2)   To promote the use and conservation of such district or
landmark for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of the
city and the state as a whole.



   (B)   Historic district and landmark establishment.  Historic
districts and landmarks are established through the application of an overlay
district which are zoning districts that are applied only in conjunction with
other zoning districts, and may grant additional use or development
requirements upon the underlying zoning controlling the use and development
of a lot to ensure the compatibility and appropriateness of exterior design
within the historic district or for the landmark. Overlay districts can be
applied to any zoning districts and the boundaries of such overlay shall be
shown on the official zoning map of the city. An overlay district can be
initiated as an amendment by City Council, Planning Board, Historic Resources
Commission, or a property owner.



   (C)   Designation of historic districts.  The City Council may
adopt, amend, reject, or repeal ordinances designating historic districts
when adoption or amendment is pursuant to the following procedure:



      (1)    An investigation and report describing the historical,
architectural, or archaeological significance of the buildings, structures,
features, sites or surroundings included in any such proposed district, and
the description of the boundaries of such district has been prepared; and



      (2)    The North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources,
acting through the State Historic Preservation Officer or his or her
designee, shall make an analysis of and recommendations concerning such
report and description of proposed boundaries. Failure of the Department to
submit its written analysis and recommendations to the City Council within 30
calendar days after a written request for such analysis has been received by
the Department of Cultural resources shall relieve the city of any
responsibility for awaiting such analysis, and the City Council may at any
time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its zoning
ordinance.



      (3)    Historic districts shall consist of areas which are
deemed to be of special significance in terms of their history, prehistory,
architecture and/or culture, and to possess integrity of design, setting,
materials, feeling, and association. The conservation of such a district will
provide for the education, pleasure and enhancement of the quality of life of
all residents of the city.



      (4)   The City Council shall designate the boundaries of a
historic district in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 92.100,
Amendment Procedures.



      (5)   Following the City Council designation and approval of a
historic district, the area so designated shall be labeled as an overlay
district on the official zoning map with HDO/Historic District Overlay.



      (6)   With respect to any changes in the boundaries of such
district subsequent to its initial establishment or the creation of
additional districts within the city, the investigative studies and reports
shall be prepared by the Historic Resources Commission and shall be referred
to the Planning Board for its review and comment. Changes in the boundaries
of an initial district or proposals for additional districts shall also be
submitted to the Department of Cultural Resources in accordance with the
provisions as stated in division (C)(2) above.



   (D)   Designation of landmarks.  The City Council may adopt, amend,
reject, or repeal ordinances designating historic landmarks that meet the
following criteria, when those ordinances contain the following elements and
when adoption or amendment is pursuant to the following procedure:



      (1)    Criteria for designation. No building, structure, site,
area, or object shall be recommended for designation as an historic landmark
unless it is deemed and found by the Historic Resources Commission to be of
special significance in terms of its historical, prehistorical,
architectural, archaeological, and/or cultural importance, and to possess
integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or
association.



      (2)    Elements of ordinances designating historic landmarks.
Ordinances designating historic landmarks shall contain the following
elements which shall:



         (a)   Describe each property designated in the
ordinance, including the approximate area of the property so designated.



         (b)   List the name or names of the owner or owners of
the property.



         (c)   Describe those elements of the property that are
integral to its historical, prehistorical, architectural, archaeological
and/or cultural significance.



         (d)   Describe the nature of the Commission's
jurisdiction over the interior, if any, and those interior features of the
property to be reviewed for certificates of appropriateness if they are to be
changed.



         (e)    Require, for each building, structure, site,
area, or object designated as an historic landmark that the waiting period
set forth in the General Statutes specifically be observed prior to its
demolition.



         (f)   Recite any other information the City Council
deems necessary within the authority conferred by the General Statutes.



      (3)   Procedure for adopting or amending historic landmark
ordinances. Ordinances designating historic landmarks shall be adopted and
amended according to the following procedure:



         (a)   The Historic Resources Commission shall make, or
cause to be made, an investigation and report on the historical,
prehistorical, architectural, archaeological and/or cultural significance of
each building, structure, site, area, or object proposed for designation.
Applications prepared by owners will be judged by the same criteria as those
prepared by the Commission. Such reports shall contain the following
information:



            1.   The name of the property to be considered for
designation, both common and historic names, if they can be determined.



            2.    The name and address of the current property
owner.



            3.    The location of the property proposed to be
designated historic, including the street address and tax map and parcel
numbers.



            4.   The date of construction and of any later
alterations, if any.



            5.   An assessment of the significance of the site
or structure pursuant to this section.



            6.   An architectural or archaeological
description of the area of the site or structure proposed to be designated.
If outbuildings or other appurtenant features are proposed to be designated,
the report shall contain a description of those features.



            7.   An historical discussion of the site or
structure within its type, period, and locality.



            8.   Black and white photographs and color slides
that clearly depict the property proposed to be designated, including views
of all facades, pertinent details and siting.



            9.    A map showing the location of the property,
including any outbuildings and appurtenant features.



            10.    A clear description of the boundaries.



         (b)   The Commission shall forward its recommendation to
the City Council. The Commission shall refer the report to the State
Department of Cultural Resources, Division of Archives and History.



         (c)   The Department of Cultural Resources, acting
through the State Historic Preservation Officer or his or her designee, may
make an analysis of and recommendations concerning the report. If the
Department does not submit its written comments or recommendations in
connection with any proposed designation within 30 calendar days after a
written request for such analysis has been received by the Department, the
Commission and the City Council shall be relieved of any responsibility to
consider such comments.



         (d)    The Historic Resources Commission and the City
Council shall each hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance. Notice of
the hearings shall be published at least once in a newspaper generally circu-
lated within the city. Written notice of the hearings shall also be mailed by
the Resources Commission to all owners and occupants of properties whose
iden- tity and current mailing address can be ascertained by the exercise of
reason- able diligence. All such notices shall be published or mailed not
less than ten nor more than 25 days prior to the date set for the public
hearing. The mailed notices in this division are for the convenience of
property owners and occupants, and any defect or their omission therein shall
not impair the validity of the public hearing or any action following
therefrom.



         (e)    Following the public hearings, the City Council
may adopt the ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with any amendments
it deems necessary, or reject the proposed ordinance.



         (f)    Upon adoption of the ordinance or any amendments
thereto, the owners and occupants of each designated historic landmark shall
be given written notification of such designation insofar as reasonable
diligence permits. One copy of the ordinance and each amendment thereto shall
be filed by the Historic Resources Commission in the office of the County
Register of Deeds. Each property designated as an historic landmark in the
ordinance shall be indexed according to the name of the owner of the property
in the grantee and grantor indexes in the Register of Deeds office, and the
Historic Resources Commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and
indexing. A second copy of the ordinance and of each amendment thereto shall
be kept on file in the City Clerk's office and shall be made available for
public inspection at any reasonable time. A third copy of the ordinance and
each amendment thereto shall be given to the County Building Inspector.



         (g)    Upon adoption of the ordinance or any amendments
thereto, it shall be the duty of the Historic Resources Commission to give
notice thereof to the County Tax Assessor. The designation and any recorded
restrictions upon the property limiting its use for preservation purposes
shall be considered by the Assessor in appraising it for tax purposes. The
fact that a building, structure, site, area, or object has been designated an
historic landmark shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps maintained by
the county for such period as the designation remains in effect.



   (E)    Jurisdiction of Historic Resources Commission.  The City of
Albemarle Historic Resources Commission, with assistance from city staff,
shall be responsible for preserving the city's historic resources within its
limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction on the city’s official zoning
map. The Commission's composition, procedures and duties shall comply with
§§ 21.77 through 21.80 and any other pertinent sections of this ordinance.



   (F)    Certificates of appropriateness required.



      (1)    (a)    No exterior portion of any building or other
structure (including masonry, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and
pavement, or other appurtenant features), nor above-ground utility structure,
nor any type of outdoor advertising sign, nor any tree larger than 18 inches
in diameter at four and one-half feet above the ground shall be erected,
altered, restored, moved or demolished on a landmark, or within the historic
district, until after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as
to exterior features has been submitted to and approved by the Historic
Resources Commission, or its designee.



         (b)    However, in the case where a tree may be
diseased, severely damaged or undermining property without posing an
immediate danger, it can be removed and shall be replaced with a similar type
plant material contained on the plant list of the Design Guidelines with a
minor works approval. In addition, nothing in this section would prevent the
immediate removal of a tree that the Historic Preservation Commission
Administrator, Building Inspector or emergency responders deem to be an
immediate danger to life or property.



         (c)    Exterior features shall include the architectural
style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building
or other structure, including the kind and texture of the building material,
the size and scale of the building, and the type and style of all windows,
doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant fixtures. In the case of
outdoor advertising signs, exterior features shall be construed to mean the
style, material, size and location of all such signs.



      (2)    Such a certificate shall be issued by the Commission
prior to the issuance of a zoning permit or other permit granted for purposes
of constructing, altering, moving or demolishing structures. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be required whether or not a zoning permit is required.
Therefore, a certificate of appropriateness is a prerequisite to the issuance
of such a zoning permit or such other permits. Any such zoning permits or
such other permits not issued in conformity with this section shall be
invalid.



      (3)    The State of North Carolina, the City of Albemarle and
all public utility companies shall be required to obtain a certificate of
appropriateness for work on or immediately adjacent to designated landmark
properties and within the historic district(s). Certificates of
appropriateness shall be issued prior to initiating any changes in the
character of street paving, sidewalks, utility installations, lighting,
walls, fences, structures and buildings on property, easements or streets
owned or franchised by the State of North Carolina, the City of Albemarle or
public utility companies. Standard maintenance and in-kind repair and/or
replacement of materials shall be exempt from this requirement.



   (G)    Criteria to determine appropriateness. 



      (1)    The following review criteria, along with companion
design guidelines found and the guidelines of the Secretary of the Interior,
shall be considered, where relevant, to make findings of fact indicating the
extent to which the application for a certificate of appropriateness is or is
not congruous with the historic aspects of the designated landmark or
district:



         (a)    Building height.



         (b)    Walls.



         (c)    Proportion of width to height of the total
building facade.



         (d)    Proportion, shape, positioning, location, pattern
and sizes of any elements of fenestration.



         (e)    Spacing of buildings, defined as the distance
between adjacent buildings.



         (f)    Building materials.



         (g)    Surface textures.



         (h)    Expression of architectural detailing.



         (i)    Roof shapes.



         (j)    Scale.



         (k)    Orientation of the building to the street.



         (l)    Ground cover or paving.



         (m)    Signs.



         (n)    Exterior lighting and appurtenant features.



      (2)    The Commission shall adopt principles and guidelines
interpreting these criteria for new construction, alterations, additions,
moving and demolition of landmarks or properties in the historic district.



   (H)    Demolition. 



      (1)    An application for a certificate of appropriateness
authorizing the relocation, demolition or destruction of a designated
landmark or a building, structure or site within the historic district may
not be denied except as provided in division (H)(2) below. However, the
effective date of such a certificate may be delayed for a period of up to 365
days from the date of approval. The maximum period of delay authorized by
this section shall be reduced by the Commission where it finds that the owner
would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial
use of or return from such property by virtue of the delay. During such
period the Commission shall negotiate with the owner and with any other
parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building or site.



      (2)    An application for a certificate of appropriateness
authorizing the demolition or destruction of a building, site or structure
determined by the state Historic Preservation Officer as having statewide
significance, as defined in the criteria of the National Register of Historic
Places, may be denied except where:



         (a)    The Commission finds that the owner would suffer
extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return
by virtue of the denial; or



         (b)    The property has been found, after proper
inspection, to be a threat to public safety, and the city has adopted a
demolition ordinance under the minimum housing code.



      (3)    If the Commission has voted to recommend designation of
a property as a landmark or designation of an area as a district, and final
designation has not been made by the City Council, the demolition or
destruction of any building, site or structure located on the property of the
proposed landmark or in the proposed district may be delayed by the
Commission for a period of up to 180 days or until the City Council takes
final action on the designation, whichever comes first.



   (I)    Land use, interior arrangement, maintenance, emergency
repairs not considered. 



      (1)    Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a property
owner from making any use of his or her property not prohibited by other
statutes, ordinances or regulations.



      (2)    The Commission may enter, solely in performance of its
official duties and only at reasonable times, upon private lands for
examination or survey thereof. However, no member, employee, or agent of the
Commission may enter any private building or structure without express
consent of the owner or occupant thereof.



      (3)    Except as provided in division (I)(4) below, the
Commission shall have no jurisdiction over interior arrangement and shall
take no action except to prevent the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of buildings, structures,
appurtenant features, outdoor advertising signs, or other significant
features which would be incongruous with the special character of a landmark
or of the district.



      (4)    Notwithstanding division (I)(3) above, the jurisdiction
of the Commission over interior spaces shall be limited to specific interior
features of architectural, artistic or historical significance in publicly
owned designated landmarks; and of privately owned historic landmarks for
which consent for interior review has been given by the owner. The consent of
any owner for interior review shall bind future owners and/or successors in
title, provided such consent has been filed in the office of the Register of
Deeds, and indexed accordingly to the name of the owner of the property in
the grantee and grantor indexes. The landmark designation shall specify the
interior features to be reviewed and the specific nature of the Commission's
jurisdiction over the interior.



      (5)    The ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature of a landmark or in the historic district which does
not involve a change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, shall
not be prevented by the requirements pertaining to the designated landmark or
historic district.



      (6)    Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:



         (a)    The maintenance, or



         (b)    In the event of an emergency, the immediate
restoration of any existing aboveground utility structure without approval by
the Commission.



      (7)    The construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, moving or demolition of any exterior architectural features,
which the City Code Inspector or similar official shall certify is required
for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, shall not be
prevented by the requirements pertaining to the landmark or the historic
district.



   (J)    Hearing procedures.



      (1)    The Historic Resources Commission shall receive
applications for certificates of appropriateness as required under
division(F) above. The Commission shall review such application according to
the review criteria, the design guidelines and the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation & Illustrated Guidelines for
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, and shall approve or disapprove such
application as provided in division (J)(4) below.



      (2)    Prior to issuance or denial of a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission shall take such action as may reasonably be
required to inform the owners of any property likely to be materially
affected by the application, and shall give the applicant and such owners an
opportunity to be heard. A written notice of the proposal shall be sent to
the applicant and to owners of property (i.e., lots, parcels or tracts of
land) within 100 feet of the property for which an application for a
certificate of appropriateness has been applied for.



      (3)    In cases where the Commission deems it necessary, it
may hold a public hearing concerning an application for a certificate of
appropriateness.



      (4)    The Historic Resources Commission's final action on an
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be by the passage of a
motion to take one of the following actions:



         (a)    Approve the application for a certificate of
appropriateness, as proposed;



         (b)    Approve the application for a certificate of
appropriateness, subject to specific conditions and/or modifications of the
proposal presented in the application for a certificate of appropriateness;



         (c)    Disapprove the application for a certificate of
appropriateness as proposed or modified.



      (5)    An appeal of the Commission's action in granting or
denying any certificate:



         (a)    May be taken to the Zoning Board of Adjustment by
any aggrieved party;



         (b)    Shall be taken within times prescribed by the
Historic Resources Commission by general rule; and



         (c)    Shall be in the nature of certiorari.



   (K)    Minor works. 



      (1)     "MINOR WORKS" are defined as those exterior changes
that do not involve substantial alterations, additions or removals that could
impair the integrity of the landmark or property in the historic district. A
list of all minor works shall be kept within Commission's historic
preservation guidelines and otherwise made readily available to the public.
Any amendments to Commission's designated list of minor works shall be
promptly updated in the guidelines document and anywhere else displayed.



      (2)    A certificate of appropriateness application, when
determined to involve a Commission- designated minor work, may be reviewed
and approved by the Historic Preservation Commission Administrator, or other
staff member designated to this task by the Director of Planning and
Development Services. No official meeting nor advertisement or notification
of property owner(s) shall be required prior to approval.



      (3)    Administrator approvals of applications for minor works
shall be based upon Commission's guidelines. If the Administrator does not
issue a certificate of appropriateness because they do not believe the
proposed alterations in the application to be congruous with design
guidelines, the applicant will be advised to make a formal application to the
Historic Resources Commission for its approval. In such a case, the
application shall be procedurally treated as a proposal for a major exterior
alteration, added to an agenda and advertised for as required. No
application, for either major or minor works, may be denied a certificate of
appropriateness without formal action by the Historic Resources Commission.



   (L)    Certificate of issuance; expiration; enforcement.



      (1)   Passage of a motion to approve an application, with or
without modification, shall constitute the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness by the Historic Resources Commission. The application and the
duly approved minutes of the Commission shall constitute the written
documentation of such issuances. Following the meeting, a certificate shall
be mailed to the property for which a certificate has been issued. The
certificate shall be posted on the premises, in a location visible from the
street, while the work is in progress. Minutes of a Historic Resources
Commission meeting shall be approved before the end of the next meeting.



      (2)    A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a
period of six months from the date of issuance for the purpose of obtaining a
zoning permit or other permit for constructing or altering structures. A
certificate of appropriateness shall expire six months after the date of
issuance if the work authorized by the certificate has not been commenced. If
after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of six months, the
permit therefor shall immediately expire.



      (3)    Compliance with certificates of appropriateness shall
be enforced by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to comply with a certificate
of appropriateness shall be a violation of the zoning ordinance. The
enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement
of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or
laws.



      (4)    In case any building, structure, site, area or object
designated as a landmark or located within the historic district is about to
be demolished, whether as a result of deliberate neglect or otherwise,
materially altered, remodeled, removed or destroyed, except in compliance
with the ordinance, the Commission or other party aggrieved by such action
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful
action.



   (M)    Establishment of Historic District Overlay.



      (1)    In addition to the use of districts heretofore
established under the Zoning Ordinance, a historic overlay district, labeled
HDO/Historic District Overlay, is hereby established to include the
properties encompassing the historic downtown core generally from Market
Station to the west, Five Points to the east, South Street to the south and
North Street to the north, more particularly described as follows: 



Note: References to the Tax Record numbers identify lots as shown on the GIS
MAP of Stanly County effective as of  November 15, 2006.



      Bounded on the North (1) Beginning with the southwestern corner
of Tax Record 3723, which is in the eastern line of N. Depot St., and
following the southern property lines of Tax Records 3723 and 23706 to the
southeastern corner of Tax Record 23706, which is in the western line of N.
First St.; thence (2) crossing North First St. in a northeasterly direction
to the southwestern corner of an opened alley on the east line of N. First
St.; thence (3) following the southern line of the alley and then crossing
the alley in an easterly direction to the western line of Tax Record 23101;
thence (4) following the western property line of Tax Record 23101 south to
the southwest corner of the aforesaid lot; thence (5) following the southern
line of Tax Record 23101 and crossing N. Second St. in an easterly direction
to the western property line of Tax Record 28268; thence (6) following the
western property line of Tax Record 28268 in a northerly direction to the
northwestern corner of Tax Record 28268; thence (7) following the northern
property line of Tax Record 28268 and crossing N. Third St. in an easterly
direction to the western line of Tax Record 28274; thence (8) following the
western line of Tax Record 28274 in a northerly direction past the northwest
corner of Tax Record 28274 to the centerline of Montgomery Ave; thence (9)
following the centerline of Montgomery Ave. in an easterly direction until it
intersects with N. Fourth St.



      Bounded on the East (10) Beginning at the northeast corner of Tax
Record 28274 and following the western line of N. Fourth St. in a southerly
direction to the northeastern corner of Tax Record 28540; thence (11)
following the northern line of Tax Record 28540 west to the northwestern
corner of the aforesaid lot; thence (12) following the western property lines
of Tax Records 28540, 28539, 26031, 25542 in a southerly direction to the
southwestern corner of Tax Record 25542; thence (13) following the southern
property line of Tax Record 25542 east to the northwestern corner of Tax
Record 18329; thence (14) following the western property lines of Tax Records
18329, 9354, 20660, 26521 in a southerly direction to the southeastern corner
of Tax Record 28274, which is in the northern line of North St.; thence (15)
following the southern property line of Tax Record 28274 for fifty feet in a
westerly direction to a point on the northern line of North St.; thence (16)
crossing North St. and following the western property lines of Tax Records
25248, 13641, 6433, 24430, 16475 in a southerly direction to the southwestern
corner of Tax Record 16475; thence (17) following the southern property line
of Tax Record 16475 and crossing N. Fourth St. in an easterly direction to
the western property line of Tax Record 18000, which is in the eastern line
of N. Fourth St.; thence (18) following the eastern line of N. Fourth St. in
a northerly direction to the southern line of a partially opened alley;
thence (19) following the southern line of the partially opened alley
easterly to the northeastern corner of Tax Record 11755; thence (20) crossing
N. Fifth St. and Pee Dee Ave. in an easterly direction to the northeastern
corner of Tax Record 35245; thence (21) following the southern line of Pee
Dee Avenue northeast to the northwestern corner of Tax Record 13556; thence
(22) following the western property line of Tax Record 13556 in a
southeastern direction to the southwest corner of the aforesaid lot; thence
(23) following the northern edge of Tax Record 10713 in a southwesterly
direction to the northwest corner of the aforesaid lot; thence (24) following
the western property line of Tax Record 10713 in a southeasterly direction to
the southwest corner of the aforesaid lot, which is in the northern line of
E. Main St.;  thence (25) following the southern property line of Tax Record
7885 in a southwesterly direction to the southwest corner of the aforesaid
lot, thence (26) following the southern property line of Tax Record 35245 in
a westerly direction for 365 feet to a point which is located along the
northern line of E. Main St.; thence (27) crossing E. Main St and following
the western property line of Tax Record 17849 in a southerly direction to the
southwestern corner of the aforesaid lot; thence (28) following the southern
property line of Tax Record 17849 easterly to the southeast corner of the
aforesaid lot; thence (29) following the western property lines of Tax
Records 17335 and 6513 to the northeastern corner of Tax Record 20582. 



      Bounded on the South (30) Beginning at the northeast corner of
Tax Record 20582 and following the northern property line in a westerly
direction to the northwestern corner of the aforesaid lot; thence (31)
crossing S. Fourth St. in a northwesterly direction to the northeast corner
of Tax Record 33436; thence (32) following the northern property line of Tax
Record 33436 westerly to the northwest corner of the aforesaid lot; thence
(33) following the western property line of Tax Record 33436 to the
southwestern corner of the aforesaid lot, which is on the northern line of an
unopened alley; thence (34) following the northern line of the unopened alley
in a westerly direction to the southeastern corner of Tax Record 23381;
thence (35) following the eastern property line of Tax Record 23381 in a
northerly direction to the northeastern corner of the aforesaid lot; thence
(36) following the northern property line of Tax Record 23381 and crossing S.
Third St. in a westerly direction to the eastern property line of Tax Record
22795, which is in the western line of S. Third St.; thence (37) following
the eastern property lines of Tax Records 22795 and 28510 in a southerly
direction to the southeastern corner of Tax Record 28510 (excluding the part
of Tax Record 28510 where the Stanly County Jail is located); thence (38)
following the northern line of Tax Record 28506 in a westerly direction to
the northwest corner of the aforesaid lot; thence (39) following the western
property line of Tax Record 28506 in a southerly direction to the northeast
corner of Tax Record 11387; thence (40) following the northern property line
of Tax Record 11387 and crossing S. Second Street in a westerly direction to
the eastern property line of Tax Record 28498, which is in the western line
of S. Second St.; thence (41) following the western line of  S. Second St.
in a southerly direction across South St. to the northeast corner of Tax
Record 20382, thence (42) following the northern property line of Tax Record
20382 in a westerly direction to the northwestern corner of the aforesaid
lot; thence (43) following the western property line of Tax Record 20382 to
the southwest corner of aforesaid lot; thence (44) following the northern
line of an open alley seventy-eight feet in a westerly direction to a corner
in an eastern property line of Tax Record 18289; thence (45) following that
eastern property line of Tax Record 18289 in a northerly direction for
twenty-three feet to another corner in the northern property line of Tax
Record 18289; thence (46) following the northern line of Tax Record 18289 to
the northwestern corner of the aforesaid lot, which is in the eastern line of
S. First St; thence (47) following the eastern line of S. First St in a
northerly direction crossing South St. to the southwest corner of Tax Record
6994; thence (48) crossing S. First St. in a westerly direction to the
southeastern corner of Tax Record 9959; thence (49) following the northern
line of South St. in a southwesterly direction and crossing S. Depot St. to
the southeast corner of Tax Record 2067; thence (50) following the eastern
property lines of Tax Records 2067 and 10902 in a northerly direction to the
northeast corner of Tax Record 10902; thence (51) following the northern
property line of Tax Record 10902 in a westerly direction to the northwest
corner of the aforesaid lot; thence (52) following the eastern property line
of Tax Record 139 in a southerly direction to the southeastern corner of the
aforesaid lot; thence (53) following the southern property line of Tax Record
139 and crossing Railroad St. in a westerly direction to the eastern property
line of Tax Record 31117; thence (54) following the eastern property line of
Tax Record 31117 in a southerly direction to the southern most corner of Tax
Record 31117, which is on the eastern line of the Winston Salem Southbound
Railroad right-of-way.



      Bounded on the West (55) Beginning at the southern most corner of
Tax Record 31117, following the eastern line of the right-of-way of the
Winston Salem Southbound Railroad in a northerly direction to the
northwestern corner of Tax Record 28491; thence (56) following the northern
property line of Tax Record 28491 in an easterly direction to the northeast
corner of the aforesaid lot; thence (57) following the eastern property line
of Tax Record 28491 in a southerly direction to the northwest corner of Tax
Record 2476; thence (58) following the northern property line of Tax Record
2476 in an easterly direction to the northeast corner of the aforesaid lot;
thence (59) following the eastern property line of Tax Record 2476 in a
southerly direction to the northwest corner of Tax Record 33265; thence (60)
following the northern property line of Tax Record 33265 and crossing Harris
St., a railroad right-of-way and N. Depot St. in an easterly direction to the
northwest corner of Tax Record 22788, which is in the eastern line of N.
Depot St; thence (61) following the eastern line of N. Depot St. in a
northerly direction to the southwestern corner of Tax Record 3723, which is
the point of Beginning.



      (2)    The above is depicted on a map entitled Proposed
Downtown Albemarle Local Historic District, which is attached to Ordinance
No. 06-27, passed December 18, 2006, and incorporated by reference herein,
and is on file with the city at the Office of Planning and Community
Development located at 144 N. Second Street, Albemarle NC.



(Ord. 05-41, passed 11-7-05; Am. Ord. 06-27, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 12-24,
passed 8-6-12; Am. Ord. 16-28, passed 8-15-16; Am. Ord. 17-05, passed 3-6-17)



§ 92.085C  I-O INSTITUTIONAL AND OFFICE DISTRICT.



   (A)    This district is intended to provide for institutional
development and, where appropriate, to serve as a transitional buffer between
residential and non-residential districts. To ensure that conflict in land
use is kept to a minimum, strict development controls are employed, such as
limits on retail uses, buffers, height and signs. This district is intended
to be easily accessible, and therefore, placed adjacent to or accessible from
a thoroughfare of not less than 60 feet right-of-way.



   (B)    The following uses are permitted:



      (1)    Adult day care centers.



      (2)    Colleges, universities, public elementary and secondary
schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as
ordinarily given in public schools and including dormitories when located on
the campus of any of the above.



      (3)    Libraries, museums, and art galleries.



      (4)    Nursery schools and kindergartens, provided that at
least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is provided for each child.



      (5)    Assisted living and nursing homes.



      (6)    Offices, business, professional, and public.



      (7)    Public-private partnership facilities.



      (8)    Public safety facilities, including armories.



      (9)    Independent living facilities.



      (10)    Specialized community residential center for
individuals with developmental disabilities, with lodging facilities for
visitors.



      (11)    Restaurants.



      (12)    Event center/assembly hall.



      (13)    Orphanages and adoption care facilities



   (C)    The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the City Council after the Council holds a public hearing: battered group
care facilities, camps and retreats, and inpatient rehabilitation facilities
when located at least one half mile from the same use.



(Ord. 11-24, passed 7-18-11; Am. Ord. 15-34, passed 11-2-15; Am. Ord. 16-09,
passed 4-4-16; Am. Ord. 18-31, passed 9-4-18)



§ 92.086 AREA, YARD, AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.



   Each permitted use shall conform to the dimensional requirements of the
district in which it is located.



 


Districts

 

Minimum Lot Size

 

Minimum Yard Requirements

 

Maximum height in feet




Square feet per dwelling unit

 

Lot width in feet

 

Front yard setback

 

Side yard in feet

 

Rear lot in feet






Within city limits
R-10 Residential

 


 


 


 


 


 





Single-Family

 

10000

 

75

 

40

 

12(a)

 

30

 

35




Two-Family

 

7500

 

85

 

40

 

12(a)

 

30

 

35




R-8 Residential

 


 


 


 


 


 





Single-Family

 

8000

 

70

 

35

 

10(a)

 

25

 

35




Two-Family

 

6000

 

80

 

35

 

10(a)

 

25

 

35




R-8A Residential

 


 


 


 


 


 





Single-Family

 

8000

 

70

 

35

 

10(a)

 

25

 

35




Two-Family

 

4000

 

80

 

35

 

10(a)

 

25

 

35




Multi-Family

 

4000(i)

 

85

 

35

 

10(a)

 

30

 

50




R-4 Residential
High Density

 

4000

 

60

 

10

 

14(a) and 0(a)

 

10

 

50




R-O Residential
Office

 


 


 


 


 


 





Single-Family

 

8000

 

70

 

35

 

10(a)

 

25

 

35




Two-Family

 

4000

 

85

 

35

 

10(a)

 

30

 

50




Multi-Family

 

4000

 

85

 

35

 

10(a)

 

30

 

50




Offices and
institutions

 

-

 

-

 

30

 

8(a)

 

20

 

50




BUSINESS:

 


 


 


 





NBD - Neighborhood Business District

 

30(b)(f)

 

10(e)(f)

 

20(f)

 

50




GHBD - General Highway Business District

 

30(b)(f) (h)

 

10 (e)(f)(h)

 

20 (f) (h)

 

50




SCD - Shopping Center District

 

50(c)(f)

 

20(f)

 

20(f)

 

50




MUSCD - Mixed Use Shopping Center District

 

30(b)(f)(h)

 

10(f)

 

(f)

 

50




HMD - Hospital-Medical Center District

 

30(b)(f)

 

10(f)

 

20(f)

 

-




CBD - Central Business District

 

-

 

-

 


 

-




INDUSTRIAL:

 


 


 


 





LID - Light Industrial District

 

30(b) (d) (f)

 

(d) (f) (h)

 

20(f) (h)

 





HID - Heavy Industrial District

 

30(b) (d) (f)

 

d) (f) (h)

 

20(f) (h)

 





I-O Institutional and Office District

 

30(a)(b) (c)

 

30(a)

 

(b) (f)

 

50





 



         (a)   Corner lots must have an additional ten feet along
the side street line. Accessory building in the rear must comply with the
requirement. Two-family dwellings to be constructed in the R-10 Residential
District shall be allowed only on corner lots with entrances facing different
streets.



         (b)   May be used for parking except in case of HID,
Heavy Industrial District, where it must be landscaped.



         (c)   No building shall be less than 50 feet from any
street right-of-way line.



         (d)   Where a lot abuts any residential district, there
shall be a side or rear yard clearance of at least ten feet. However, 20
additional feet must be provided when an industrial district abuts any
residential district.



         (e)   Side yard may be eliminated on one side of lot to
permit a building wall not less than 12 inches thick and not less than 75%
solid masonry to be built on the property line or, if not on the property
line, then not less than five feet from the property line. After elimination
of the side yard on one side of the lot, there shall remain a side yard on
the other side of the lot not less than 15 feet to permit access to the rear
yard area; and the elimination of a side yard shall not be permitted in any
business zone where it will reduce the side yard adjacent to a lot with a
residential building thereon being used solely for residential purposes.



         (f)   Upon any front, side, or rear lot line which abuts
on the right-of-way of a major thoroughfare as it is shown on the latest
adopted thoroughfare plan posted at the city hall, the yard requirement for
the front, side, or rear yard shall be 50 feet from the proposed right-of-way
as it is shown on the major thoroughfare as noted above. No sign structure
shall project closer than 25 feet to the curb line where curb and gutter have
been installed, and, where not installed, the ditch line on a major
thoroughfare as noted above; however, in no event shall the sign structure
project onto the rightof-way.



         (g)   Areas comprising Group Business Developments, as
defined in § 92.008, shall meet the exterior requirements of this section;
however, the individual interior lots in a Group Business Development shall
be exempt from minimum side yard setback requirements.



         (h)   Upon any rear lot line, street or alley
right-of-way line as shown on the latest adopted thoroughfare plat posted at
the city hall, the yard requirement shall be 20 feet from the lot line or
street or alley right-of-way line.



         (i)   Except for projects involving rehabilitation of
existing structures for which increased density is necessary to make
redevelopment and/or revitalization of a site financially feasible, in which
case the requirement shall be 4,000 square feet for the first unit, and 1,900
square feet for each additional unit. For such a project, the primary goal
will be rehabilitation of the existing structure(s) with local significance,
but some new construction compatible with the existing structure can be
allowed with the approval of City Council.



('58 Code, § 19-94)   (Ord. 79-30, passed 1-21-80; Am. Ord. 80-16, passed
6-16-80; Am. Ord. 86-5, passed 1-27-86; Am. Ord. 87-20, passed 8-17- 87; Am.
Ord. 89-6, passed 6-15-89; Am. Ord. 89-15, passed  - -89; Am. Ord. 90- 10,
passed 8-6-90; Am. Ord. 04-14, passed 4-19-04; Am. Ord. 11-24, passed
7-18-11; Am. Ord. 14-12, passed 4-7-14; Am. Ord. 16-20, passed 6-6-16)
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.087  [RESERVED.]



§ 92.088  [RESERVED.]



§ 92.089  [RESERVED.]



§ 92.090  BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General Purpose. The bufferyard is a precisely defined yard
together with the planting required thereon. Both the amount of land and the
type and amount of planting specified for each bufferyard requirement of
Chapter 92 of the Code of Ordinances are designed to lessen incompatibilities
between adjacent land uses or screen a use from a public road. It is intended
that bufferyards will separate different land uses from each other in order
to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise,
glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or parking areas, or to
provide spacing to reduce adverse impacts of noise, odor, or danger from
fires or explosions.  The planting units required have been calculation to
insure that they do, in fact, function as “buffers.”



   (B)   General Provisions.



      (1)   Initial determination. An initial determination of the
proposed use and adjacent uses shall be made using the following:



         (a)   Single Family Residential is equivalent to R-20,
R10, and R-8 districts.



         (b)   Multi-Family Residential is equivalent to the R-8
and R-BA districts.



         (c)   High Intensity Commercial is equivalent to the
CBD, SCD, GHBD,  MUSCD, and I-O districts.



         (d)   Light Intensity Commercial is equivalent to the
NBD, R-O and HMD districts.



         (e)   Industrial is equivalent to LID and HID districts.
These specific uses shall be classified as industrial zoning types for
bufferyard purposes only:



         (i)   Banking and financial services, with drive-through
facilities;



         (ii)   Car wash;



         (iii)   Convenience store with gasoline sales;



         (iv)   Implement sales and services:



         (v)   Kennels;



         (vi)   Outdoor display retail;



         (vii)   Motor vehicle repair and maintenance;



         (viii)   Motor vehicle storage yard;



         (ix)   Outdoor display retail;



         (x)   Recreational vehicle park;



         (xi)   Recreational services, outdoor; yard.



         (xii)   Restaurants (with drive-through service); and



         (xiii)   Storage and salvage



      (2)   Determine the bufferyard (Type I, II, III, or IV).
Determine the required bufferyard for adjacent zoning type of project
(impending use) from the following:



         (a)   Type I Bufferyard. A type I bufferyard is a low
density screen designed to partially block visual contact and create spatial
separation between adjacent uses.



         (b)   Type II Bufferyard. A type II bufferyard is a
medium density screen designed to partially block visual contact and create
spatial separation between adjacent uses.



         (c)   Type III Bufferyard. A type III bufferyard is a
high density screen designed to eliminate visual contact and create spatial
separation between adjacent uses.



         (d)   Type IV Bufferyard. A type IV bufferyard is a
higher density screen designed to eliminate visual contact and create spatial
separation between adjacent uses.




Bufferyard Requirements




 


Zoning Type of Project

 

Zoning Type of Adjacent Property





 

SFR

 

MFR

 

LI C

 

HI C

 

IND




SFR

 

*

 

*

 

*

 

*

 

*




MFR

 

II

 

*

 

*

 

I+

 

I+




LI C

 

II

 

I

 

*

 

*

 

*




HIC

 

III

 

II

 

*

 

*

 

*




IND

 

IV

 

IV

 

I

 

*

 

*




 



*   No bufferyard requirement



+   Type I bufferyard required if no bufferyard is provided on developed
adjacent property designated as BIC or IND zoned types provided on developed
adjacent property designated as high intensity commercial (BIC) or industrial
(IND) zoning types.



      (3)   Bufferyard Selection. Select the desired bufferyard
option for the required bufferyard type from those described below.



         (a)   Type I Bufferyard. There are four design options
that may be used to satisfy this requirement.




Type I Bufferyard Design Options




 


Minimum Bufferyard Width

 

Minimum Plant Material/100 Linear Feet




10 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants;
10 supplemental evergreen shrubs




20 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants




30 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 5 primary evergreen plants




50 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 3 primary evergreen plants




 



         (b)   Type II Bufferyard. There are four design options
that may be used to satisfy this requirement.




Type II Bufferyard Design Options




 


Minimum Bufferyard Width

 

Minimum Plant Material/100 Linear Feet




15 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants;
20 supplemental evergreen shrubs




20 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants;
10 supplemental evergreen shrubs




30 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants




100 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 4 primary evergreen plants




 



         (c)   Type III Bufferyard. There are five design options
that may be used to satisfy this requirement.




Type III Bufferyard Design Options




 


Minimum Bufferyard Width

 

Minimum Plant Material/100 Linear Feet




15 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 8 primary evergreen plants;
20 supplemental evergreen shrubs




20 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants




30 feet

 

3 deciduous trees; 13 primary evergreen plants




40 feet

 

3 deciduous trees; 10 primary evergreen plants




50 feet

 

3 deciduous trees; 5 primary evergreen plants




 



         (d)   Type IV Bufferyard.  There are six design options
that may be used to satisfy this requirement.




Type IV Bufferyard Design options




 


Minimum Bufferyard Width

 

Minimum Plant Material/100 Linear Feet




15 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants;
20 supplemental evergreen shrubs




30 feet

 

2 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants;
10 supplemental evergreen shrubs




40 feet

 

3 deciduous trees; 18 primary evergreen plants




50 feet

 

3 deciduous trees; 14 primary evergreen plants




100 feet

 

3 deciduous trees; 10 primary evergreen plants




200 feet

 

3 deciduous trees; 5 primary evergreen plants




 



   (C)   Additional Requirements.



      (1)   Fractional calculations. Fractional planting requirement
calculations shall be rounded to the next higher whole number.



      (2)   Existing plant material. Existing plant material within
the required bufferyard may be included in the computation of the required
plantings with approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



      (3)   Fence or wall option. An opaque fence or wall may be
used in lieu of not more than 50% of the required evergreen bufferyard
planting with the approval of the Zoning Enforcement officer and providing
the following conditions are met, where applicable.



         (a)   Fence height for industrial zoning. The minimum
required fence height shall be eight feet above ground level when the
proposed project zoning type is classified as an industrial zoning type.



         (b)   Fence height for zoning types except industrial.
The minimum required fence height shall be six feet above ground level when
the proposed project zoning type is classified as any zoning type except
those classified as industrial.



         (c)   Vegetation planted on exterior sides. Where a
fence or wall is used as part of the required screening, all required
vegetation shall be planted on the exterior side of the fence or wall.



         (d)   Screening multi-family residential zoning type.
Where the fence option is used to screen multifamily residential zoning types
from more intense zoning types, the required vegetation may be planted on the
interior side of the fence or wall.



         (e)   Remaining vegetation distribution. Where a fence
is used in lieu of not more than 50% of the required vegetation, the
remaining percentage of vegetation to be used in conjunction with the fence
or wall shall be evenly distributed in the bufferyard.



      (4)   Bufferyard locations. Bufferyards shall be located on
the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending to the lot or parcel
boundary line, with the following exceptions.



         (a)   On adjacent property. All or part of the
bufferyard may be located on adjacent property within a permanent easement
dedicated for such purpose with approval of the zoning Enforcement Officer.



         (b)   Portion of site proposed for development. If only
a portion of a site is proposed for development, the required bufferyard may
be located at the limit of the construction perimeter with approval of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.



         (c)   Topographic irregularities. Where topographic
irregularities require a different location to meet the intent of this
section, the location of the bufferyard may be varied with approval of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.



         (d)   Rights-of-way and streets. Bufferyards shall not
be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated, or proposed
right-of-way, or a private street.



      (5)   Size of plant material.



         (a)   Deciduous trees in bufferyards 30 feet in width or
less may be either medium or large varieties as described in the appendix,
provided, however, at least one-half of the required trees shall be large
variety. Deciduous trees in bufferyards or greater than 30 feet in width
shall be large variety trees. Suggested plant materials are listed in the
office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



         (b)   All deciduous trees used for bufferyard screening
must be a minimum of eight feet in height at installation and shall be at
least two inches in diameter measured six inches above ground level.



         (c)   All primary evergreen plants shall be a minimum of
six feet in height at the time of installation unless combined with an
approved earthen berm, and shall not be less than ten feet in height at
maturity.



         (d)   All supplemental evergreen shrubs shall be a
minimum of 18 inches in height at the time of installation and shall attain a
minimum height of 36 inches three years after installation.



      (6)   Spacing of plant material.



         (a)   All deciduous trees shall be installed with tree
trunks spaced a minimum distance of 30 feet apart and a maximum distance of
60 feet apart.



         (b)   All primary evergreen plants shall be distributed
evenly along the length of the bufferyard and shall be staggered where
quantities permit. Primary evergreen plants shall be installed with tree
trunks spaced a minimum of seven feet apart and a maximum of 15 feet from
other primary evergreen plants and from any required deciduous tree.



         (c)   All supplemental evergreen shrubs shall be
distributed evenly along the length of the bufferyard and shall be staggered
where quantities permit.



(Ord. 98-01, passed 1-20-98; Am. Ord. 11-24, passed 7-18-11)



§ 92.091  LANDSCAPING OF PARKING LOTS.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the intent of this section to protect and
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by requiring the
landscaping of parking areas which will serve to control access, enhance
safety, reduce radiant heatfrom surfaces, reduce wind and air turbulence,
reduce noise, reduce the glare of motor vehicles and surfaces, ameliorate
storm water drainage problems, filter automotive exhaust, and protect and
preserve the appearance, character, and value of adjacent properties.



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   The landscaping requirements of this section shall apply
to all new parking lot development, public and private, designated as
multi-family, recreational, office or institutional, commercial or industrial
land uses. It is the intent of this section to require compliance with these
standards whenever existing structures and/or uses are enlarged or expanded
and additional parking is required by this section.



      (2)   Each new or expanded off-street parking lot shall be
constructed in such a manner that its surface material shall be dust free.
This is to be accomplished by concrete or blacktop (if another non-dust
producing surface is proposed, it must be approved by the Planning Board).
Each automobile parking space shall be provided with adequate access and
maneuvering area to each space. Each parking lot shall be provided with
vehicular access to a street or alley.



      (3)   All off-street parking lots shall be graded and drained
so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area in
accordance with the design standards of the City of Albemarle Engineering
Department.



   (C)   Pre-development Site Review. Site plans for proposed
development shall comply with the requirements of this section prior to
issuance of a zoning permit. Such plans shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Director.



   (D)   Definitions.



      (1)   "LANDSCAPING."  The existing and/or proposed features
of real estate which are intended to enhance and/or buffer a development,
including but not limited to trees, shrubs, lawns, and rocks.



      (2)   "PARKING LOT."  An open paved space, intended to
accommodate ten or more vehicles, which uses designated or marked areas to
provide parking for shopping, offices, or dwelling accommodations.



      (3)   "PARKING SPACE."  A marked area, intended to
acconunodate a parked vehicle.



      (4)   "PARKWAY."  The unpaved portion of a public road or
street right-of-way abutting a parcel.



      (5)   "PRESERVABLE TREE."  Any tree for which tree removal
requires a tree removal permit.



      (6)   "PROPERTY OWNER."  Includes the owner of an easement.



      (7)   "REMOVE(D) OR REMOVAL."  The physical removal or
effective removal through cutting, chopping, sawing, damaging, topping,
poisoning, or other direct or indirect action intended to result in the death
of a tree. It shall not mean normal pruning or trimming of a tree.



      (8)   "SITE PLANS."  Plans to be submitted by the property
owner or developer depicting and describing the changes that will occur as
the parking lot is developed; particular attention should be paid to
identifying preservable trees.



      (9)   "TURF GRASS."  Areas of mown ground cover grasses
primarily consisting of bluegrass, fescue and rye grass.



   (E)   Landscaping Requirements.



      (1)   Interior areas of parking lots. The area(s) within the
property used for parking and movement shall provide landscaping as follows:



         (a)   A small shrub (mature height of 2-4 feet) shall
have a planting area of nine square feet. Minimum size at installation shall
be a three gallon container with roots filling the container.



         (b)   A medium shrub (mature height of 4-15 feet) shall
have a planting area of 25 square feet. Minimum size at installation shall be
a seven gallon container with roots filling the container.



         (c)   A small tree (mature height of less than 20 feet)
should have a planting width of at least eight feet and an open area of at
least 100 square feet. Minimum planting area is an 8 x 12.5 foot rectangle.



         (d)   Medium tree (mature height less than 35 feet)
should have a planting width of at eight feet and an open space of at least
150 square feet. Minimum planting area is an 8 x 18.75 foot rectangle.



         (e)   Large tree (mature height greater than 35 feet)
should have a planting area of at least 200 square feet. Minimum planting
area dimension is a 10 x 20 foot rectangle.



   (F)   Plants Required.



      (1)   One small tree shall be required for every ten parking
spaces or one medium tree shall be required for every 15 or fewer parking
spaces; or one large tree for every 20 or fewer spaces; or a combination of
tree sizes based on the number of parking spaces and the size of the planting
area.



   The following example is given for illustrative and guidance purposes
in the application of this subsection:



A parking lot having 38 parking spaces would require a minimum of four small
trees or three medium trees, or two large trees or two small and one large
tree or two small and two medium trees,or one small, one medium, and one
large tree.



      (2)   One small shrub shall be required for every five or
fewer parking spaces; or one medium shrub for every ten parking spaces; or a
combination of small and medium shrubs based on the number of parking spaces,
the amount of planting spaces available and any sight elevation problems that
may be encountered in the parking lot.



      (3)   The minimum size of the planting area will be based on
the total minimum square foot area required by each shrub and tree to be
planted in that area.



   The following example is given for illustrative and guidance purposes
in the application of this section:



One medium tree and four small shrubs are to be planted in a traffic island
The minimum size of the planting are will be:



      (1)   medium tree: 150 square feet



      (4)   small shrubs: 36 square feet Total area needed: 186
square feet



      (4)   Required trees and shrubs shall be distributed
throughout the vehicular area and be placed as landscaped islands at each end
of parking aisles so that no parking space is located more than 60 feet from
a parking lot tree so as to assist in traffic delineation and control.



      (5)   Planting areas shall comply with the specified
calculations at a minimum and shall be protected from vehicular encroachment
by curbing or wheel stops at least six inches in height.



      (6)   All tree planting areas not affected by turf grass or
low growing ground cover shall be adequately mulched to a minimum depth of
two inches with organic material such as shredded bark or pine needles to
conserve moisture and discourage growth of noxious weeds.



      (7)   Separation from structures. All parking areas, unless
located on or within a structure, shall be separated from the exterior wall
of a structure exclusive of paved pedestrian entrance ways or loading areas
by a buffer strip of at least five feet in width which shall be landscaped
with mulch, pine straw, or shrubs.



   (G)   Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner, or in the event of a property transfer, the subsequent property
owner's responsibility to maintain and ensure the survival of the plant
material and planting areas in perpetuity. Plants and trees thatdo not
survive planting or for some reason succumb to injury, disease and/or insect
infestation must be replaced during the first planting season following the
death of the plant(s) in accordance with the specifications of this section,



   (H)   Performance Guarantee. Landscape and tree planting
requirements may be deferred to an appropriate planting season, based on a
decision made by the Planning Director in order to facilitate a property
owner's desire to obtain a certificate of occupancy. This provision is meant
to allow for seasonal extremes in weather and soil conditions which may be
incompatible to landscaping. It is not, however, meant to be used in any way
to circumvent the intent and purpose of this section. No Certificate of
occupancy shall be approved until:



      (1)   The required landscaping is completed in accordance with
the approved plan; or



      (2)   A bond or certified check, payable to the city, in the
amount of 100% of the estimated cost to assure installation of the required
landscaping. The amount of the bond shall be submitted by the developer and
reviewed and determined by the city staff to be acceptable; or



      (3)   An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank in a
form approved by the City Attorney may be accepted in lieu of bond under the
terms and conditions applicable to bonds in Subsection (b) above; and



      (4)   No surety or portion thereof, as provided for in this
section, shall be released by the city until all landscaping has been
installed, inspected and approved.



   (I)   Exceptions.  When parking is provided underground or within a
building, the above requirements shall not apply.



   (J)   Street tree front and side line landscaping facing city or DOT
streets.



      (1)   Street tree planting requirements.



         (a)   The required planting strip must be comprised of a
row of canopy or ornamental trees planted an average of 35 feet on center and
located at least five feet behind the street, utility right-of-way,
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.



         (b)   Medium and large trees must be a least two and
one-half inches in caliper and no less than eight feet in height at the time
of installation and shall have an expected mature height of at least 30 feet.



         (c)   Small trees must be at least one and one-half
inches in caliper and no less than six feet in height and an expected height
of no more than 20 feet and shall be required under overhead utility lines.



         (d)   The above size and height standards shall apply to
interior landscaping of parking lots.



      (2)   Tree and shrub species  The following is a list of
recommended trees and shrubs by common name:



         (a)   Trees - large.



               1.   American Elm (disease resistant variety
only);



               2.   Ash;



               3.   Black Locust;



               4.   Ginkgo;



               5.   Hickory;



               6.   Norway Maple;



               7.   Pecan;



               8.   Red Maple;



               9.   Red Oak;



               10.   River Birch;



               11.   Sweet Gum (fruitless);



               12.   Sugar Maple;



               13.   White Oak;



               14.   White Pine;



               15.   Zelkova.



         (b)   Trees - medium.



               1.   American Holly;



               2.   Dogwood;



               3.   European White Birch Pendula;



               4.   Carolina Silver Bell;



               5.   Flowering Crabapple;



               6.   Magnolia;



               7.   Redbud.



         (c)   Trees - small.



               1.   Autumn Cherry;



               2.   Azalea;



               3.   Crepe Myrtle;



               4.   Flowering Crabapple;



               5.   Flowering Dogwood;



               6.   Japanese Cherry varieties;



               7.   Japanese Maple;



               8.   Kousa Dogwood;



               9.   Ornamental grass species;



               10.   Purple-leaf Plum;



               11.   Red Mulberry;



               12.   Redbud;



               13.   Trident Maple.



         (d)   Shrubs - small.



               1.   Carissa Holly;



               2.   Flowering Quince;



               3.   Forsythia;



               4.   India Hawthorne;



               5.   Japanese Barberry;



               6.   Nandina;



               7.   Pfitzer Juniper;



               8.   Purple Beauty Berry.



         (e)   Shrubs - medium.



               1.   Obelia Grandiflora;



               2.   Camellia;



               3.   Carolina Allspice;



               4.   Fragrant Sumac;



               5.   Hedge Conteaster;



               6.   Laurelcherry;



               7.   Lilac;



               8.   Loropetalum;



               9.   Mapleleaf Viburnum and species;



               10.   Rhododendron;



               11.   Rose of Sharon;



               12.   Sargents Chinese Juniper;



               13.   Weigela;



               14.   Witch Hazel.



      (3)   The use of other species shall only be allowed by
written permission of the Director of Planning and Community Development.



(Ord. 99-43, passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 10-03, passed 2-1-10)



§ 92.095 ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The Building Inspector is hereby authorized, and it shall be his duty
to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter. If a ruling of the
Building Inspector is questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal
the ruling to the City manager for his decision. If the City Manager's
decision is questioned, his ruling may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.



('58 Code, § 19-110)



§ 92.096 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No building, sign, or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended
or enlarged, or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of
any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the Building
Inspector has issued a zoning permit for the work. Every person obtaining a
zoning permit hereunder shall pay a fee therefor, as provided in § 90.38.



('58 Code, § 19-111)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.097 APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT; EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Each application to the Building Inspector for a zoning permit
shall be accompanied by plot plans in duplicate showing the following.



      (1)   The actual dimensions of the lot to be built on.



      (2)   The size of the building to be erected.



      (3)   The location of the building on the lot.



      (4)   The location of existing structures on the lot, if any.



      (5)   The number of dwelling units the building is designed to
accommodate.



      (6)   The approximate setback lines of buildings on adjoining
lots.



      (7)   Any other information as may be essential for
determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed.



   (B)   Any zoning permit issued shall expire and be canceled unless
the work authorized by it shall have begun within six months of its date of
issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period
of one year. Written notice thereof shall be given to the person affected,
including notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall
not proceed unless and until a special zoning permit has been obtained.



('58 Code, § 19-112)



§ 92.098  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.



   (A)    A certificate of occupancy issued by the Building Inspector
is required in advance of the following.



      (1)   Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected,
altered, or moved.



      (2)   A change of use of any building or land.



      (3)   Each nonconforming use created by the passage and
subsequent amendments to this chapter. The owner of the nonconforming use
shall obtain a certificate of occupancy within 30 days of the date of the
passage or amendments.



   (B)   A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of
a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or
structural alteration of the building, or part, shall have been completed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of occupancy
shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to
the applicable provisions of this chapter. If the certificate of occupancy is
denied, the Building Inspector shall state in writing the reasons for
refusal, and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all
certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector,
and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any person having a proprietary
or tenancy interest in the building or land involved.



('58 Code, § 19-113) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.099  REMEDIES.



   (A)   In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building or land is used
in violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector, or any other
appropriate city authority, or any person who would be damaged by the
violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for
injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent
the violation.



   (B)   In case any sign shall be installed, erected, or constructed
in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, the Building Inspector
shall notify by personal notice or registered mail the owner or lessee
thereof to alter the sign so as to comply with the provisions of this chapter
and to secure the necessary permit therefor, or to remove the sign. If an
order is not complied with within ten days, the Building Inspector shall
remove the sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. In the event
that a sign or wall bulletin should become insecure, or in danger of falling,
the person maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice from the Building
Inspector, forthwith, in case of immediate danger, and in any case, within
ten days, secure the sign in a manner approved by the Building Inspector.



('58 Code, § 19-114) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.100  PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   A petition for a zoning amendment may be initiated by the City
Council, the Planning Board, any department or agency of the city, the owner
or any property within the zoning jurisdiction of the city, or any interested
citizen who can show cause for an amendment.



   (B)    Any application for amendment to this chapter shall be filed
with the Director of Planning and Community Development at least 17 days
prior to the date on which it is to be introduced to the Planning Board. 
Adjoining property owners shall be notified by First Class Mail not less than
ten days prior to the Planning Board meeting.  The Director of Planning and
Community Development shall be responsible for presenting the application to
the Planning Board.  Each petition for an amendment shall be accompanied by
a fee as provided in the schedule of fees relative to planning and zoning
established by resolution of the City Council to help defray the cost of
advertising thee public hearing required by the General Statutes.  If a
public hearing is not held, the fee shall be refunded to the petitioner. Each
application shall be signed and shall contain at least the following
information.



      (1)    The applicant’s name in full, applicant’s address,
and the address or description of the property to be rezoned.



      (2)    Applicant’s interest in the property and the type of
rezoning requested.



      (3)    If the proposed change would require a change in the
zoning map, an accurate diagram of the property proposed for rezoning showing
the following.



         (a)    All property lines with dimensions including a
north arrow.



         (b)    Adjoining streets with rights-of-way and paving
widths.



         (c)    The location of all structures and the use of all
land.



         (d)    Zoning classification of all abutting zoning
districts.



         (e)    Comprehensive site plan if the application is for
commercial, industrial, or multi-family development.



   (C)   Unless initiated by the Planning Board, all proposed
amendments to this chapter shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
review and comment.  If no written report is received from the Planning
Board within 30 days of referral of the amendment to that Board, the City
Council may proceed in its consideration of the amendment without the
Planning Board report.  The City Council is not bound by the
recommendations, if any, of the Planning Board.



   (D)   A public hearing shall be held by the City Council before the
adoption, amendment, or repeal of any part of this chapter.



      (1)   A notice of the public hearing shall be given once a
week for two successive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city, the notice to be published the first time not less than ten days
nor more than 25 days prior to the date established for the public hearing.
In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included but
the day of the hearing shall be included. The City Council shall not consider
any presentation made by the petitioner that, if the change is granted, the
rezoned property will be used for only one of the possible range of uses
permitted in the requested classification. Rather, the City Council shall
consider whether the entire range of permitted uses in the requesting
classification is more appropriate than the range of uses in the existing
classification, except in the case of a conditional use rezoning



      (2)   Whenever there is a zoning map amendment, the owner of
that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing, and the owners of all
parcels of land abutting that parcel of land as shown on the county tax
listing, shall be mailed a notice of a public hearing on the proposed
amendment by first class mail at the last addresses listed for such owners on
the county tax abstracts. This notice must be deposited in the mail at least
ten but not more than 25 days prior to the date of the public hearing. The
person or persons mailing such notices shall certify to the City Council that
fact, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.



      (3)   The first class mail notice required under this section
shall not be required if the zoning map amendment directly affects more than
50 properties, owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners, and
the city elects to use the expanded published notice provided for in this
subsection. In this instance, a city may elect to either make the mailed
notice provided for in division (D)(2) of this section or may as an
alternative elect to publish notice of the hearing as required by G.S.
160A-364, but provided that each advertisement shall not be less than one
half of a newspaper page in size. The advertisement shall only be effective
for property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the
newspaper which publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside of
the newspaper circulation area, according to the address listed on the most
recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified
according to the provisions of division (D)(2) of this section.



      (4)   When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the city shall
prominently post a notice of the public hearing on the site proposed for
rezoning or on an adjacent public street or highway right of way. When
multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map amendment, a
posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the city shall post
sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested persons.



   (E)   Any petition for an amendment to this chapter may be withdrawn
at any time at the discretion of the person initiating the request, upon
written notice to the City Clerk.



   (F)   When the City Council shall have denied any application for
the change of any zoning district, it shall not thereafter accept any other
application for the same change of zoning district affecting the same
property, or any portion thereof, until the expiration of six months from the
date of the previous denial.



   (G)   Qualified protests.



      (1)   This chapter may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, modified or repealed. In case, however, of a qualified
protest against a zoning map amendment, that amendment shall not become
effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the
City Council. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the
Council and members who are excused from voting shall not be considered
"members of the Council" for calculation of the requisite supermajority.



      (2)   To qualify as a protest under this section, the petition
must be signed by the owners of either (i) 20% or more of the area included
in the proposed change or (ii) 5% of a 100 foot wide buffer extending along
the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be rezoned.
A street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the 100 foot
buffer area as long as that street right-of-way is 100 feet wide or less.
When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the proposed zoning map
amendment, the 100 foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of
that parcel. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may rely on
the county tax listing to determine the "owners" of potentially qualifying
areas.



      (3)   The foregoing provisions concerning protests shall not
be applicable to any amendment which initially zones property added to the
territorial coverage of the chapter as a result of annexation or otherwise,
or to an amendment to an adopted (i) special use district, (ii) conditional
use district, or (iii) conditional district if the amendment does not change
the types of uses that are permitted within the district or increase the
approved density for residential development, or increase the total approved
size of nonresidential development, or reduce the size of any buffers or
screening approved for the special use district, conditional use district, or
conditional district.



      (4)   No protest against any change in or amendment to a
zoning ordinance or zoning map shall be valid or effective for the purposes
of G.S. 160A-385 unless it be in the form of a written petition actually
bearing the signatures of the requisite number of property owners and stating
that the signers do protest the proposed change or amendment, and unless it
shall have been received by the City Clerk in sufficient time to allow the
city at least two normal work days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays, before the date established for a public hearing on the proposed
change or amendment to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the
petition. The City Council may by ordinance require that all protest
petitions be on a form prescribed and furnished by the city, and such form
may prescribe any reasonable information deemed necessary to permit the city
to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. A person who has
signed a protest petition may withdraw his or her name from the petition at
any time prior to the vote on the proposed zoning amendment. Only those
protest petitions that meet the qualifying standards set forth in G.S.
160A-385 at the time of the vote on the zoning amendment shall trigger the
supermajority voting requirement.



   (H)   The Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the
proposed amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been
adopted and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable. The
Planning Board shall provide a written recommendation to the Board of County
Commissioners that addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board, but a comment by the Planning Board that a
proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall not
preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the governing
board.



   (I)   Zoning regulations shall be made in accordance with a
comprehensive plan. Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the
governing board shall adopt a statement describing whether its action is
consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and explaining why the board
considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest. That
statement is not subject to judicial review.



('58 Code, § 19-130)   (Am. Ord. 81-12, passed 6-15-81; Am. Ord. 89- 35,
passed 12-18-89; Am. Ord. 94-20, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 98-01, passed
1-20-98; Am. Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 07-42, passed 11-19-07; Am.
Ord. 13-38, passed 9-16-13)



§ 92.101  PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)    Purpose.



      (1)    Conditional uses are established to provide for the
location of those uses which are generally com-patible with other land uses
permitted in a zoning district, but which, because of their unique
characteristics or potential impacts on the surrounding neighborhood and the
city as a whole, require individual consideration of their location, design,
configuration, and/or operation at the particular location proposed. Such
individual consideration may also call for the imposition of individualized
conditions in order to ensure that the use is appropriate at a particular
location, and to ensure protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
Any conditional use identified in this chapter shall not be permitted without
the approval of the City Council in accordance with the requirements and
procedures set forth in this section.



   (B)    Pre-application conference.



      (1)    It is highly recommended that the conditional use
applicant meet with pertinent city staff in a pre-application conference
prior to the submittal of a request for approval of a conditional use. The
purposes of this conference are to provide additional information regarding
the review pro-cess and assistance in the preparation of the application.



   (C)    Materials for submittal.



      (1)    Applications for a conditional use permit shall include
any materials deemed necessary by the Planning Director, his or her designee,
or City Council to adequately show the location, design, configuration,
and/or operations of the proposed use at the parcel.



   (D)    Approval process.



      (1)    Application.  An application for a conditional use
permit shall be filed by the owner of the property, or by an agent specific-
ally authorized by the owner to file the application. Where an agent files
the application, the agent shall pro- vide documentation that the owner of
the property has authorized the filing of the application. Each application
for a conditional use permit shall contain all required information.
Incomplete applications shall not be accepted.



      (2)    Fees.  Each application submitted to the City Council
shall be accompanied by a fee, as provided in the schedule of fees relative
to planning and zoning established by resolution of the City Council, to
defray the expense of processing the application.



      (3)    Notice of hearings.  Prior to a public hearing, notice
of hearings on conditional use permit applications shall follow § 21.71(B).



      (4)    Procedure.  Following notice as required in §
21.71(B), the City Council shall hold a quasi-judi-cial public hearing per §
21.72(B)-(E).



      (5)    Decision.  After conducting the public hearing, City
Council shall:



         (a)    Approve the request;



         (b)    Approve the request with conditions;



         (c)    Deny the request; or



         (d)    Continue the hearing.



   (E)    Standards for a decision.



      (1)    Before a request for a conditional use permit is
granted, City Council must show that all of the following standards are met:



         (a)    The use will not materially endanger the public
health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to the
plan as submitted and provided.



         (b)    The use meets all required conditions and
specifications.



         (c)    The use will not substantially injure the value
of adjoining or abutting property, or, alternatively, that the use is a
public necessity.



         (d)    The proposed use is in harmony with adjacent uses
in terms of location, scale, site design, hours of operation and operating
characteristics.



         (e)    The proposed use is in general conformance with
adopted plans.



      (2)    The City Council may approve conditional use
applications with additional conditions or require- ments based upon the
following stan- dards, so as to assure that the afore- mentioned criteria
have been addressed:



         (a)    Placement.  Specific placement of primary and/or
accessory structures and/or uses.



         (b)    Parking spaces with ingress and egress. 
Location of on-site parking, designated loading areas, and means of
ingress/egress for all vehicles including service vehicles.



         (c)    Environmental impact. Compliance with laws,
including but not limited to, floodplain and watershed regulations.



         (d)    Screening, buffering, and landscaping. 
Installation of screening, buffering, fencing and landscaping where necessary
to protect adjacent property.



         (e)    Effect on nearby pro-perties.  Effects of
proposed use on nearby properties, including but not limited to, the effects
of noise, odor, lighting, and traffic.



         (f)    Compatibility.  The level of general
compatibility with nearby properties and impacted neighborhoods, including
but not limited to, the appropriateness of the scale, design, and use in
relationship to other properties.



         (g)    Consistency with policy. Consistency with the
city land use plan and applicable area plans, overlay purposes, and zoning
district intent in this chapter.



         (h)    Other factors.  Any other review factors which
the City Council considers to be appropriate to the property in question.



   (F)    Expiration.



      (1)    A conditional use permit shall become null and void in
any of the following cases:



         (a)    If a building permit and/or commencement of
approved use has not been secured within one year after the date of approval
by City Council.



         (b)    When the conditional use is changed to another
use for more than 30 days, other than that for which the conditional use
permit was issued; or the conditional use is discontinued or ceased for a
continuous period of 180 days or more without the re-appro- val of City
Council. Without the re-approval of City Council, the conditional use permit
is null and void, and continuation of the special use is a violation of this
ordinance.



         (c)    If there is an expan-sion of use without the
re-approval of City Council.



         (d)    If a substantial violation of the conditions of
the permit, as determined by the Planning Director or designee, occurs. The
addition of language to the conditional use permit regarding such voiding
shall not be required.



   (G)    Re-submission of denied applications.



      (1)    No application for approval of a development project
(conditional use, site plan, project plan) shall be filed with or accepted by
the Planning Department if that project is identical or substantially similar
to a condi-tional use application which has been denied by the City Council
within one year of the final action by the City Council denying the request.



   (H)    Appeals.



      (1)    An appeal from the decision of the City Council
regarding a condi-tional use application may be made by an aggrieved party,
and shall be made to the Superior Court of Stanly County in the nature of
certiorari. Any such petition to the Superior Court shall be filed with the
court no later than 30 days after a written copy of the decision of the City
Council is received by the applicant.



   (I)    Record keeping.



      (1)    Conditional use permits shall be recorded in the chain
of title so that future purchasers of a property will by fully aware of all
conditional use permit stipulations.



(Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 15-19, passed 6-1-15; Am. Ord. 17-07,
passed 3-20-17)



§ 92.102  ESTABLISHING A DEVELOPMENT MORATORIUM.



   (A)   The city may adopt temporary moratoria on any city development
approval required by law. The duration of any moratorium shall be reasonable
in light of the specific conditions that warrant imposition of the morato-
rium and may not exceed the period of time necessary to correct, modify, or
resolve such conditions. Except in cases of imminent and substantial threat
to public health or safety, before adopting an ordinance imposing a
development moratorium with a duration of 60 days or any shorter period, the
governing board shall hold a public hearing and shall publish a notice of the
hearing in a newspaper having general circulation in the area not less than
seven days before the date set for the hearing. A development moratorium with
a duration of 61 days or longer, and any extension of a moratorium so that
the total duration is 61 days or longer, is subject to the notice and hearing
requirements of G.S. 160A-364. Absent an imminent threat to public health or
safety, a development moratorium adopted pursuant to this section shall not
apply to any project for which a valid building permit issued pursuant to
G.S. 160A-417 is outstanding, to any project for which a conditional use
permit application or special use permit application has been accepted, to
development set forth in a site specific or phased development plan approved
pursuant to G.S. 160A-385.1, to development for which substantial
expenditures have already been made in good faith reliance on a prior valid
administrative or quasi- judicial permit or approval, or to preliminary or
final subdivision plats that have been accepted for review by the city prior
to the call for public hearing to adopt the moratorium. Any preliminary
subdivision plat accepted for review by the city prior to the call for public
hearing, if subse- quently approved, shall be allowed to proceed to final
plat approval without being subject to the moratorium.



   (B)   Any ordinance establishing a development moratorium must
expressly include at the time of adoption each of the following:



      (1)   A clear statement of the problems or conditions
necessitating the moratorium and what courses of action, alternative to a
moratorium, were considered by the city and why those alternative courses of
action were not deemed adequate.



      (2)   A clear statement of the development approvals subject
to the moratorium and how a moratorium on those approvals will address the
problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.



      (3)   An express date for termination of the moratorium and a
statement setting forth why that duration is reasonably necessary to address
the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.



      (4)   A clear statement of the actions, and the schedule for
those actions, proposed to be taken by the city during the duration of the
moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the
moratorium.



   (C)   No moratorium may be subsequently renewed or extended for any
additional period unless the city shall have taken all reasonable and
feasible steps proposed to be taken by the city in its ordinance establishing
the moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of
the moratorium and unless new facts and conditions warrant an extension. Any
ordinance renewing or extending a development moratorium must expressly
include, at the time of adoption, the findings set forth in division (B)(1)
through (4) of this section, including what new facts or conditions warrant
the extension.



   (D)   Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a moratorium on
development approvals required by law may apply to the appropriate division
of the General Court of Justice for an order enjoining the enforcement of the
moratorium, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue that order.
Actions brought pursuant to this section shall be set down for immediate
hearing, and subsequent proceedings in those actions shall be accorded
priority by the trial and appellate courts. In any such action, the city
shall have the burden of showing compliance with the procedural requirements
of this division.



(Ord. 06-08, passed 4-3-06)



BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



§ 92.110  VARIANCES AND APPEALS.



   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide on all requests for
variances to prescribed requirements of the zoning ordinance and appeals of
the decision of administrative officials charged with enforcement of the
ordinance. The Board shall conduct its hearings in accordance with §§ 21.70
through 21.74, and shall otherwise adhere to all requirements therein.



(Ord. 16-28, passed 8-15-16)



SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT - ZONING VESTED RIGHTS



§ 92.120  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to implement the provisions of G.S.
160A-385.1 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established
upon the approval of a site specific development plan.



(Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



§ 92.121  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   "APPROVAL AUTHORITY."  The City Council or other board or official
designated by ordinance or the provisions this subchapter as being authorized
to grant the specific zoning or land use permit or approval that constitutes
a site specific development plan.



   "SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN."  A plan of land development
submitted to the city for purposes of obtaining one of the following zoning
or land use permits or approvals. Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a
variance, a sketch plan nor any other document that fails to describe with
reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use for a specified parcel or
parcels of property shall constitute a site specific development plan.



   "ZONING VESTED RIGHT."  A right pursuant to G.S. 160A-385.1 to
undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms
and conditions of an approved site specific development plan.



(Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



§ 92.122  ESTABLISHMENT OF A ZONING VESTED RIGHT.



   (A)    A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the
valid approval, or conditional approval, by the City Council as applicable,
of a site specific development plan, following notice and public hearing.



   (B)    The approving authority may approve a site specific
development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (C)    Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) of this section,
approval of a site specific development plan with the condition that a
variance be obtained shall not confer a zoning vested right unless and until
the necessary variance is obtained.



   (D)    A site specific development plan shall be deemed approved
upon the effective date of the approval authority's action or ordinance
relating thereto.



   (E)    The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude
the application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but
does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or
regulations that are general in nature and are applicable to all property
subject to land-use regulation by the city, including, but not limited to,
building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes. Otherwise
applicable new or amended regulations shall become effective with respect to
property that is subject to a site specific development plan upon the
expiration or termination of the vested right in accordance with this chapter.



   (F)    A zoning vested right is not personal right, but shall attach
to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific
development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled
to exercise such right while applicable.



(Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



§ 92.123  APPROVAL PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY.



   (A)    Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application
for site specific development plan approval shall be processed in accordance
with the procedures established by ordinance and shall be considered by the
designated approval authority for the specific type of zoning or land use
permit or approval for which application is made.



   (B)    In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon
approval of a site specific development plan, the applicant must indicate at
the time of application, on a form to be provided by the city, that a zoning
vested right is being sought.



   (C)    Each map, plat, site plan or other document evidencing a site
specific development plan shall contain the following notation: "Approval of
this plan establishes a zoning vested right under G. S. 160A-385.1. Unless
terminated at an earlier date, the zoning vested right shall be valid until
(date)."



   (D)    Following approval or conditional approval of a site specific
development plan, nothing in this subchapter shall exempt such a plan from
subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and
conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals
are not inconsistent with the original approval.



   (E)    Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit the revocation of
the original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable
terms and conditions of the approval or this chapter and any other applicable
ordinance of the city.



(Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



§ 92.124  DURATION.



   (A)    A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this
chapter shall remain vested for a period of two years unless specifically and
unambiguously provided otherwise pursuant to division (B) of this section.
This vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or modifications to a
site specific development plan unless expressly provided by the approval
authority at the time the amendment or modification is approved.



   (B)    Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this
section, the approval authority may provide that rights shall be vested for a
period exceeding two years but not exceeding five years where warranted in
light of all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the size
of the development, the level of investment, the need for or desirability of
the development, economic cycles, and market conditions. These determinations
shall be in the sound discretion of the approval authority at the time the
site specific development plan is approved.



   (C)    Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions
of G. S. 160A-418 and the revocation provisions of G. S. 160A-422 shall
apply, except that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked because
of the running of time while a zoning vested right under this section is
outstanding. (Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



§ 92.125  TERMINATION.



   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this chapter shall
terminate:



   (A)    At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to
buildings and uses for which no valid permit applications have been filed;



   (B)    With the written consent of the affected landowner;



   (C)    Upon findings by the City Council, by ordinance after notice
and a public hearing, that natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate
vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as
contemplated in the site specific development plan;



   (D)    Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for
all cost, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including,
but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all
architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant's fees
incurred after approval by the city, together with interest thereon at the
legal. rate until paid. compensation shall not include any diminution in the
value of the property which is caused by such action.



   (E)    Upon findings by the city Council, by ordinance after notice
and a hearing, that the landowner or his representative intentionally
supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which
made a difference in the approval by the approval authority of the site
specific development plan; or



   (F)    Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law
or regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site specific
development plan, in which case the approval authority may modify the
affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law
has a fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance after notice and a hearing.



(Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



§ 92.126  VOLUNTARY ANNEXATION.



   A petition for annexation filed with the city under G. S. 160A-31 or G.
S. 160A-58.1 shall contain a signed statement declaring whether or not any
zoning vested right with respect to the properties subject to the petition
has been established under G. S. 160A-385.1 or G. S. 153A-344.1. A statement
that declares that no zoning vested right has been established under G.S.
160A-385.1 or G. S. 153A-344.1, or the failure to sign a statement declaring
whether or not a zoning vested right has been established, shall be binding
on the landowner and any such zoning vested right shall be terminated.



(Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



§ 92.127  LIMITATIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter is intended or shall be deemed to create any
vested right other than those established pursuant to G. S. 160A-385.1.



(Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



§ 92.128  REPEALER.



   In the event that G. S. 160A-385.1 is repealed, this subchapter shall
be deemed repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective.



(Ord. 91-28, passed 1-6-92)



CHAPTER 93:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION



Section



Preface



   93.01   Statutory authorization



   93.02   Findings of fact



   93.03   Statement of purpose



   93.04   Objectives



   93.05   Definitions



General Provisions



   93.20   Lands to which the chapter applies



   93.21   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas



   93.22   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   93.23   Compliance



   93.24   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   93.25   Interpretation



   93.26   Warning and disclaimer of liability



Administration



   93.31   Designation of Floodplain Administrator



   93.32   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements



   93.33   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   93.34   Corrective procedures



   93.35   Variance procedures



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   93.41   General standards



   93.42   Specific standards



   93.43   Standards for floodplains without established base flood
elevations



   93.44   Standards for riverine floodplains base flood elevations but
without established floodways or non- encroachment areas



   93.45   Floodways and non-encroachment areas



   93.46   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO)



Legal Status Provisions



   93.51   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood
damage prevention chapter



   93.52   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits



 



   93.99   Penalty



PREFACE



§ 93.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has G.S. Chapter 143,
Article 21, Part 6, and Chapter 160A, Article 19, Parts 3, 5, and 8 and
Chapter 160A, Article 8 delegated to local governmental units the
responsibility  to adopt  regulations  designed  to promote the public
health,  safety, and general welfare.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the City of
Albemarle are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life,
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities
and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or
other hazards.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in
damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development
that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges) that are located in flood prone areas;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood prone areas; and



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a
Special Flood Hazard Area.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Words and phrases. Unless specifically defined below, words or
phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most
reasonable application.



   "ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE)."  A structure located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure.  Garages, carports and
storage sheds are common urban accessory structures.  Pole barns, hay sheds
and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.



   "ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING)."  An extension or increase in the
floor area or height of a building or structure.



   "APPEAL."  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   "AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING."  A designated Zone AO on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from
one to three feet.  These areas are located where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.



   "AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD."  See "Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA)".



   "BASE FLOOD."  The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.



   "BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)."  A determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When
the BFE has not been provided in a "Special Flood Hazard Area", it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other
source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies.  This elevation, when
combined with the "Freeboard", establishes the "Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation".



   "BASEMENT."  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   "BUILDING."  See "Structure".



   "CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY."  A building, portion of a building, or
exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.



   "DEVELOPMENT."  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.



   "DISPOSAL."  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge,
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste
into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part
of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.



   "ELEVATED BUILDING."  A non-basement building which has its lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings, or columns.



   "ENCROACHMENT."  The advance or infringement of uses, fill,
excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   "EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION."  A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.



   "FLOOD" or "FLOODING"  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   "FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM)."  An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the
Special Flood Hazard Areas and the floodways are delineated.  This official
map is a supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).



   "FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM)." means an official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas have been defined as Zone A.



   "FLOOD INSURANCE."  The insurance coverage provided under the National
Flood Insurance Program.



   "FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)." means an official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both
the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated.



   "FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)."  An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The Flood Insurance
Study report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published.



   "FLOOD PRONE AREA." See "Floodplain."



   "FLOOD ZONE."  A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary
Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of
flooding in the area.



   "FLOODPLAIN."  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.



   "FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR." The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   "FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT."  Any type of permit that is required
in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement
of any development activity.



   "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT."  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   "FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS." This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power.  This
term describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.



   "FLOODPROOFING."  any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.



   "FLOODWAY."  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.



   "FREEBOARD."  The height added to the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) to
account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the "Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation".



   "FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY." A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water,
limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading
of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair.  The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



   "HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY."  As defined in G.S. Chapter
130A, Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing,
treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.



   "HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG)."  The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls
of the structure.



   "HISTORIC STRUCTURE." 



      (1)   Any structure that is:



         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places (a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic landmarks in communities with a "Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program"; or



         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical
significance of a historic district designated by a community with a
"Certified Local Government (CLG) Program".



      (2)   Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved
by the US Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina
Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation
Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 as amended in 1980.



   "LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG)."  The elevation of the ground, sidewalk
or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after
completion of the building.



   "LOWEST FLOOR."  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an
area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   "MANUFACTURED HOME."  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
The term "MANUFACTURED HOME" does not include a "recreational vehicle".



   "MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION."  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   "MARKET VALUE."  The building value, not including the land value and
that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot.  "MARKET
VALUE" may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement
cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash
value); or adjusted tax assessed values.



   "MEAN SEA LEVEL."  For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which
Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced.  Refer to each
FIRM panel to determine datum used.



   "NEW CONSTRUCTION."  Structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.



   "NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA."  The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.



   "POST-FIRM."  Construction or other development for which the "start
of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map.



   "PRE-FIRM."  Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map.



   "PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND."  That at least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure is above ground.



   "PUBLIC SAFETY" and/or "NUISANCE." Anything which is injurious to the
safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable
number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or
basin.



   "RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV)."  A vehicle, which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self- propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   "REFERENCE LEVEL."  The top of the lowest floor for structures within
Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.



   "REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION."  The "Base Flood Elevation"
plus the "Freeboard".  In "Special Flood Hazard Areas" where Base Flood
Elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus
two feet of freeboard.  In "Special Flood Hazard Areas" where no BFE has
been established, this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest
adjacent grade.



   "REMEDY A VIOLATION."  To bring the structure or other development
into compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations,
or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other
development.



   "RIVERINE."  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   "SALVAGE YARD."  Any non-residential property used for the storage,
collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.



   "SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY."  Any facility involved in the
disposal of solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).



   "SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE."  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36),
any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary
landfill, or any other method.



   "SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)." The land in the floodplain subject
to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as
determined in § 93.21 of this chapter.



   "START OF CONSTRUCTION."  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.



   "STRUCTURE."  A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas, liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.



   "SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE."  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.  See definition of "substantial
improvement".  "SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE" also means flood-related damage
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period
for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the
average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.



   "SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT."  Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, taking place during any one-year period for which the cost equals
or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement.  This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed.  The term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or
community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.



   "VARIANCE." Is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.



   "VIOLATION."  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.  A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in §§ 93.31
through 93.35 and 93.41 through 93.46 is presumed to be in violation until
such time as that documentation is provided.



   "WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE)."  The height, in relation to mean sea
level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
riverine areas.



   "WATERCOURSE."  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. 
"WATERCOURSE" includes specifically designated areas in which substantial
flood damage may occur.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.20  LANDS TO WHICH THE CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the
jurisdiction, including Extra- Territorial Jurisdictions (ETJs), of the City
of Albemarle and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose
governing body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.21  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   (A)   The Special Flood Hazard Areas are those identified under the
Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North
Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for Stanly County dated September 3, 2008,
which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.



   (B)   The initial Flood Insurance Rate Maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date:  Stanly County Unincorporated
Area, dated December 1, 1981. City of Albemarle, dated December 1, 1981.



   (C)   In addition, upon annexation to the City of Albemarle or
inclusion in the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ), the Special Flood
Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
and/or produced under the Cooperating Technical State agreement between the
State of North Carolina and FEMA as stated above, for the Unincorporated
Areas of Stanly County, with accompanying maps and other supporting data are
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.22  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with
the provisions of §§ 93.20 through 93.26.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.23  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.24  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.25  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.26  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration.  Larger floods can and will occur.  Actual flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This chapter does not imply
that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter shall
not create liability on the part of  the City of Albemarle or by any officer
or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 93.31  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Director of Planning and Community Development, hereinafter
referred to as the "Floodplain Administrator", is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.32  FLOODPLAIN  DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application requirements.  Application for a Floodplain
Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any
development activities located within Special Flood Hazard Areas.  The
following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply
for a floodplain development permit:



      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed
floodplain development:



         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures,
utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas,
drainage facilities, and other development;



         (b)   The boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as
delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in § 93.21, or a
statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard Area;



         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed
development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined
in § 93.21;



         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in § 93.32;



         (e)   The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as
set forth in § 93.21; § 93.33; or § 93.43;



         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and



         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered
land surveyor or professional engineer.



      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all
development within a Special Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:



         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;



         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any non- residential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and



         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.



      (3)   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form
81-65) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation,
exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measure.



      (4)   A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale, which shall include
details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this
chapter are met.  These details include but are not limited to:



         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable
(such as fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation,
open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and



         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with § 93.42(4)(c) when
solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30.



      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest
floor.



      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to
be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal
permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been
received.



      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles
and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions
of § 93.42(F) and (G) of this chapter are met.



      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if
not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.



   (B)   Permit requirements.  The Floodplain Development Permit shall
include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit.



      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the
proposed development in accordance with available data specified in § 93.21.



      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the reference level and all attendant utilities.



      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the protection of all public utilities.



      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.



      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development
shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse,
as applicable.



      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE
or A1-30.



      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if
applicable).  (Such as parking, building access and limited storage only).



   (C)   Certification requirements.



      (1)   Elevation certificates.



         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction.  It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level.  The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder prior to the beginning of construction.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny
a floodplain development permit.



         (b)   A final as-built Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form
81-31) is required after construction is completed and prior to Certificate
of Compliance/Occupancy issuance.  It shall be the duty of the permit holder
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance.  In some instances, another certification may be required to
certify corrected as-built construction.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.



      (2)   Floodproofing Certificate.  If non-residential
floodproofing is used to meet the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation
requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting
data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are
required prior to the actual start of any new construction.  It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and
all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level.  Floodproofing
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same.  The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and
the inspection and maintenance plan.  Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval.  Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to deny a Floodplain Development Permit.  Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance
of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.



      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE,
or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height
above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance
with  the provisions of § 93.42(C)(2).



      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a
professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the
location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be
submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit.



      (5)   Certification exemptions.  The following structures, if
located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the
elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in items (a) and
(b) of this subsection:



         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
93.42(F)(1);



         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
93.42(G); and



         (c)   Accessory Structures less than 150 square feet
meeting requirements of § 93.42(H).



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.32



§ 93.33  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:



   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue
permits for all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to
assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



   (B)   Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard
Areas to assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been
received.



   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department
of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained.



   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment
areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
93.45 are met.



   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new
and substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 93.32(C).



   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of § 93.32(C).



   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with the provisions of § 93.32(C).



   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure,
obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of § 93.32(C)and § 93.42(B).



   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, or non-encroachment
areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. 
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this
chapter.



   (K)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 93.20, obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data
available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed
pursuant to § 93.43(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this
chapter.



   (L)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no
floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with
the provisions of § 93.21, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, State,
or other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.



   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a
structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a Special Flood
Hazard Area is above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE), advise the property
owner of the option to apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from
FEMA.  Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain
development permit file.



   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this chapter and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy
Act of 1974, as amended.



   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress.  As the work
pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary
to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the
local ordinance and the terms of the permit.  In exercising this power, the
Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required.  Whenever a building or
part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in
violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to
be immediately stopped.  The stop-work order shall be in writing and
directed to the person doing or in charge of the work.  The stop-work order
shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the
stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. 
Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.



   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required.  The
Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the
reason(s) for the revocation.  Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for
refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or local laws; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit.  Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
State or local law may also be revoked.



   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the Special Flood Hazard
Areas within the jurisdiction of the community.  The Floodplain
Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of § 93.34.



   (T)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.



   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited
to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of § 93.21, including any revisions thereto
including Letters of Map Change, issued by FEMA.  Notify State and FEMA of
mapping needs.



   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including
Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision
(LOMRs).



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.34  CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator
finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her
duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation.  The
owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law
cited in such notification.



   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action.  If
the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective
action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal
service, stating:



      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the
floodplain management regulations;



      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain
Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after
the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to
the matter; and



      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator
may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove
fill as applicable.



   (C)   Order to take corrective action.  If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall
find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage
Prevention Chapter, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner,
requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period,
not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days.  Where the
Floodplain Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other
property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser
period as may be feasible.



   (D)   Appeal.  Any owner who has received an order to take
corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by
giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the
Clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order.  In the absence
of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final.  The
local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may
affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no
appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished at the discretion of the court.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



§ 93.35  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Albemarle Board of Adjustment as established by the City
of Albemarle, hereinafter referred to as the "appeal board", shall hear and
decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.



   (C)   Variances may be issued for:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon
the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure;



      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet
the definition as stated in § 93.05, provided provisions of § 93.35(I)(2),
(3), and (5) have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety; or



      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the
requirements of this section.



   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this section, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location
as defined under § 93.05 as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.



   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purposes of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter.



   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice specifying the difference between the Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such
construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage.  Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance.



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request.



   (I)   Conditions for variances:



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will
make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws,
regulations, or ordinances.



      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway or non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development
permit approval.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities
or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical
storage facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided
that all of the following conditions are met.



      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.



      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the
Special Flood Hazard Area.



      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or
floodproofed to at least the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.



      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal,
state and local laws.



      (5)   The City of Albemarle has notified the Secretary of the
North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention
to grant a variance at least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 93.41  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.



   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so
as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes,
utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.



   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter.



   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the
effective date of this chapter and located totally or partially within the
floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that
such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other
requirements of this chapter.



   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall
not be permitted, except by variance as specified in § 93.35(J).  A
structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use
or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment
facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the structure
or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood
protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
93.32(C).



   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies
for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a Special Flood
Hazard Area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new
construction and substantial improvements.



   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or
in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the
provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) shall apply.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.42  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data
has been provided, as set forth in § 93.21, or this section, the following
provisions, in addition to the provisions of § 93.41, are required:



   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in § 93.05.



   (B)   Non-residential construction.  New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other
non-residential structure shall have the reference level, including basement,
elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined
in § 93.05.  Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be
floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of
elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection
elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy.  For AO
Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with §
93.46(A)(2).  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied.  Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth
in § 93.32(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and
maintenance plan.



   (C)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated
so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 93.05.



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance
with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S.
§ 143-143.15.  Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an
elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the
chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. 
When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an
engineering certification is required.



      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall
meet the requirements of § 93.42(D).



      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of
all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas.
This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator
and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.



   (D)   Elevated buildings.  Fully enclosed area, of new construction
and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:



      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but
shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for
parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment
(standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator).  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished
or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant
materials at least to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation; and



      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood
openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  To meet this requirement,
the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides
of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be
at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;



         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area,
each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to
automatically enter and exit;



         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be
no higher than one-foot above the adjacent grade;



         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not
considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require
flood openings.  Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural
status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined
above.



   (E)   Additions/improvements.



      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more non-conforming than the existing structure.



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications
to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.



      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures
when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction.



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



   (F)   Recreational vehicles.  Recreational vehicles shall either:



      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be
fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached
additions); or



      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.



   (G)   Temporary non-residential structures.  Prior to the issuance
of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant
must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such
structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood
warning notification.  The following information shall be submitted in
writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:



      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will
be permitted.  Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to
one year;



      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure
will be removed (such as minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane
or immediately upon flood warning notification);



      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with
the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and



      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location
outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the temporary structure will
be moved.



   (H)   Accessory structures.  When accessory structures (sheds,
detached garages and the like) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard
Area, the following criteria shall be met:



      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas)



      (2)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;



      (3)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential;



      (4)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;



      (5)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with the provisions of § 93.41;



      (6)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of § 93.41(D); and



      (7)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of § 93.42(D)(3).



   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that
satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or
floodproofing certificate.  Elevation or floodproofing certifications are
required for all other accessory structures in accordance with § 93.32(C).



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.43  STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATIONS.



   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A
and established in § 93.21, where no Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has
been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the
provisions of § 93.41, shall apply:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a
distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the
stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical
data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria:



      (1)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from
other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such
areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and
shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§ 93.41
and 93.42.



      (2)   When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from
a federal, state, or other source, all new construction and substantial
improvements within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also comply
with the requirements of §§ 93.41 and 93.45.



      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other
development proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if
development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured
home sites.  Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by
reference in accordance with § 93.21 and utilized in implementing this
chapter.



      (4)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available
from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the reference level
shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §§ 93.05.  All other applicable
provisions of § 93.42 shall also apply.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.44  STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.



   Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is
provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor
non-encroachment areas are identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the
FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all
development within such areas:



   (A)   Standards of §§ 93.41 and 93.42; and



   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is
designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification
with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is
provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.45  FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.



   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located
within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in § 93.21.  The
floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the
velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and
potential projectiles.  The following provisions, in addition to standards
outlined in §§ 93.41 and 93.42, shall apply to all development within such
areas:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:



      (1)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would
not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or



      (2)   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been
approved by FEMA.  A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained
upon completion of the proposed encroachment.



   (B)   If § 93.45(A) is satisfied, all development shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided the following provisions are met:



      (1)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
93.42(C); and



      (2)   The no encroachment standard of § 93.45(A).



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.46  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).



   Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in § 93.21,
are areas designated as shallow flooding areas.  These areas have special
flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate.  In addition to §§ 93.41 and 93.42, all
new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the following
requirements:



   (A)   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the
depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus
a freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two
feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.



   (B)   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be
floodproofed to the same level as required in § 93.46(A) so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below
that level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
Certification is required in accordance with § 93.32(C), § 93.42(B).



   (C)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS



§ 93.51  EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION CHAPTER.



   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted November 23, 1981
as amended, classified as Chapter 93 of the Code or Ordinances of the City of
Albemarle and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may
be enforced.  The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action,
suit or proceeding instituted or pending.  All provisions of the Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City of Albemarle enacted on November 23,
1981, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed. The date of
the initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance for Stanly County is December
1, 1981.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.52  EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date
of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violates this chapter or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or
both.  Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Albemarle from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.



(Ord. 08-32, passed 9-3-08)



CHAPTER 94:  WATERSHED AREAS



Section



Authority and General Regulations



   94.01   Authority and enactment



   94.02   Jurisdiction



   94.03   Exceptions to applicability



   94.04   Definitions



   94.05   Severability



   94.06   Effective date



Subdivision Regulations



   94.11   General provisions



   94.11(a)   Subdivision application and review procedures



   94.12   Subdivision standards and required improvements



   94.13   Construction procedures



   94.14   Penalties for transferring lots in unapproved subdivisions



Development Regulations



   94.15   Establishment of watershed areas



   94.16   Cluster development



   94.17   Buffer areas required



   94.18   Rules governing the interpretation of watershed area
boundaries



   94.19   Application of regulations



   94.20   Existing development



   94.21   Watershed protection permit



   94.22   Building permit required



   94.23   Watershed protection occupancy permit



Public Health Regulations



   94.27   Public health generally



   94.28   Abatement



Administration, Enforcement and Appeals



   94.31   Watershed Administrator; duties



   94.32   Appeal from Watershed Administrator



   94.33   Changes and amendments to the watershed protection ordinance



   94.34   Public notice and hearing required



   94.35   Watershed Review Board; establishment



   94.36   Rules of conduct for members



   94.37   Powers and duties of Watershed Review Board



   94.38   Appeals from Watershed Review Board



   94.98   Remedies



   94.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Application forms



   Appendix B:   Rules for procedure for the Watershed Review Board
regarding appeals and variances



AUTHORITY AND GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 94.01  AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT.



   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has, in G.S. Chapter
160A, Article 8, Section 174, General Ordinance Authority; and in Chapter
143, Article 21, Watershed Protection Rules, delegated the responsibility or
directed local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. The
governing board of city does hereby ordain and enact into law the following
sections the Watershed Protection Chapter of the city.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.02  JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the areas designated
as a Public Water Supply Watershed by the State Environmental Management
Commission and shall be defined and established on the map entitled,
"Watershed Protection Map of the City of Albemarle, North Carolina" ("the
watershed map"), which is adopted simultaneously herewith. The watershed map
and all explanatory matter contained thereon accompanies and is hereby made a
part of this chapter. This chapter shall be permanently kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.03  EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Nothing contained herein shall repeal, modify, or amend any
federal or state law or regulation, or any chapter or regulation pertaining
thereto except any chapter which these regulations specifically replace; nor
shall any provision of this chapter amend, modify, or restrict any provisions
of the city code; however, the adoption of this chapter shall and does amend
any and all ordinances, resolutions, and regulations in effect in the city at
the time of the adoption of this chapter that may be construed to impair or
reduce the effectiveness of this chapter or to conflict with any of its
provisions.



   (B)   It is not intended that these regulations interfere with any
easement, covenants, or other agreements between parties. However, if the
provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions or higher
standards for the use of a building or land, then the provisions of these
regulations shall control.



   (C)   Existing development, as defined in this chapter, is not
subject to the requirements of this chapter. Expansions to structures
classified as existing development must meet the requirements of this
chapter; however, the built-upon area of the existing development is not
required to be included in the density calculations.



   (D)   A pre-existing lot owned by an individual prior to the
effective date of this chapter, regardless of whether or not a vested right
has been established, may be developed for single family residential purposes
without being subject to the restrictions of this chapter. However, this
exemption is not applicable to multiple contiguous lots under single
ownership. See § 94.20(A)(2) regarding the recombination of existing lots.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.04  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   "AGRICULTURAL USE."  The use of waters for stock
watering, irrigation, and other farm purposes.



      (2)   "ANIMAL UNIT."  A unit of measurement developed by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency that is used to compare different types
of animal operations.



      (3)   "BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES BMP ."  A structural or
nonstructural management-based practice used singularly or in combination to
reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water
quality protection goals.



      (4)   "BUFFER."  An area of natural or planted vegetation
through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff
does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff
and filtering of pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the normal
pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of
streams or rivers.



      (5)   "BUILDING."  Any structure having a roof supported by
columns or by walls, and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of
persons, animals, or property.



      (6)   "BUILT-UPON AREA."  Built upon areas shall include that
portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or partially
impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel roads, recreation
facilities (for example tennis courts)and the like. (Note: Wooden slatted
decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.)



      (7)   "CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT."  The grouping of buildings in
order to conserve land resources and provide for innovation in the design of
the project. This term includes non-residential development as well as
single-family residential subdivisions and multifamily developments that do
not involve the subdivision of land.



      (8)   "COMPOSTING FACILITY."  A facility in which only
stumps, limbs, leaves, grass, and untreated wood collected from land clearing
or landscaping operations is deposited.



      (9)   "CRITICAL AREA."  The area adjacent to a water supply
intake or reservoir where risk associated with pollution is greater than from
the remaining portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as
extending either 1/2 mile from the normal pool elevation of the reservoir in
which the intake is located or to the ridge line of the watershed (whichever
comes first); or 1/2 mile upstream from the intake located directly in the
stream or river (run-of-the-river), or the ridge line of the watershed
(whichever comes first). Since WS-I watersheds are essentially undeveloped,
establishment of a critical area is not required. Local governments may
extend the critical area as needed. Major landmarks such as highways or
property lines may be used to undeveloped, establishment of a critical area
is not required. Local governments may extend the critical area as needed.
Major landmarks such as highways or property lines may be used to delineate
the outer boundary of the critical area if these landmarks are immediately
adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary of 1/2 mile.



      (10)   "CUSTOMARY HOMEOCCUPATIONS."  Any use conducted
entirely within a dwelling or accessory structure and carried on by the
occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character
thereof. Provided further that no mechanical equipment is installed or used
except as is normally used for domestic or professional purposes.



      (11)   "DEVELOPMENT."  Any land disturbing activity which
adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on
a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation
into the soil.



      (12)   "DISCHARGING LANDFILL."  A facility with liners,
monitoring equipment and other measures to detect and/or prevent leachate
from entering the environment and in which the leachate is treated on site
and discharged to a receiving stream.



      (13)   "DWELLING UNIT."  A building, or portion thereof,
providing complete and permanent living facilities for one family.



      (14)   "EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.”  Those projects that are
built or those projects that at a minimum have established a vested right
under North Carolina zoning law as of the effective date of this chapter
based on at least one of the following criteria:



         (a)   Substantial expenditures of resources (time,
labor, money) based on a good faith reliance upon having received a valid
local government approval to proceed with the project,



         (b)   Having an outstanding valid building permit as
authorized by G.S. §§ 153A-344.1 and 160A-385.1), or



         (c)   Having expended substantial resources (time,
labor, money) and having an approved site specific or phased development plan
as authorized by the G.S. §§ 153A-344.1 and 160A-385.1).



      (15)   "EXISTING LOT (LOT OF RECORD."  A lot which is part of
a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of this chapter, or a lot described
by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to
the adoption of this chapter.



      (16)   "FAMILY."  One or more persons occupying a single
dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood or
marriage or adoption, no such family shall contain over five persons, but
further provided that domestic servants employed or living on the premises
may be housed on the premises without being counted as a family or families.



      (17)   "HAZARDOUS MATERIAL."  Any substance listed as such
in: SARA Section 302, Extremely Hazardous Substances, CERCLA Hazardous
Substances, or Section 311 of CWA (oil and hazardous substances).



      (18)   "INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT."  Any non-residential
development that requires an NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or
requires the use or storage of any hazardous material for the purpose of
manufacturing, assembling, finishing, cleaning, or developing any product or
commodity.



      (19)   "LANDFILL."  A facility for the disposal of solid
waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance with G.S. Chapter 130A,
Article 9. For the purpose of this chapter this term does not include
composting facilities.



      (20)   "LOT."  A parcel of land occupied or capable of being
occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use,
together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.



      (21)   "MAJOR VARIANCE."  A variance that results in any one
or more of the following:



         (a)   The complete waiver of a management requirement;



         (b)   The relaxation, by a factor of more than 10%, of
any management requirement that takes the form of a numerical standard;



         (c)   The relaxation of any management requirement that
applies to a development proposal intended to qualify under the high density
option.



      (22)   "MINOR VARIANCE."  A variance that does not qualify as
a major variance.



      (23)   "NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT."  All development other
than residential development, agriculture, and silviculture.



      (24)   "PLAT."  A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to
be, or has been 'subdivided.



      (25)   "PROTECTED AREA."  The area adjoining and upstream of
the critical area in a WS-IV water supply in which protection measures are
required. The boundaries of the protected areas are defined as extending five
miles upstream and draining to water supply reservoirs (measured from the
normal pool elevation) or to the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes
first); or ten miles upstream and draining to the intake located directly in
the stream or river (run-of-the river), or to the ridge line of the watershed
(whichever comes first). Local governments may extend the protected area.
Major landmarks such as highways or property lines may be used to delineate
the outer boundary of the protected area if these landmarks are immediately
adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary of five or ten miles. In some
cases the protected area will encompass the entire watershed.



      (26)   "RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT."  Buildings for residence
such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes,
condominiums, townhouses, cottages, and the like and their associated
outbuildings such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos, and the like and
customary home occupations.



      (27)   "SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.”  Any development where:



         (a)   No building contains more that one development
unit:



         (b)   Every dwelling unit is on a separate lot, and



         (c)   Where no lot contains more than one dwelling unit.



      (28)   "STREET (ROAD)."  A right-of-way for vehicular traffic
which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.



      (29)   "STRUCTURE."  Anything constructed or erected,
including but not limited to buildings, which requires location on the land
or attachment to something having permanent location on the land.



      (30)   "SUBDIVIDER."  Any person, firm, or corporation who
subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.



      (31)   "SUBDIVISION."  All divisions of a tract or parcel of
land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the
purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and
shall include all division of land involving the dedication of a new street
or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included
within this definition nor be subject to the regulations authorized by this
chapter:



         (a)   The combination or recombination of portions of
previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not
increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this
chapter;



         (b)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten
acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;



         (c)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of
land for the widening or opening of streets;



         (d)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose
entire area is no greater than five acres into not more than three lots,
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant
lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the this chapter; or



         (e)   The division of a tract into plots or lots used as
a cemetery.



      (32)   "TOXIC SUBSTANCE."  Any substance or combination of
substances (including disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon
exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any organism, either
directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains,
has the potential to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer,
genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions or
suppression in reproduction or growth), or physical deformities in such
organisms or their off spring or other adverse health effects.



      (33)   "VARIANCE."  A permission to develop or use property
granted by the Watershed Review Board relaxing or waiving a water supply
watershed management requirement adopted by the Environmental Management
Commission that is incorporated into this chapter.



      (34)   "WATER DEPENDENT STRUCTURE."  Any structure for which
the use requires access to or proximity to or citing within surface waters to
fulfill its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks, and
bulkheads. Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat
supplies, parking lots, and commercial boat storage areas are not water
dependent structures.



      (35)   "WATERSHED."  The entire land area contributing
surface drainage to a specific point (for example, the water supply intake.)



      (36)   "WATERSHED ADMINISTRATOR."  An official or designated
person of the city responsible for administration and enforcement of this
chapter.



   (B)   Word interpretation. For the purpose of this chapter, certain
words shall be interpreted as follows:



      (1)   words in the present tense include the future tense.



      (2)   Words used in the singular number include the plural,
and words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the natural
construction of the wording indicates otherwise.



      (3)   The word "PERSON" includes a firm, association,
corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual.



      (4)   The word "STRUCTURE" shall include the word "BUILDING".



      (5)   The word "LOT" shall include the words, "PLOT,""PARCEL,"
or "TRACT."



      (6)   The word "SHALL" is always mandatory and not merely
directory. The word "WILL" is always mandatory and not merely directory.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93; Am. Ord. 94-15, passed 5-16-94)



§ 94.05  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration
shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof
that is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.06  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter shall take effect and be in force on July 1, 1993.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



§ 94.11  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No subdivision plat of land within the Public Water Supply
Watershed shall be filed or recorded by the Register of Deeds until it has
been approved in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. Likewise,
the Clerk of Superior Court shall not order or direct the recording of a plat
if the recording of such plat would be in conflict with this subchapter.



   (B)   The approval of a plat does not constitute or effect the
acceptance by the city or the public of the dedication of any street or other
ground, easement, right-of-way, public utility line, or other public facility
shown on the plat and shall not be construed to do so.



   (C) All subdivisions shall conform with the mapping requirements
contained in G.S. § 47-30.



   (D)   All subdivisions of land within the jurisdiction of the city
after the effective date of this chapter shall require a plat to be prepared,
approved, and recorded pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.11(a)  SUBDIVISION APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   (A)   All proposed subdivisions shall be reviewed prior to recording
with the Register of Deeds by submitting a vicinity map to the Watershed
Administrator to determined whether or not the property is located within the
designated Public Water Supply Watershed. Subdivisions that are not within
the designated watershed area shall not be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and may be recorded provided the Watershed Administrator affixes his
signature to a legend on the plat certifying the subdivision is not located
within the watershed. In addition, subdivisions within a WS-IV watershed are
subject to the provisions of this chapter only when an erosion and
sedimentation plan is required under the provisions of state law, or approved
local program. Subdivisions within the designated watershed area shall comply
with the provisions of this subchapter and all other state and local
requirements that may apply.



   (B)   Subdivision applications shall be filed with the Watershed
Administrator. The application shall include a completed application form,
two copies of the plat and supporting documentation deemed necessary by the
Watershed Administrator (see Appendix A).



   (C)   The Watershed Administrator shall review the completed
application and submit recommendations to the Watershed Review Board for
further review and final action. The Watershed Review Board shall either
approve, approve conditionally or disapprove each application by a majority
vote of the members present and voting. First consideration of the
application shall be at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board
after the application is submitted. The Board shall take final action within
45 days of its first consideration. The Watershed Administrator may provide
public agencies an opportunity to review and make recommendations. However,
failure of the agencies to submit their comments and recommendations shall
not delay the Board's action within the prescribed time limit. Those public
agencies may include, but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The District Highway Engineer with regard to proposed
streets and highways.



      (2)   The Director of the Health Department with regard to
proposed private water system or sewer systems normally approved by the
Health Department.



      (3)   The State Division of Environmental Management with
regard to proposed sewer systems normally approved by the Division,
engineered storm water controls or storm water management in general.



      (4)   Any other agency or official designated by the Watershed
Administrator.



   (D)   If the Watershed Review Board approves the application, such
approval shall be indicated on both copies of the plat by the following
certificate and signed by the chairman or other authorized member of the
Board:




Certificate of Approval for Recording




"I certify that the plat shown hereon complies with the Watershed Protection
Chapter and is approved by the Watershed Review Board for recording in the
Register of Deeds office.



_______________      _____________________________________
Date            Chairman, Watershed Review Board



NOTICE: This property is located within a Public Water Supply Watershed -
development restrictions may apply."



   (E)   If the Watershed Review Board disapproves or approves
conditionally the application, the reasons for such action shall be stated in
writing for the applicant and entered in the minutes. The subdivider may make
changes and submit a revised plan which shall constitute a separate request
for the purpose of review.



   (F)   All subdivision plats shall comply with the requirements for
recording of the County Register of Deeds.



   (G)   The subdivider shall provide the Watershed Administrator with
evidence the plat has been recorded with the Register of Deeds within five
working days of its being recorded.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.12  SUBDIVISION STANDARDS AND REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   All lots shall provide adequate building space in accordance
with the development standards contained in §§ 94.15 to 94.23. Lots which
are smaller than the minimum required for residential lots shall be
identified on the plat as, "NOT FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES".



   (B)   For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project
area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be
developed.



   (C)   Storm water drainage facilities. The application shall be
accompanied by a description of the proposed method of providing storm water
drainage. The subdivider shall provide a drainage system that diverts
stormwater runoff away from surface waters and incorporates best management
practices to minimize water quality impacts.



   (D)   Erosion and sedimentation control.  The application shall,
where required, be accompanied by a written statement that a Sedimentation
and Erosion Control Plan has been submitted to and approved by the North
Carolina Department of Environmental Health and Natural Resources, Land
Quality Section.



   (E)   Roads constructed in critical areas and watershed buffer
areas.  Where possible, roads should be located outside of critical areas
and watershed buffer areas. Roads constructed within these areas shall be
designed and constructed so to minimize their impact on water quality.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.13  CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   No construction or installation of improvements shall commence
in a proposed subdivision until a subdivision plat has been approved by the
Watershed Review Board.



   (B)   No building or other permits shall be issued for erection of a
structure on any lot not of record at the time of adoption of this chapter
until all requirements of this chapter have been met. The subdivider, prior
to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with
the Watershed Administrator to provide for adequate inspection.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.14  PENALTIES FOR TRANSFERRING LOTS IN UNAPPROVED SUBDIVISIONS.



   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land
located within the jurisdiction of the city, thereafter subdivides his land
in violation of this chapter or transfers or sells land by reference to,
exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land
before the plat has been properly approved under this chapter and recorded in
the office of the register of deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
document used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt
the transaction from this penalty. The city may bring an action for
injunction of any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance, or sale of land,
and the court shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an injunction and order
requiring the offending party to comply with this chapter.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS



§ 94.15  ESTABLISHMENT OF WATERSHED, AREAS.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to list and describe the
watershed areas herein adopted as follows.



   (B)   WS-IV Watershed Areas - Protected Area (WS-IV-PA). Only new
development activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control plan
under state law or approved local government program are required to meet the
provisions of this chapter when located in a WS-IV watershed. A maximum of
two dwelling units per acre or 24% builtupon is allowed for projects with
curb and gutter street systems. A maximum of three dwelling units per acre or
36% built-upon area is allowed for projects without a curb and gutter street
system.



      (1)   Uses allowed:



         (a)   Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food
Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and Trade Act
of 1990.



         (b)   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the
Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC 11.6101-.0209).



         (c)   Residential development.



         (d)   Non-residential development, excluding the storage
of toxic and hazardous materials unless a spill containment plan is
implemented.



      (2)   Density and built-upon limits:



         (a)   Single-family residential development shall not
exceed two dwelling units per acre, as defined on a project by project basis.
No residential lot shall be less than 1/2 acre, or 1/3 acre for projects
without a curb and gutter system, except within an approved cluster
development.



         (b)   All other residential and non-residential
development shall not exceed 24% built-upon area on a project by project
basis. For projects without a curb and gutter street system, development
shall not exceed 36% built-upon area on a project by project basis for the
purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project area shall include
acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed.



         (c)   In addition to the development allowed under
subdivisions (a) and (b) above, new development and expansions to existing
development may occupy up to ten percent of the protected area with up to 70%
builtupon area on a project by project basis, when approved as a special
intensity allocation (SIA). The Watershed Administrator is authorized to
approve SIAs consistent with the provisions of this section. Projects must,
to the maximum extent practicable, minimize built-upon surface area, direct
stormwater away from surface waters and incorporate Best Management Practices
to minimize water quality impacts. For the purpose of calculating built-upon
area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which
the project is to be developed.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93; Am. Ord. 96-04, passed 3-18-96)  Penalty, see
§ 94.99



§ 94.16  CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.



   Clustering of a development is allowed in all watershed areas (except
WS-I) under the following conditions:



   (A)   Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single-family cluster
development projects; however, the total number of lots shall not exceed the
number of lots allowed for single-family detached developments in § 94.15.
Builtupon area or stormwater control requirements of the project shall not
exceed that allowed for the critical area or balance of watershed, whichever
applies.



   (B)   All built-upon area shall be designed and located to minimize
stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated
stormwater flow.



   (C)   The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or
natural state. Where the development has an incorporated property owners
association, the title of the open space area shall be conveyed to the
association for management. Where a property association is not incorporated,
a maintenance agreement shall be filed with the property deeds.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.17  BUFFER AREAS REQUIRED.



   (A)   A minimum 100-foot vegetative buffer is required for all new
development activities that exceed the low density option; otherwise, a
minimum 30-foot vegetative buffer for development activities is required
along all perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S.
1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local
government studies. Desirable artificial streambank or shoreline
stabilization is permitted.



   (B)   No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water
dependent structures and public projects such as road crossings and greenways
where no practical alternative exists. These activities should minimize
built-upon surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters and
maximize the utilization of stormwater Best Management Practices.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.18  RULES GOVERNING THE INTERPRETATION OF WATERSHED AREA BOUNDARIES.



   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the watershed areas,
as shown on the watershed map, the following rules shall apply:



   (A)   Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following
either street, alley, railroad or highway lines or centerlines thereof, such
lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.



   (B)   Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. However,
a surveyed plat prepared by a registered land surveyor may be submitted to
the city as evidence that one or more properties along these boundaries do
not lie within the watershed area.



   (C)   Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled distance
more than 25 feet from any parallel lot line, the location of watershed area
boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the watershed
map.



   (D)   where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled distance
of 25 feet or less from any parallel lot line, the location of watershed area
boundaries shall be construed to be the lot line.



   (E)   Where other uncertainty exists, the Watershed Administrator
shall interpret the watershed map as to location of such boundaries. This
decision may be appealed to the Watershed Review Board.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.19  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS



   (A)   No building or land shall hereafter be used and no development
shall take place except in conformity with the regulations herein specified
for the watershed area in which it is located.



   (B)   No area required for the purpose of complying with the
provisions of this chapter shall be included in the area required for another
building.



   (C)   Every residential building hereafter erected, moved, or
structurally altered shall be located on a lot which conforms to the
regulations herein specified, except as permitted in Section 307.



   (D)   If a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as
being allowed in a watershed area, such use or class of use is prohibited.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.20 EXISTING DEVELOPMENT.



   Any existing development as defined in this chapter, may be continued
and maintained subject to the provisions provided herein. Expansions to
structures classified as existing development must meet the requirements of
this chapter; however, the built-upon area of the existing development is not
required to be included in the density calculations.



   (A)   Vacant lots. This category consists of vacant lots for which
plats or deeds have been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of
the county. Lots may be used for any of the uses allowed in the watershed
area in which it is located, provided the following:



      (1)   Where the lot area is below the minimum specified in
this chapter the watershed Administrator is authorized to issue a watershed
protection permit.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever two or more
contiguous residential vacant lots of record are in single ownership at any
time after the adoption of this chapter and such lots individually have less
area than the minimum requirements for residential purposes for the watershed
area in which such lots are located, such lots shall be combined to create
one or more lots that meet the standards of this chapter, or if this is
impossible, reduce to the extent possible the nonconformity of the lots.



   (B)   Occupied lots. This category consists of lots, occupied for
residential purposes at the time of the adoption of this chapter. These lots
may continue to be used provided that whenever two or more adjoining lots of
record, one of which is occupied, are in single ownership at any time after
the adoption of this chapter, and such lots individually or together have
less area than the minimum requirements for residential purposes for the
watershed area in which they are located, such lots shall be combined to
create lots which meet the minimum size requirements or which minimize the
degree of nonconformity.



   (C)   Uses of land. This category consists of uses existing at the
time of adoption of this chapter where such use of the land is not permitted
to be established hereafter in the watershed area in which it is located.
Such uses may be continued except as follows:



      (1)   When such use of land has been changed to an allowed
use, it shall not thereafter revert to any prohibited use.



      (2)   Such use of land shall be changed only to an allowed use.



      (3)   When such use ceases for a period of at least one year,
it shall not be reestablished.



   (D)   Reconstruction of buildings or built-upon areas. Any existing
building or built-upon area not in conformance with the restrictions of this
chapter that has been damaged or removed may be repaired and/or
reconstructed, except that there are no restrictions on single-family
residential development, provided:



      (1)   Repair or reconstruction is initiated within 12 months
and completed within two years of such damage.



      (2)   The total amount of space devoted to built-upon area may
not be increased unless stormwater control that equals or exceeds the
previous development is provided.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.21  WATERSHED PROTECTION PERMIT.



   (A)   Except where a single-family residence is constructed on a lot
deeded prior to the effective date of this. chapter, no building or
built-upon area=shall be erected, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered,
nor shall any building permit be issued nor shall any change in the use of
any building or land be made until a watershed protection permit has been
issued by the watershed Administrator. No watershed protection permit shall
be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Watershed protection permit applications shall be filed with
the watershed Administrator. The application shall include a completed
application form (see Appendix A) and supporting documentation deemed
necessary by the Watershed Administrator.



   (C)   Prior to issuance of a watershed protection permit, the
Watershed Administrator may consult with qualified personnel for assistance
to determine if the application meets the requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   A watershed protection permit shall expire if a building
permit or watershed occupancy permit for such use is not obtained by the
applicant within 12 months from the date of issuance.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.22  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Except for a single-family residence constructed on a lot deeded prior
to the effective date of this chapter, no permit required under the North
Carolina State Building Code shall be issued for any activity for which a
watershed protection permit is required until that permit has been issued.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.23  WATERSHED PROTECTION OCCUPANCY PERMIT.



   (A)   The Watershed Administrator shall issue a watershed protection
occupancy permit certifying that all requirements of this chapter have been
met prior to the occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered,
or moved and/or prior to the change of use of any building or land.



   (B)   A watershed protection occupancy permit, either for the whole
or part of a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application
for a watershed protection permit and shall be issued or denied within ten
days after the erection or structural alterations of the building.



   (C)   When only a change in use of land or existing building occurs,
the Watershed Administrator shall issue a watershed protection occupancy
permit certifying that all requirements of this chapter have been met
coincident with the watershed protection permit.



   (D)   If the watershed protection occupancy permit is denied, the
Watershed Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing stating the
reasons for denial.



   (E)   No building or structure which has been erected, moved, or
structurally altered may be occupied until the Watershed Administrator has
approved and issued a watershed protection occupancy permit.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)  Penalty, see § 94.99



PUBLIC HEALTH REGULATIONS



§ 94.27 PUBLIC HEALTH GENERALLY.



   No activity, situation, structure, or land use shall be allowed within
the watershed which poses a threat to water quality and the public health,
safety, and welfare. Such conditions may arise from inadequate on-site sewage
systems which utilize ground absorption; inadequate sedimentation and erosion
control measures; the improper storage or disposal of junk, trash, or other
refuse within a buffer area; the absence or improper implementation of a
spill containment plan for toxic and hazardous materials; the improper
management of stormwater runoff; or any other situation found to pose a
threat to water quality.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93) Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.28  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   The Watershed Administrator shall monitor land use activities
within the watershed areas to identify situations that may pose a threat to
water quality.



   (B)   The Watershed Administrator shall report all findings to the
Watershed Review Board. The Watershed Administrator may consult with any
public agency or official and request recommendations.



   (C)   Where the Watershed Review Board finds a threat to water
quality and the public health, safety, and welfare, the Board shall institute
any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain, correct, or abate the
condition and/or violation.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS



§ 94.31  WATERSHED ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.



   The city shall appoint a Watershed Administrator, who shall be duly
sworn in. It shall be the duty of the Watershed Administrator to administer
and enforce the provisions of this chapter as follows:



   (A)   The Watershed Administrator shall issue watershed protection
permits and watershed protection occupancy permits as prescribed herein. A
record of all permits shall be kept on file and shall be available for public
inspection during regular office hours of the Administrator.



   (B)    The Watershed Administrator shall serve as clerk to the
Watershed Review Board.



   (C)   The Watershed Administrator shall keep records of all
amendments to the local water supply watershed protection chapter and shall
provide copies of all amendments upon adoption to the Supervisor of the
Classification and Standards Group, Water Quality Section, Division of
Environmental Management.



   (D)   The Watershed Administrator is granted the authority to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, exercising in the
fulfillment of his responsibility the full police power of the city. The
Watershed Administrator, or his duly authorized representative, may enter any
building, structure, or premises, as provided by law, to perform any duty
imposed upon him by this chapter.



   (E)   The Watershed Administrator shall keep a record of variances
to the local water supply watershed protection chapter. This record shall be
submitted to the Supervisor of the Classification and Standards Group, Water
Quality Section, Division of Environmental Management on or before January 1
of the following year and shall provide a description of each project
receiving a variance and the reasons for granting the variance.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93; Am. Ord. 94-15, passed 5-16-94)



§ 94.32  APPEAL FROM THE WATERSHED ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Watershed Administrator may be appealed to and decided by the Watershed
Review Board.



   (B)   An appeal from a decision of the Watershed Administrator must
be submitted to the Watershed Review Board within 30 days from the date the
order, interpretation, decision, or determination is made. All appeals must
be made in writing stating the reasons for appeal. Following submission of an
appeal, the Watershed Administrator shall transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.



   (C)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Board after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by
a court of record on application of notice of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and upon due cause shown.



   (D)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal
and give notice thereof to the parties and shall decide the same within a
reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or
by attorney.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.33  CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS TO THE WATERSHED PROTECTION ORDINANCE.



   (A)   The city governing board may, on its own motion or on
petition, after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement, change, or
modify the watershed regulations, and restrictions as described herein.



   (B)   No action shall be taken until the proposal has been submitted
to the Watershed Review Board for review and recommendations. If no
recommendation has been received from the Watershed Review Board within 45
days after submission of the proposal to the Chairman of the Watershed Review
Board, the city governing board may proceed as though a favorable report had
been received.



   (C)   Under no circumstances shall the city governing board adopt
such amendments, supplements, or changes that would cause this chapter to
violate the watershed protection rules as adopted by the State Environmental
Management Commission. All amendments must be filed with the State Division
of Environmental Management, State Division of Environmental Health, and the
State Division of Community Assistance.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.34  PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIRED.



   Before adopting or amending this chapter, the city governing board
shall hold a public hearing on the proposed changes. A notice of the public
hearing shall be given once a week for two successive calendar weeks in a
newspaper having general circulation in the area. The notice shall be
published for the first time not less than ten nor more than days before the
date fixed for the hearing.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.35  WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD; ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Planning and Zoning Board of the city hereby creates the Watershed
Review Board.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.36  RULES OF CONDUCT FOR MEMBERS.



   Members of the Board may be removed by the city governing board for
cause, including violation of the rules stated below:



   (A)   Faithful attendance at meetings of the Board and conscientious
performance of the duties required of members of the Board shall be
considered a prerequisite to continuing membership on the Board.



   (B)   No Board member shall take part in the hearing, consideration,
or determination of any case in which he is personally or financially
interested. A Board member shall have a "financial interest" in a case when a
decision in the case will cause him or his spouse to experience a direct
financial benefit or loss, or will cause a business in which he or his spouse
owns a 10t or greater interest, or is involved in a decisionmaking role, to
experience a direct financial benefit or loss. A Board member shall have a
"personal interest" in a case when it involves a member of his immediate
family (such as, parent, spouse, or child).



   (C)   No Board member shall discuss any case with any parties
thereto prior to the public hearing on that case; provided, however, that
members may receive and/or seek information pertaining to the case from the
Watershed Administrator or any other member of the Board, its secretary or
clerk prior to the hearing.



   (D)   Members of the Board shall not express individual opinions on
the proper judgement of any case prior to its determination on that case.



   (E)   Members of the Board shall give notice to the Chairman at
least 48 hours prior to the hearing of any potential conflict of interest
which he has in a particular case before the Board.



   (F) No Board member shall vote on any matter that decides an
application or appeal unless he had attended the public hearing on that
application or appeal.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.37  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD.



   (A)   Administrative review. The Watershed Review Board shall hear
and decide appeals from any decision or determination made by the Watershed
Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   Variances. The Watershed Review Board shall have the power to
authorize, in specific cases, minor variances from the terms of this chapter
as will not be contrary to the public interests where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter will result in practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter
shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done. In addition, the city shall notify and allow a reasonable comment
period for all other local governments having jurisdiction in the designated
watershed where the variance is being considered.



      (1)   Applications for a variance shall be made on the proper
form obtainable from the Watershed Administrator and shall include the
following information:



         (a)   A site plan, drawn to a scale of at least one inch
to 40 feet, indicating the property lines of the parcel upon which the use is
proposed; any existing or proposed structures; parking areas and other
built-upon areas; surface water drainage. The site plan shall be neatly drawn
and indicate north point, name, and address of person who prepared the plan,
date of the original drawing, and an accurate record of any later revisions.



         (b)   A complete and detailed description of the
proposed variance, together with any other pertinent information which the
applicant feels would be helpful to the Watershed Review Board in considering
the application.



         (c)   The Watershed Administrator shall notify in
writing each local government having jurisdiction in the watershed. Such
notice shall include a description of the variance being requested. Local
governments receiving notice of the variance request may submit comments to
the Watershed Administrator prior to a decision by the watershed Review
Board. Such comments shall become a part of the record of proceedings of the
Watershed Review Board. In addition to all other local governments receiving
notification of a variance request, any entity using the watershed for water
consumption will also be notified in writing.



      (2)   Before the Watershed Review Board may grant a variance,
it shall make the following three findings, which shall be recorded in the
permanent record of the case, and shall include the factual reasons on which
they are based:



         (a)   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the chapter. In
order to determine that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships, the Board must find that the five following conditions exist:



            1.   If he complies with the provisions of the
chapter, the applicant can secure no reasonable return from, nor make
reasonable use of, his property. Merely proving that the variance would
permit a greater profit to be made from the property will not be considered
adequate to justify the Board in granting an variance. Moreover, the Board
shall consider whether the variance is the minimum possible deviation from
the terms of the chapter that will make possible the reasonable use of his
property.



            2.   The hardship results from the application of
the chapter to the property rather than from other factors such as deed
restrictions or other hardship.



            3.   The hardship is due to the physical nature of
the applicant's property, such as its size, shape, or topography, which is
different from that of neighboring property.



            4.   The hardship is not the result of the actions
of an applicant who knowingly or unknowingly violates the chapter, or who
purchases the property after the effective date of the chapter, and then
comes to the Board for relief.



            5.   The hardship is peculiar to the applicant's
property, rather than the result of conditions that are widespread. If other
properties are equally subject to the hardship created in the restriction,
then granting a variance would be a special privilege denied to others, and
would not promote equal justice.



         (b)   The variance is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the chapter and preserves its spirit.



         (c)   In the granting of the variance, the public safety
and welfare have been assured and substantial justice has been done. The
Board shall not grant a variance if it finds that doing so would in any
respect impair the public health, safety, or general welfare.



      (3)   In granting the variance, the Board may attach thereto
such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the
proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance
of the purpose of this chapter. If a variance for the construction,
alteration, or use of property is granted, such construction, alteration, or
use shall be in accordance with the approved site plan.



      (4)   The Watershed Review Board shall refuse to hear an
appeal or an application for a variance previously denied if it finds that
there have been no substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing
on the appeal or application.



      (5)   A variance issued in accordance with this section shall
be considered a watershed protection permit and shall expire if a building
permit or watershed occupancy permit for such use is not obtained by the
applicant within six months from the date of the decision.



      (6)   (a)   If the application calls for the granting of a
major variance, and if the Watershed Review Board decides in favor of
granting the variance, the Board shall prepare a preliminary record of the
hearing with all deliberate speed. The preliminary record of the hearing
shall include:



            1.   The variance application;



            2.   The hearing notices;



            3.   The evidence presented;



            4.   Motions, offers of proof, objections to
evidence, and rulings on them;



            5.   Proposed findings and exceptions;



            6.   The proposed decision, including all
conditions proposed to be added to the permit.



         (b)   The preliminary record shall be sent to the
Environmental Management Commission for its review as follows:



            1.   If the Commission concludes from the
preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that
the property owner can secure no reasonable return from, nor make any
practical use of the property unless the proposed variance is granted, and
the variance, if granted, will not result in a serious threat to the water
supply, then the Commission shall approve the variance as proposed or approve
the proposed variance with conditions and stipulations. The Commission shall
prepare a Commission decision and send it to the Watershed Review Board. If
the Commission approves the variance as proposed, the Board shall prepare a
final decision granting the proposed variance. If the Commission approves the
variance with conditions and stipulations, the Board shall prepare a final
decision, including such conditions and stipulations, granting the proposed
variance.



            2.   If the Commission concludes from the
preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that
the property owner can secure a reasonable return from or make a practical
use of the property without the variance or the variance, if granted, will
result in a serious threat to the water supply, then the Commission shall
deny approval of the variance as proposed. The Commission shall prepare a
Commission decision and send it to the Watershed Review Board. The Board
shall prepare a final decision denying the variance as proposed.



   (C)   Subdivision approval. See §§ 94.11 to 94.14.



   (D)   Public health. See §§ 94.27 and 94.28.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.38  APPEALS FROM THE WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD.



   Appeals from the Watershed Review Board must be filed with the Superior
Court within 30 days from the date of the decision. The of decisions by the
Superior Court will be in the manner of certiorari.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.98  REMEDIES.



   (A)   If any subdivision, development, and/or land use is found to
be in violation of this chapter, the city's governing body may, in addition
to all other remedies available either in law or in equity, institute a civil
penalty in the amount of $200, action or proceedings to restrain, correct, or
abate the violation; to prevent occupancy of the building, structure, or
land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about
the premises. In addition, the State Environmental Management Commission may
assess civil penalties in accordance with G.S. 143-215.6(a). Each day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   If the Watershed Administrator finds that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing the
person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal
of illegal buildings or structures, or of additions, alterations, or
structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or
shall take any action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or
to prevent violation of its provisions. If a ruling of the Watershed
Administrator is questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal such
ruling to the Watershed Review Board.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with G.S.
14-4. The maximum fine for each offense shall not exceed $500. Each day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



Appendix A: Application forms




Click here to view Appendix A
Application Forms




APPENDIX B: RULES OF PROCEDURE OR THE WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD REGARDING
APPEALS AND VARIANCES



Section



   94.55   General proceedings of the Watershed Review Board



   94.56   Meetings



   94.57   Appeals and variances



§ 94.55  GENERAL PROCEEDINGS OF THE WATERSHED REVIEW BOARD.



   The Board shall annually elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson
from among its members. The Chairperson in turn shall appoint a Secretary,
who may be an employee of the city, officer or a member of the Watershed
Review Board. The Chairperson, or in his absence the Vice-chairperson, may
administer oaths and request the attendance of witnesses. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, including the names of members present and
absent, a record of the vote on every question or abstention from voting, if
any, together with records of its examinations and other official actions.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.56  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Board meetings. The Board shall hold regular monthly meetings
at a specified time and place. Special meetings of the Board may be called at
any time by the Chairperson or by request of three or more members of the
Board. At least 48 hours written notice of the time and place of meetings
shall be given, by the Chairperson, to each member of the Board. All Board
meetings are to be held in accordance with G.S. Chapter 143, Article 33B,
commonly referred to as the open Meetings Law.



   (B)   Cancellation of meetings. Whenever there are no appeals or
other business for the Board, or whenever so many members so notify the
Secretary of inability to attend that a quorum will not be available, the
Chairperson may dispense with a meeting by giving written or oral notice to
all members.



   (C)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of four members of the Board,
but the Board shall not pass upon any questions relating to an appeal from a
decision or determination of the Watershed Administrator when there are fewer
than four-fifths of the members present.



   (D)   Voting. All regular members may vote on any issue unless they
have disqualified themselves for one or more of the reasons listed in §
94.36. The required vote to decide applications for appeals and variances
shall not be reduced by any disqualification. In all other matters, the vote
of a majority of the members present and voting shall decide issues before
the Board.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



§ 94.57  APPEALS AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   Types of appeals and variances:



      (1)   Appeals. The Board shall hear and decide all appeals
from any decision or determination made by the Watershed Administrator.



      (2)   Variances. All applications for variances shall first be
presented to the Watershed Administrator, who in turn shall refer the
applications to the Watershed Review Board for review and decision in
accordance with the procedures outlined in § 94.37.



   (B)   Procedure for filing applications for appeals and variances.
No hearing shall be held by the Board unless notice thereof is filed within
30 days after the interested party or parties receive the decision or
determination by the Watershed Administrator or the aggrieved party or
parties receive constructive notice of the decision. Applications shall be
filed with the Watershed Administrator, who shall act as clerk for the Board
in receiving this notice. All applications shall be made upon the form
specified for that purpose and all information required on the form shall be
complete before an application shall be considered as having been filed. Once
applications have been filed, the Watershed Administrator shall immediately
notify the Chairperson of the Board that such applications have been received.



   (C)   Hearings:



      (1)   Time. After receipt of an application for an appeal or
variance, the Board Chairperson shall schedule a time for a hearing which
shall be within 45 days from the filing of such notice of the application.



      (2)   Notice of hearing. For all applications, notice of the
hearing shall be mailed to the adjoining property owners and to such other
persons as the Watershed Administrator shall direct at least five days prior
to the hearing. Such notice shall state the location of the building or lot,
the general nature of the question involved and the time and place of the
hearing.



      (3)   Conduct of hearing. The hearing shall be a
quasi-judicial proceeding. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney at the hearing. The order of business for the hearing shall be as
follows: the Chairperson, or such person as he shall direct, shall give a
preliminary statement of the case; the applicant shall present the argument
in support of the application; persons opposed to granting the application
shall present their argument against the application; both sides will be
permitted to present rebuttals to opposing testimony; the Chairperson shall
summarize the evidence which has been presented, giving the parties
opportunity to make objections or corrections. Witnesses may be called and
factual evidence may be submitted, but the Board shall not be limited to
consideration of only such evidence as would be admissible in a court of law.
The Board may view the premises before arriving at a decision. All witnesses
before the Board shall be placed under oath and the opposing party may
cross-examine them.



   (D)   Decisions:



      (1)   Time. A decision by the Board shall be made within 35
days from the time of hearing.



      (2)   Form. Written notice by certified or registered mail of
the decision in a case shall be given to the applicant or appellant by the
Secretary as soon as practical after the case is decided. Also, written
notice shall be given to owners of the subject property and to persons who
have made a written request for such notice. The final decision of the Board
shall be shown in the record of the case as entered in the approved minutes.
Such record shall show the reasons for the determination, with a summary of
the evidence introduced and the findings of fact made.



      (3)   The decision on an application for an appeal may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision or determination of the
Watershed Administrator.



      (4)   With an application for a major variance, the Watershed
Review Board shall provide a recommendation to the State Environmental
Management Commission. The State Environmental Management Commission shall
have the authority to approve or deny the issuance of a variance. If the
State Environmental Management Commission approves the variance, the
Watershed Review Board may direct the Watershed Administrator to issue a
watershed protection permit.



      (5)   Expiration of permits. Unless otherwise specified, any
order or decision of the Board in granting a watershed protection permit
shall expire if a building permit or watershed occupancy permit for such use
is not obtained by the applicant within 12 months from the date of the
decision.



      (6)   Voting. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any decision or
determination of the watershed Administrator. A majority vote of the members
present and voting is required to provide a recommendation to the State
Environmental Management Commission on an application for a major variance.



      (7)   Public record of decisions. The decisions of the Board,
as filed in its minutes, shall be a public record and available for
inspection at all reasonable times. Every decision of the Watershed Review
Board shall be filed in the office of the Watershed Administrator and a
written copy thereof shall be delivered to the applicant and adjacent
property owners by personal service or registered mail.



      (8)   Decisions and appeals. Every decision by the Board
regarding appeals from decisions of the Watershed Administrator shall be
subject to review by superior court. All appeals shall be taken to superior
court within 30 days after the decision of the Board is filed in the office
of the Watershed Administrator, or after a written copy thereof is delivered
to the appellant by personal service or registered mail or certified mail,
return receipt requested, whichever is later.



(Ord. 93-22, passed 6-24-93)



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina Code





References to 1958 Code





References to Ordinances




REFEENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA CODE



 

G.S. Section
 
Code Section




Ch. 102 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1957
[repealed by Ch. 52 N.C. Sess. Laws 1997]
 
Local Acts § 1


Ch. 589 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1963
 
Local Acts § 2


Ch. 606 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1967
 
Local Acts § 3


Ch. 703 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1977
 
90.90


Ch. 259 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1979
 
Charter 1 - 11


Ch. 881, § 3.3 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1988
 
3.3


Ch. 409 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1989
 
6.3


Ch. 915 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1991
 
6.4


Ch. 379, § 6.1 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1993
 
6.1


Ch. 655, § 1 N.C.
Sess. Laws 1995
 
5.3


Ch. 52, N.C.
Sess. Laws 1997
 
Local Acts § 4


Ch. 6
 
20.01


Ch. 7A
 
93.35


7A-227
 
90.63


7A-228
 
90.63


14-4
 
10.99, 53.04, 67.99, 82.39, 82.24, 82.42, 94.99


Ch. 14, Article 27A
 
82.24


14-177 - 14-202.l
 
63.03(C)(2), (E)(3), (E)(4), 63.04(D)(3), (G)(4)


14-189 - 14-194
 
82.23


14-203 - 14-208
 
60.03(C)(2), (E)(3), (E)(4), 63.04(D)(3), (G)(4)


14-269
 
82.41


Ch. 18A
 
Charter 6.1


Ch. 18B
 
82.22


18A-15
 
Charter 6.1


18A-17
 
Charter 6.1


18B-901(c)
 
30.09


18B-904(f)
 
30.09


Ch. 20, Art. C
 
60.31


Ch. 20, Art. 9A
 
60.21


20-37.5
 
73.16


20-97(a)-(e)
 
25.01


20-222
 
80.09


20-256 - 20-372
 
90.100


42-29
 
90.63


42-30
 
90.63


Ch. 44A, Art.1
 
80.11


47-30
 
91.15, 91.16, 94.11


Ch. 55
 
92.008, 92.076, 92.078, 92.080


82-37.1
 
92.080, 92.083, 92.084


Ch. 90, Article 5
 
82.40


90-210.121 (11)
 
92.080


105-164.4(a)(3)
 
Local Acts § 5


105-236
 
Local Acts § 5


114-19
 
30.10


Ch. 118
 
Local Acts § l


118-5
 
Local Acts § l


118-55
 
Local Acts, § 2


122C-3(11)b
 
92.008


Ch. 130A, Art. 9
 
93.05


130A-290(a)(6)
 
93.05


130A-290(a)(35)
 
93.05


130A-290(a)(36)
 
93.05


130A-498
 
67.06


Ch. 136
 
Charter 5.1


Ch. 136 Article 9
 
Charter 5.1


136-141 et seq.
 
80.14


136-143
 
80.14


136-66(c)
 
Charter 5.1


136-66.3(c)
 
Charter 5.1


Ch. 143 Article 21
 
94.01


Ch. 143 Article 21  Part 6
 
93.01


143-143.15
 
93.42


143-213(18)
 
51.01(B)(1)(z)


143-215.1
 
51.01(B)(1)(u), 1.04(B)(7)(b), 51.04(B)(10)


143-215.1(b)
 
51.04(B)(9)(c)


143-215.1(d)
 
51.01 (B)(1)(v)


143-215.3(a)(14)
 
51.01(B)(1)(dd)


143-215.6(a)
 
94.98


143-215.6B
 
51.08(C)(1)


143-215.6B(f)
 
51.08 (C)(1)


143-215.6B(g)
 
51.08 (C)(1)


143-215.6B(h)
 
51.08 (C)(1)


143-215.6B(i)
 
51.08 (C)(1)


153A-123
 
31.999


153A-148.1
 
Local Acts § 5


153A-155
 
Local Acts § 5


153A-275
 
51.01


153A-344.1
 
94.04


160-172 to 160-181.2
 
92.002


Ch. 160A Article 7 Part 2
 
Charter 4.1


Ch. 160A Article 8
 
93.01


Ch. 160A Article 8 § 174
 
94.01


Ch. 160A Article 10
 
90.62, 90.82


Ch. 160A Article 18 § 354
 
21.110


Ch. 160A Article 19 Part 3
 
93.01


Ch. 160A Article 19 Part 5
 
93.01


Ch. 160A Article 19 Part 7
 
21.075


Ch. 160A Article 19 Part 8
 
93.01


160A-31
 
92.126


160A-58.1
 
92.126


160A-77
 
22.19


160A-78
 
22.19


160A-79
 
22.19


160A-102
 
Charter 3.3


160A-174(a)
 
67.06


160A-175
 
10.99, 53.04


160A-194
 
90.90


160A-208.1
 
Local Acts § 5


160A-216(1)-(2)
 
Charter 5.3


160A-218
 
Charter 5.2, 5.3


160A-243(c)
 
Charter 5.1


160A-303
 
80.02


160A-303.2
 
80.02


160A-312
 
51.01


160A-344.1
 
92.126


160A-364
 
92.100, 92.102


160A-373
 
91.07


160A-381
 
92.025


160A-385
 
92.100


160A-385.1
 
92.102, 92.120, 92.121, 92.126, 92.127, 92.128, 94.04


160A-393
 
21.012


160A-393(c)(1)
 
21.012


160A-393(d)
 
21.010, 21.011


160A-393(k)
 
21.010


160A-400.9(e)
 
21.010


160A-417
 
91.19, 92.102


160A-418
 
92.124(C)


160A-422
 
92.124(C)


160A-441
 
90.45(A), 90.75


160A-443
 
90.59(C)(2)


160A-443(5)
 
90.61, 90.81


160A-443(6)
 
90.62


160A-444
 
90.45(B)


160A-446(6)
 
90.82


160A-446(f)
 
70.79(D), 90.59(D),(E)


160A-446(g)
 
70.79(C)(1), 90.59(C)(1)


163-29l
 
Charter 3.1


309.6(6)
 
92.080, 92.081


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1958 CODE



 

1958 Code
 
1981 Code




1-2
 
10.02, 10.03


1-3
 
10.04


1-4
 
10.05


1-5
 
10.06


1-7
 
10.07


2-16
 
22.01


2-17
 
22.02


2-23
 
22.05


2-24
 
22.06


2-26
 
22.08


2-28
 
22.15


2-33
 
22.16


3-1
 
81.01


3-2
 
81.02(A)


3-4
 
81.03(A)


3-5
 
81.03(B)


3-6
 
81.04


3-7
 
81.05


3-8
 
81.06


3-9
 
81.07


3-10
 
81.15


3-10.l
 
81.16


3-10.2
 
81.17


3-10.3
 
81.18


3-10.4
 
81.19


3-10.5
 
81.20


3-10.6
 
81.21


3-10.7
 
81.22


3-10.8
 
81.23


3-10.9
 
81.24


4-1
 
90.15


4-2
 
90.17


4-3
 
90.02


4-3.l
 
90.06


4-3.2
 
90.08


4-3.3
 
90.07


4-3.4
 
90.09


4-4
 
90.30, 90.32


4-9
 
90.15


4-10
 
90.17


4-12
 
90.33


4-14
 
90.30


4-22
 
90.05


4-22.l
 
90.08


4-22.2
 
90.07


4-22.3
 
90.09


4-34.l
 
90.03


4-34.2
 
90.08


4-34.3
 
90.07


4-34.4
 
90.09


4-35
 
90.15


4-36
 
90.17


4-37
 
90.33


4-41
 
90.30


4-42
 
50.06


4-113
 
90.46


4-114
 
90.47


4-115
 
90.48


4-116
 
90.49


4-117
 
90.50


4-118
 
90.51


4-119
 
90.52


4-120
 
90.53


4-121
 
90.54


4-122
 
90.55


4-123
 
90.56


4-124
 
90.57


4-125
 
90.58


4-126
 
90.59


4-127
 
90.60


4-128
 
90.61


4-129
 
90.62


4-130
 
90.63


4-131
 
90.64


4-132
 
90.65


4-133
 
90.66


6-1.2
 
31.26


6-1.3
 
31.27(A)


6-1.4
 
31.28


6-1.5
 
31.29


6-1.6
 
31.30


6-3
 
31.02


6-12
 
31.05


6-13
 
31.06


6-14
 
31.07


6-15
 
31.08


6-16
 
31.09


6-17
 
31.10


6-18
 
31.11


6-19
 
31.12


6-20
 
31.13


6-21
 
31.14


6-22
 
31.15


6-23
 
31.16


6-30
 
31.17


10-1
 
82.10


10-2
 
82.30


10-3
 
82.31


10-4
 
82.11


10-5
 
82.12


10-6
 
82.13


10-7
 
82.14


10-10
 
82.32


10-11
 
82.33


10-12
 
82.01


10-13
 
82.34


10-16
 
82.22


10-18
 
82.39(A)


10-19
 
82.39(B)


10-20
 
82.23


10-20.1(a)
 
64.01


10-20.1(b)
 
64.02


10-21
 
82.35


10-22
 
82.20


10-23
 
82.36


10-24
 
82.15


10-24.l
 
32.01


10-24.2
 
32.02


10-24.3
 
32.03


10-30
 
82.38


10-31
 
82.21


11-3
 
30.01


11-4
 
30.03


11-6
 
30.02


11-7
 
30.04


11-8
 
30.05


11-10
 
30.06


11-11
 
30.07


13-4
 
65.15


13-5
 
65.16


13-9
 
40.09


13-11
 
40.10


13-12
 
40.11(A), 72.05


13-13
 
40.11(B)


13-14
 
40.12


13-16
 
40.20


13-17
 
40.21


13-18
 
40.22


13-19
 
40.23


13-20
 
40.24


13-21
 
40.25


14-1
 
91.01


14-2
 
91.02


14-3
 
91.03


14-4
 
91.04


14-5
 
91.06


14-6
 
91.07


14-7
 
91.08


14-8
 
91.09


14-9
 
91.10


14-10
 
91.11


14-11
 
91.12


14-12
 
91.13


14-13
 
91.14


14-14
 
91.15


14-15
 
91.16


14-16
 
91.17


14-17
 
91.18


14-18
 
91.19


14-19
 
91.20


15-30
 
63.01


15-31
 
63.02


15-32
 
63.03


15-33
 
63.04


15-34
 
63.05


15-35
 
63.06


15-36
 
63.07


15-37
 
63.08


15-38
 
63.09


15-39
 
63.10


15-41
 
63.11


16-1
 
70.01


16-2
 
70.02


16-3
 
70.06


16-5
 
70.04


16-6
 
70.07


16-7
 
70.03


16-8
 
72.13


16-9
 
72.14


16-10
 
72.15


16-11
 
72.16


16-12
 
72.18


16-13
 
74.10


16-14
 
74.11


16-15
 
72.11


16-16(a)
 
71.02


16-16(b)
 
71.03


16-17
 
72.68


16-18
 
75.02


16-19
 
72.55


16-20
 
72.56


16-22
 
71.05


16-23
 
71.07


16-24(a)
 
72.45


16-24(b)
 
72.47


16-24.l
 
72.50


16-24.2
 
75.03


16-25
 
72.49


16-26
 
72.26


16-27
 
72.26


16-28
 
72.01


16-29
 
72.65


16-30
 
72.67


16-31
 
72.67, 72.69


16-32
 
72.02


16-33
 
72.48


16-34
 
72.03


16-38
 
72.17


16-39
 
72.06, 76.04


16-40
 
72.06, 76.04


16-41
 
82.37


16-42
 
72.04


16-43
 
72.37


16-47
 
72.12


16-48
 
72.09, 72.10


16-49
 
74.01


16-50
 
74.01


16-51
 
74.02


16-52
 
73.05


16-53
 
73.13


16-54 - 16-56
 
73.15


16-57
 
73.30


16-59
 
73.03


16-60
 
73.02


16-62
 
73.02


16-63
 
73.01


16-64
 
73.09


16-66
 
73.06


16-67
 
73.12


16-68
 
70.08


16-69
 
73.04


16-69.l
 
73.23


16-69.2
 
73.23


16-85
 
76.06


16-100
 
72.70


16-101
 
80.01


17-1
 
50.01


17-3
 
50.02


17-4
 
50.03


17-5
 
50.04


17-6
 
50.05


18-1
 
60.10


18-2
 
60.11


18-3
 
60.12


18-4
 
60.13


18-5
 
60.14


18-6
 
60.15


18-7
 
60.16


18-8
 
60.17


18-9
 
60.18


18-10
 
60.19


18-11
 
60.20


18-12
 
60.21


18-13
 
60.21


18-14
 
60.22


18-15
 
60.01


18-16
 
60.02


18-17
 
60.03


18-18
 
60.04


18-19
 
60.30


18-20
 
60.31


18-21
 
60.31


18-22
 
60.32


18-23
 
60.33


18-24
 
60.34


18-25
 
60.35


18-30
 
82.02(A)


18-31
 
82.02(B)


19-1
 
92.001


19-2
 
92.002


19-11
 
92.003


19-30
 
92.004


19-30.1
 
92.005


19-31
 
92.006


19-40
 
92.007


19-41
 
92.008


19-50
 
92.009


19-51
 
92.010


19-52
 
92.011


19-53
 
92.015


19-54
 
92.016


19-55
 
92.017


19-64
 
92.047


19-65
 
92.019


19-70
 
92.070


19-71
 
92.071


19-72
 
92.072


19-80
 
92.073


19-81
 
92.074


19-82
 
92.075


19-83
 
92.076


19-85
 
92.078


19-86
 
92.079


19-87
 
92.080


19-88
 
92.081


19-89
 
92.082


19-90
 
92.083


19-9l
 
92.080


19-92
 
92.084


19-93
 
92.085


19-94
 
92.086


19-100
 
92.012


19-101
 
92.013


19-102
 
92.010


19-103
 
92.014


19-104
 
92.020


19-110
 
92.095


19-111
 
92.096


19-112
 
92.097


19-113
 
92.098


19-114
 
92.099


19-130
 
92.100


19-140
 
92.018


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




78-4
 
4-3-78
 
90.90 - 90.98


78-6
 
5-8-78
 
73.06


79-1
 
1-15-79
 
92.079 - 92.085


79-4
 
6-25-79
 
92.008, 92.073, 92.076, 92.078 - 92.083


79-5
 
4-23-79
 
92.082


79-7
 
4-23-79
 
40.30, 40.31, 40.99


79-12
 
8-20-79
 
92.070, 92.073, 92.075, 92.076, 92.078 - 92.085


79-16
 
8-13-79
 
Ch. 24 App. A, Tables I, II


79-30
 
1-21-80
 
92.086


80-3
 
3-3-80
 
92.008, 92.019, 92.084


80-9
 
5-19-80
 
92.080, 92.081, 92.083


80-16
 
6-16-80
 
92.086


80-26
 
10-27-80
 
Ch. 24 App. A, Tables I, II, III


80-28
 
11-17-80
 
92.074, 92.076


81-3
 
3-16-81
 
92.078 - 92.080, 92.083 - 92.085


81-8
 
4-21-81
 
92.080


81-12
 
6-15-81
 
92.100


81-26
 
11-23-81
 
93.02 - 93.04, 93.20, 93.22 - 93.26, 93.31 - 93.33, 93.35, 93.99


82-3
 
2-1-82
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


82-6
 
11-8-82
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


82-7
 
3-15-82
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV


82-8
 
5-17-82
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


82-10
 
6-7-82
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


82-16
 
—
 
92.008


82-24
 
11-15-82
 
40.40 - 40.44


82-27
 
12-20-82
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXVII


83-3
 
1-17-83
 
90.75 - 90.83


83-4
 
2-21-83
 
92.073


83-6
 
—
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


83-17
 
6-20-83
 
50.06, 90.38


83-19
 
7-5-83
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


83-20
 
7-5-83
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


83-27
 
9-19-83
 
Ch. 66


83-28
 
—
 
92.080


83-30
 
9-19-83
 
Adopting ord.


83-32
 
9-19-83
 
73.16, Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


83-34
 
11-7-83
 
Ch. 77, Sch. X


83-35
 
11-7-83
 
Ch. 77, Schs. XXI, XXII


83-41
 
12-12-83
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXVII


83-44
 
2-20-84
 
Ch. 24 App. Tables I, II


84-2
 
2-20-84
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


84-4
 
5-7-84
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


84-5
 
5-7-84
 
73.16, Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


84-6
 
5-7-84
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


84-12
 
5-21-84
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV, Sch. XXXVI


84-16
 
7-16-84
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV


84-21
 
10-15-84
 
Ch. 24, App. A, Tables I, II


84-22
 
11-5-84
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


85-13
 
5-20-85
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXVI


85-18
 
6-19-85
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


85-19
 
12-23-85
 
Ch. 24, App. A, Tables I, II


85-21
 
8-5-85
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XII


85-22
 
8-12-85
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


85-24
 
11-18-85
 
82.34


85-25
 
11-4-85
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXVI


85-29
 
12-12-85
 
Ch. 40, App.


85-32
 
12-23-85
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


86-5
 
1-27-86
 
92.086


86-8
 
5-19-86
 
92.080, 92.083


86-20
 
9-2-86
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VIII


86-21
 
10-6-86
 
81.25 - 81.27


86-26
 
11-3-86
 
92.075, 92.079, 92.083


86-28
 
11-18-86
 
92.083


87-1
 
1-19-87
 
92.071


87-6
 
4-21-87
 
93.01 - 93.04, 93.20 - 93.26, 93.31 - 93.35, 93.41 - 93.45, 93.99


87-8
 
5-11-87
 
92.073, 92.079, 92.080, 92.082, 92.083


87-12
 
6-1-87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


87-16
 
7-20-87
 
92.081


87-19
 
8-17-87
 
91.17


87-20
 
8-17-87
 
92.076, 92.086


87-23
 
8-17-87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


87-24
 
8-31-87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIX


87-32
 
12-10-87
 
Ch. 24, App.


87-35
 
12-10-87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


87-36
 
12-10-87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


87-37
 
12-10-87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXVIII


87-40
 
11-30-87
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


87-41
 
12-21-87
 
22.01


88-1
 
4-18-88
 
90.99 -90.103


88-7
 
2-15-88
 
92.008


88-9
 
4-18-88
 
92.080, 92.081


88-11
 
4-4-88
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


88-15
 
6-6-88
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


88-16
 
6-20-88
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


88-17
 
7-12-88
 
92.080, 92.081


88-19
 
7-18-88
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


88-20
 
7-12-88
 
Ch. 24, App. A, Tables I, II


88-21
 
7-18-88
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


88-23
 
8-1-88
 
Ch. 40, App.


88-27
 
9-13-88
 
Ch. 40, App.


88-31
 
11-21-88
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


89-2
 
2-6-89
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


89-3
 
3-6-89
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


89-4
 
4-3-89
 
92.080, 92.081


89-5
 
5-15-89
 
92.039


89-6
 
6-15-89
 
92.086


89-7
 
6-5-89
 
92.076


89-8
 
5-15-89
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


89-13
 
6-19-89
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXIV


89-15
 
-  -89
 
92.008, 92.080, 92.086


89-16
 
6-22-89
 
Ch. 24, App. A, Tables I, II


89-21
 
9-5-89
 
82.40


89-28
 
9-5-89
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


89-33
 
12-4-89
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


89-35
 
12-18-89
 
92.100


89-39
 
12-18-89
 
Ch.77, XXXI


90-1
 
1-16-90
 
Ch. 40, App.


90-2
 
2-5-90
 
20.01


90-4
 
3-6-90
 
92.083


90-5
 
3-19-90
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXI


90-8
 
4-16-90
 
Ch.77, Sch. V


90-10
 
8-6-90
 
92.070, 92.081A, 92.086


90-13
 
7-17-90
 
92.084


90-21
 
7-2-90
 
Ch.24, App. A, Tables I, II


90-23
 
8-6-90
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXI


90-24
 
8-15-90
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXVIII-A


90-25
 
8-15-90
 
73.14, Ch.77, Sch. XXXIV


90-26
 
8-15-90
 
Ch.77, Sch. XX


90-27
 
9-17-90
 
Ch. 51


90-28
 
9-4-90
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXII


90-31
 
10-15-90
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXVIII


90-37
 
11-19-90
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXII


90-39
 
12-17-90
 
92.017, 92.073


91-1
 
1-22-91
 
92.079(C)


91-2
 
1-22-91
 
Ch.77, Sch. XX


91-3
 
1-28-91
 
92.081(F)


91-7
 
2-18-91
 
63.01


91-9
 
5-6-91
 
81.02


91-19
 
8-19-91
 
92.021, 92.022


91-20
 
8-19-91
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXII


91-23
 
10-7-91
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXII


91-25
 
10-21-91
 
63.01


91-28
 
1-6-92
 
92.120 - 92.128


92-2
 
1-21-92
 
82.39


92-3
 
2-3-92
 
Ch.77, Sch. IX


92-4
 
1-22-92
 
Ch.24, Sch. A, Tables I, II, III


92-9
 
4-20-92
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXI


92-10
 
5-18-92
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXII


92-17
 
6-15-92
 
82.34(B)


92-25
 
9-8-92
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXI


92-30
 
12-7-92
 
92.074


92-31
 
12-7-92
 
92.008


93-1
 
2-1-93
 
Ch77, Sch. IX


93-2
 
2-1-93
 
Ch.24, App. A, Tables I, II, III


93-13
 
4-5-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXVIII


93-14
 
4-5-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXIIA


93-15
 
4-5-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXI


93-16
 
4-5-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXII


93-18
 
4-19-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXIIA


93-21
 
5-17-93
 
92.079


93-22
 
6-24-93
 
94.01 - 94.38, 94.98, 94.99, Apps. A, B


93-23
 
6-21-93
 
92.080, 92.081, 92.081A, 92.083


93-24
 
8-2-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXVIII


93-34
 
9-20-93
 
67.01 - 67.05, 67.99


93-35
 
10-4-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXI


93-36
 
11-15-93
 
92.073


93-41
 
12-6-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXIX


93-44
 
12-20-93
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXIX


94-2
 
2-21-94
 
92.040


94-3
 
2-21-94
 
91.10, 91.12


94-10
 
4-18-94
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXI


94-14
 
5-16-94
 
93.01 - 93.52, 93.99


94-15
 
5-16-94
 
94.04


94-17
 
8-15-94
 
92.080


94-19
 
9-19-94
 
51.01 - 51.11, 51.13, 51.14


94-20
 
9-19-94
 
91.05, 92.030, 92.073, 92.074, 92.100


94-26
 
11-7-94
 
33.01 - 33.08, 33.99


94-27
 
11-7-94
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXII


94-30
 
12-19-94
 
92.080, 92.084


94-31
 
12-5-94
 
Ch.77, Sch. V


94-32
 
12-5-94
 
Ch. 24, App. A, Tables I, II, III


94-33
 
12-5-94
 
82.16 - 82.18


94-34
 
12-5-94
 
40.50 - 40.58


94-35
 
12-5-94
 
80.01 - 80.15


94-36
 
12-19-94
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXII


95-2
 
2-20-95
 
92.008, 92.023


95-5
 
2-6-95
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXVII


95-9
 
3-6-95
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


95-16
 
5-1-95
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


95-18
 
5-1-95
 
Charter 3.1, 3.2


95-28
 
7-11-95
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV


95-31
 
8-21-95
 
92.073


95-35
 
10-2-95
 
Ch. 77, Sch.XXXIX


95-36
 
10-2-95
 
82.37.1


95-38
 
10-16-95
 
73.99


95-43
 
12-12-95
 
82.41


95-46
 
1-2-96
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


96-03
 
2-19-96
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


96-04
 
3-18-96
 
94.15


96-06
 
3-18-96
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV


96-07
 
4-1-96
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


96-12
 
5-6-96
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXIX


96-18
 
6-17-96
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


96-23
 
9-16-96
 
92.084


96-24
 
9-16-96
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


96-27
 
10-8-96
 
81.02


96-28
 
11-18-96
 
92.008, 92.076, 92.083


96-31
 
11-18-96
 
92.083


97-05
 
3-3-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


97-06
 
3-3-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


97-07
 
3-3-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIX


97-08
 
3-17-97
 
92.008, 92.080, 92.081


97-09
 
3-17-97
 
68.01 - 68.18, 68.99


97-14
 
4-21-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


97-15
 
4-21-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


97-16
 
4-21-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


97-18
 
5-5-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


97-20
 
5-19-97
 
Ch. 40, App.


97-22
 
5-19-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


97-23
 
6-2-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


97-37
 
7-7-97
 
73.15; Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIIB


97-38
 
7-7-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI and XXXIIB


97-39
 
7-7-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


97-40
 
7-7-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


97-45
 
8-18-97
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


97-48
 
9-2-97
 
Ch. 24, App. A, Tables I - III


97-49
 
9-2-97
 
73.17


97-54
 
10-27-97
 
92.033


97-55
 
10-27-97
 
81.23.1


97-58
 
1-5-98
 
92.067, 92.073 - 92.076, 92.078 - 92.085


97-59
 
11-17-97
 
81.04 - 81.04.3


97-70
 
1-5-98
 
82.10.1


98-01
 
1-20-98
 
92.070, 92.090, 92.100


98-05
 
2-2-98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


98-09
 
4-6-98
 
31.999


98-10
 
2-16-98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


98-11
 
3-16-98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


98-12
 
3-16-98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


98-13
 
3-16-98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. VIII


98-15
 
4-6-98
 
31.25-1 - 31.25-13, 31.28, 31.999


98-20
 
4-20-98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


98-24
 
6-15-98
 
92.081


98-26
 
7-20-98
 
92.079


98-27
 
8-3-98
 
92.008, 92.021, 92.073 - 92.076


98-30
 
7-20-98
 
81.06


98-33
 
7-20-98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


98-35
 
7-20-98
 
Ch. 24, App. A, Tables I - III


98-42
 
10-5-98
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


98-45
 
10-19-98
 
Ch. 40, App.


98-46
 
10-19-98
 
Ch. 40, App.


99-07
 
3-1-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


99-14
 
4-5-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV


99-18
 
4-19-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


99-19
 
4-19-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI, XXII


99-23
 
6-21-99
 
92.080


99-26
 
6-21-99
 
92.086


99-27
 
8-2-99
 
92.073, 92.074


99-28
 
6-21-99
 
Ch. 62


99-29
 
6-21-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


99-32
 
7-6-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


99-35
 
6-22-99
 
Ch. 40, App. A


99-38
 
7-6-99
 
Ch. 61


99-40
 
8-2-99
 
92.081, 92.083


99-42
 
8-2-99
 
82.37.1


99-43
 
9-7-99
 
92.074, 92.077, 92.079A, 92.085A, 92.091


99-44
 
9-7-99
 
91.21 - 91.23


99-51
 
9-20-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


99-52
 
9-20-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


99-53
 
9-20-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV-A


99-58
 
11-1-99
 
Ch. 40, App. A


99-63
 
12-6-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIII-A, XXXIII-B


99-64
 
12-6-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXII-B


99-65
 
12-6-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIII-A


99-66
 
12-6-99
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXVIII


99-67
 
1-4-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


99-69
 
1-4-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIII-A


00-02
 
1-18-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


00-06
 
2-21-00
 
Ch. 40 App.


00-08
 
2-21-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


00-11
 
3-20-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXVIII


00-24
 
7-17-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


00-26
 
8-21-00
 
10.80 - 10.84


00-28
 
8-21-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


00-36
 
10-16-00
 
92.080, 92.084


00-37
 
10-2-00
 
82.42


00-38
 
11-6-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV-A


00-39
 
12-4-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


00-40
 
10-16-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIX


00-46
 
12-4-00
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


00-47
 
12-18-00
 
92.008, 92.080, 92.081, 92.081A, 92.083


01-11
 
3-5-01
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


01-12
 
3-5-01
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV-A


01-17
 
4-16-01
 
92.080


01-18
 
4-16-01
 
92.078


01-27
 
6-4-01
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


01-29
 
6-18-01
 
Charter 3.3


01-33
 
7-2-01
 
Ch. 24, App. A, Tables I and II


01-34
 
7-16-01
 
92.080


01-35
 
7-16-01
 
92.076


01-36
 
8-6-01
 
91.09, 91.10


01-39
 
8-20-01
 
91.09, 91.10


01-40
 
8-20-01
 
91.10


01-44
 
12-17-01
 
92.025 - 92.034


01-45
 
12-3-01
 
10.84


02-01
 
1-22-02
 
92.085A


02-04
 
1-22-02
 
40.30


02-05
 
2-4-02
 
10.84


02-06
 
2-16-02
 
92.025, 92.028


02-07
 
2-4-02
 
31.999


02-08
 
2-4-02
 
31.25-2, 31.25-4 -  31.25-6, 31.25-8 -  31.25-10, 31.25-12, 31.25-13


02-14
 
4-25-02
 
64.03


02-17
 
4-2-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


02-18
 
4-1-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


02-20
 
4-15-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


02-21
 
4-15-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


02-23
 
5-6-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


02-32
 
7-15-02
 
92.028


02-33
 
6-17-02
 
Ch. 24, App. A


02-39
 
9-3-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


02-40
 
9-16-02
 
91.10


02-42
 
9-16-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXVIII


02-43
 
9-16-02
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XX


02-47
 
11-4-02
 
80.02(3)


02-48
 
10-21-02
 
92.080


02-53
 
12-16-02
 
91.10


03-02
 
3-17-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX and XXXX


03-03
 
3-17-03
 
73.16, Ch. 77, Sch. XXXX


03-19
 
7-21-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


03-20
 
7-21-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


03-24
 
8-4-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


03-25
 
8-4-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXII-B


03-26
 
8-4-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


03-27
 
8-18-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV-A


03-28
 
8-18-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


03-29
 
9-15-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


03-30
 
10-6-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


03-31
 
10-6-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIX


03-32
 
10-6-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XX


03-33
 
10-6-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


03-37
 
11-3-03
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


04-01
 
1-5-04
 
60.21, 60.31


04-02
 
1-20-04
 
92.074


04-03
 
1-20-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


04-13
 
5-3-04
 
30.08


04-14
 
4-19-04
 
92.086


04-18
 
6-7-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


04-19
 
6-7-04
 
Ch. 77, Schs. XXI, XXII


04-23
 
6-21-04
 
90.49, 90.63


04-24
 
6-21-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV


04-25
 
6-2-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch, XXI


04-28
 
7-14-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. V


04-38
 
8-16-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXIX


04-39
 
8-16-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


04-43
 
9-20-04
 
92.074


04-48
 
10-18-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


04-49
 
11-15-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


04-52
 
11-15-04
 
92.026, 92.028, 92.029, 92.032, 92.033


04-53
 
11-25-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV


04-54
 
11-25-04
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


05-04
 
2-7-05
 
82.50 - 82.55


05-11
 
3-21-05
 
92.079, 92.082


05-26
 
6-20-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


05-27
 
6-20-05
 
Ch. 24, App. A


05-28
 
7-5-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXVIII


05-30
 
7-18-05
 
92.033


05-31
 
7-18-05
 
92.078


05-32
 
7-18-05
 
92.029, 92.030


05-37
 
10-3-05
 
Ch. 77, Schs. XXI, XXII


05-41
 
11-7-05
 
92.085B


05-43
 
11-21-05
 
82.16


05-46
 
11-21-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV-A


05-48
 
11-21-05
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


05-50
 
11-21-05
 
40.13


06-01
 
1-3-06
 
40.01 - 40.10


06-02
 
1-3-06
 
82.30


06-06
 
2-6-06
 
92.008, 92.080, 92.084, 92.085


06-08
 
4-3-06
 
92.001, 92.008, 92.070, 92.074 - 92.079, 92.080 -92.085A, 92.100 - 92.102


06-09
 
4-3-06
 
91.01, 91.03, 91.19


06-20
 
8-7-06
 
10.99


06-22
 
8-21-06
 
92.033


06-24
 
9-5-06
 
Ch. 24, App. A


06-26
 
10-2-06
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


06-27
 
12-18-06
 
92.085B


06-31
 
10-17-06
 
31.25-4


07-01
 
1-2-07
 
41.01-41.06


07-02
 
1-2-07
 
82.16-82.18


07-06
 
3-5-07
 
Ch.77, Sch. XXXIX


07-12
 
5-21-07
 
51.01 - 51.15


07-13
 
5-7-07
 
81.04-81.04.3


07-14
 
6-4-07
 
91.10


07-15
 
5-21-07
 
92.008, 92.084, 92.085


07-18
 
6-18-07
 
Ch.24, App. A


07-19
 
6-18-07
 
50.07


07-20
 
7-2-07
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


07-21
 
7-16-07
 
92.080, 92.083


07-24
 
7-16-07
 
82.39


07-25
 
9-4-07
 
52.01 - 52.12


07-26
 
9-4-07
 
53.01 - 53.07


07-28
 
9-4-07
 
10.80


07-29
 
9-4-07
 
81.18.1


07-32
 
10-1-07
 
Ch. 77, Schs. XXX, XXXIX


07-33
 
10-1-07
 
Ch. 77, Schs. XXVIII, XXIX, XXXIII, XXXV


07-34
 
10-1-07
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


07-36
 
10-16-07
 
81.01.1, 81.01.2, 81.03.1, 81.18.2


07-42
 
11-19-07
 
92.100


08-03
 
2-4-08
 
92.008, 92.078


08-04
 
2-4-08
 
73.18


08-06
 
2-4-08
 
82.24


08-11
 
4-7-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXIX


08-12
 
4-21-08
 
91.24


08-13
 
4-21-08
 
91.10


08-14
 
4-21-08
 
92.026, 92.028, 92.032


08-17
 
5-19-08
 
92.074


08-21
 
6-16-08
 
92.008, 92.080


08-22
 
7-7-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV-A


08-23
 
6-16-08
 
Ch. 24, App. A


08-26
 
7-7-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


08-27
 
7-21-08
 
92.008, 92.080


08-28
 
8-18-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


08-29
 
8-18-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXII


08-31
 
9-15-08
 
92.008, 92.023


08-32
 
9-3-08
 
93.01 - 93.04, 93.20 - 93.26, 93.31 - 93.35, 93.41 - 93.46, 93.51, 93.52,
93.99


08-33
 
10-6-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXVIII


08-34
 
10-6-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXIX


08-35
 
10-6-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


08-36
 
10-6-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XX


08-43
 
12-15-08
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXX


09-03
 
1-26-09
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


09-04
 
2-2-09
 
30.10, 60.31A


09-05
 
1-26-09
 
31.25-4


09-06
 
2-2-09
 
30.09


09-10
 
4-20-09
 
22.01


09-12
 
4-20-09
 
Ch. 77, Schs. XIV-A, XXI


09-21
 
6-15-09
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXI


09-22
 
6-15-09
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV-A


09-27
 
8-17-09
 
92.082


09-29
 
9-21-09
 
92.074


09-31
 
-  -09
 
54.01 - 54.04


09-34
 
10-19-09
 
92.029


09-35
 
10-19-09
 
92.084


09-42
 
12-21-09
 
92.028, 92.029


10-01
 
1-14-10
 
82.40


10-03
 
2-1-10
 
92.091


10-04
 
2-15-10
 
Ch. 77, Schs. XXXI, XXXII, XXXII-A, XXXIII-B, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII


10-05
 
2-15-10
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXIX


10-06
 
2-15-10
 
Ch. 77, Schs. XXXVIII, XXXIX


10-20
 
6-8-10
 
91.10


10-21
 
6-8-10
 
92.074


10-02
 
11-15-10
 
92.027, 92.029, 92.032


11-01
 
1-4-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV-A


11-07
 
4-18-11
 
31.999


11-09
 
5-2-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


11-12
 
6-6-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


11-15
 
7-5-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXX


11-16
 
6-20-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


11-17
 
6-20-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV


11-22
 
7-5-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


11-23
 
7-18-11
 
92.017


11-24
 
7-18-11
 
92.033, 92.085, 92.086, 92.090


11-27
 
9-6-11
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XIV


11-35
 
12-19-11
 
92.008, 92.080


12-03
 
2-6-12
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV


12-04
 
2-6-12
 
41.05


12-05
 
2-20-12
 
82.34, 82.41


12-09
 
3-19-12
 
92.080


12-14
 
4-16-12
 
92.080


12-24
 
8-6-12
 
92.085


12-25
 
8-6-12
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XII


12-26
 
8-6-12
 
67.06


12-28
 
8-20-12
 
22.01


12-33
 
10-15-12
 
92.008, 92.080, 92.083, 92.084


13-01
 
1-22-13
 
92.026, 92.033


13-04
 
1-22-13
 
Ch. 24, App. A


13-23
 
6-17-13
 
92.080


13-32
 
8-19-13
 
Ch. 24, App. A


13-38
 
9-16-13
 
92.100


13-42
 
10-7-13
 
72.57, 72.99


13-46
 
11-4-13
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXX


13-47   
 
11-4-13
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


13-50
 
12-16-13
 
22.01


14-04
 
2-17-14
 
51.01 - 51.15


14-06
 
3-17-14
 
82.34


14-12
 
4-7-14
 
92.086


14-14
 
4-7-14
 
82.41


14-16
 
5-5-14
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXI


14-18
 
5-19-14
 
Ch. 77, Sch. IX


14-22
 
7-7-14
 
92.078


14-28
 
10-6-14
 
92.008, 92.080, 92.084, 92.085


14-34
 
11-3-14
 
92.008, 92.079


14-38
 
12-1-14
 
92.008, 92.084, 92.085


15-10
 
4-6-15
 
82.34


15-12
 
5-4-15
 
92.028 - 92.030, 92.032, 92.033


15-19
 
6-1-15
 
92.101


15-21
 
6-15-15
 
25.01


15-28
 
10-5-15
 
Ch. 77, Sch. II


15-34
 
11-2-15
 
92.085C


16-03
 
1-19-16
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXV


16-09
 
4-4-16
 
92.008, 92.082, 92.085C


16-10
 
4-4-16
 
92.023


16-20
 
6-6-16
 
92.008, 92.086


16-21
 
7-18-16
 
Ch. 40, App.


16-25
 
8-15-16
 
Ch. 40, App.


16-27
 
8-15-16
 
90.45 - 90.66


16-28
 
8-15-16
 
92.085B, 92.110


16-35
 
9-19-16
 
80.01 - 80.15


16-38
 
10-17-16
 
Ch. 77, Schs. IX, XIV, XXXI


16-48
 
11-21-16
 
91.01 - 91.24


17-05
 
3-6-17
 
92.085B


17-07
 
3-20-17
 
92.101


17-14
 
- -2017   
 
Ch. 77, Sch. XXXIX


17-15
 
- -
 
92.008, 92.080, 92.081, 92.083


17-24
 
- -
 
92.074


17-25
 
8-7-17
 
92.008


17-26
 
- -17
 
62.01


17-30
 
9-5-17
 
65.17


18-06
 
4-2-18
 
82.34


18-30
 
9-4-18
 
21.001 - 21.017,  21.030 - 21.048, 21.060 - 21.063, 21.075 - 21.081, 21.095
- 21.098, 21.110 - 21.113, 21.125 - 21.128


18-31
 
9-4-18
 
92.008, 92.023, 92.074 - 92.085, 92.085C


 
 
 
 
 




 


