CHARTER
ENACTMENT
§ 1 ENACTMENT.
The Charter of the Town of Aberdeen is hereby revised and consolidated to read as
follows:
CHARTER
ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION AND CORPORATE POWERS
§ 1-1 INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS.
The Town of Aberdeen shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name
of the “Town of Aberdeen,” and shall continue to be vested with all property and rights which
now belong to the town; shall have perpetual succession; may have a common seal and alter and
renew the same at pleasure; may sue and be sued; may contract, may acquire and hold all such
property, real and personal as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or
dedicated to it, to otherwise acquired by it, and may from time to time hold, invest, sell or
dispose of the same; and shall have and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all
municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature.
§ 1-2 EXERCISE OF POWERS.
All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the town, its officers, agencies
or employees, shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter, if this Charter makes
no provision, as provided by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners and as
provided by the general laws of North Carolina pertaining to municipal corporations.
§ 1-3 ENUMERATED POWERS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be
exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or those
appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the Town of Aberdeen shall have and may exercise
all powers which, under the Constitution of North Carolina, it would be competent for this
Charter specifically to enumerate.
CHARTER
ARTICLE II
CORPORATE BOUNDARIES
§ 2-1 EXISTING CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.
(A) The corporate limits of the Town of Aberdeen shall be those existing at the time
of the ratification of this Charter and as the same may be altered from time in accordance with
law. The board of commissioners shall cause to be prepared a map to be designated “Map of the
Town of Aberdeen Corporate Limits,” showing the corporate limits as the same may exist as of
the effective date of this Charter. The board of commissioners shall also cause to be prepared a
written description of the corporate limits as shown on said map to be designated “Description of
Aberdeen Corporate Limits.” Said map and description shall be retained permanently in the
office of the town clerk as the official map and a description of the corporate limits of the town.
Immediately upon alteration of the corporate limits made pursuant to law from time to time the
board of commissioners shall cause to be made the appropriate changes and/or additions to said
official map and description. Photographic copies or other legible and permanent reproductions
of said official map or description certified as by law providing for the certification of ordinances
shall be admissible into evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as would
the official map or description.
(B) The town board shall require the redrawing of the official map and the rewriting
of the official description as may from time to time be required. A redrawn map and a rewritten
description shall supersede for all purposes the earlier maps and descriptions which are
respectively replaced.
§ 2-2 EXTENSION OF CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.
All extensions of the corporate boundaries shall be governed by the General Statutes of
North Carolina.
CHARTER
ARTICLE III
MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
§ 3-1 COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
The board of commissioners shall consist of five members to be elected by the qualified
voters of the town voting at large in the manner provided in Article IV of this Charter.
§ 3-2 MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
The mayor shall be elected by and from the qualified voters of the town voting at large in
the manner provided in Article IV of this Charter. The mayor shall be the official head of the
town government and shall preside at all meetings of the board of commissioners. When there is
an equal division on a question, the mayor shall resolve the deadlock by this vote, but he shall in
no other case. The mayor shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are or may be
conferred upon him by the general laws of North Carolina, by this Charter, and by the ordinances
of the town. The board of commissioners shall choose one of its number to act as mayor pro
tempore and he shall perform the duties of the mayor in the mayor’s absence or disability. The
mayor pro tempore as such shall have no fixed term of office, but shall serve in such capacity at
the pleasure of the remaining members of the board.
§ 3-3 COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The town shall operate under the council-manager form of government in accordance
with Part 2 of Article 7, Chapter 160-A of the General Statutes. The term “council” shall be
deemed to be interchangeable with the term “board of commissioners”, as set forth in G.S. §
160A-1(3).
§ 3-4 TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS; VACANCIES.
(A) The members of the board of commissioners shall serve for staggered terms of
four years. The mayor shall serve for a term of four years as set forth in Article IV section 4.1.
Their terms shall begin on the day and hour of the organizational meeting in December following
their election and they shall serve until their successors are elected and qualify. (Ordinance
amended 4/23/2018)
(B) No person shall be eligible to be a candidate or to be elected as mayor or as a
member of the board of commissioners or to serve in such capacity, unless he is a resident and a
qualified voter of the town.
(C) In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or commissioner, the board
shall by majority vote appoint some qualified person to fill the same for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
§ 3-5 ORGANIZATION OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, OATHS OF
OFFICE.
The board of commissioners shall meet and organize for the transaction of business at the
first regularly scheduled meeting of the board in December following each biennial election.
Before entering upon their offices, the mayor and each commissioner shall take, subscribe to and
have entered upon the minutes of the board of the following oath of office:
“I, _______________ do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and maintain the
Constitutions and laws of the United States and the Constitution and laws of North Carolina not
inconsistent therewith, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my office as
_______________ so help me, God.”
§ 3-6 MEETINGS OF BOARD.
The board of commissioners shall fix a suitable time and place for its regular meetings,
which shall be held at least as often as once monthly. Special meetings may be held according to
the procedures and requirements designated by the general laws of North Carolina pertaining to
special meetings of city councils.
§ 3-7 QUORUM; VOTES.
(A) A majority of the members elected to the board of commissioners shall constitute
a quorum for the conduct of business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time to
compel the attendance of absent members in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance.
(B) The affirmative vote of a majority of the members elected to the board of
commissioners not excused from voting on the issue in question shall be necessary to adopt any
ordinance, or any resolution or motion having the effect of an ordinance. All other matters to be
voted upon shall be decided by a majority vote of those present and voting.
§ 3-8 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading or proving of ordinances shall be in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the general laws of North Carolina not inconsistent
with this Charter. The ayes and noes shall be taken upon all ordinances and resolutions and
entered upon the minutes of the board. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: “Be it
ordained by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Aberdeen.” All ordinances and
resolutions shall take effect upon adoption unless otherwise provided therein.
CHARTER
ARTICLE IV
ELECTIONS
§ 4-1 REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
The municipal elections shall be held and conducted by the Moore County Board of
Elections. The regular municipal elections shall be nonpartisan and dedicated by simple
plurality. The regular election for municipal offices shall be on Tuesday after the first Monday
in November in 1975 and every two years thereafter. The elections shall be held and conducted
in accordance with the applicable provisions of Articles 23 and 24 of Chapter 163 of the General
Statutes of North Carolina. Beginning in the regular election to be held in November 1975, the
three candidates for commissioner receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for
terms of four years, and the town candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall be
elected for terms of two years. Thereafter, as their terms expire, their successors shall be elected
for terms of four years. Beginning in November 2019, the office of mayor shall be elected for a
term of two years, and thereafter, starting in the election of November 2021, the mayor shall be
elected for a term of four years. (Ordinance amended 4/23/2018)
CHARTER
ARTICLE V
TOWN ATTORNEY
§ 5-1 APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM; COMPENSATION.
The board of commissioners shall appoint a town attorney who shall be an attorney at law
licensed to engage in the practice of law in North Carolina and who need not be a resident to the
town during his tenure. The town attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the board and shall
receive such compensation as the board shall determine.
§ 5-2 DUTIES OF TOWN ATTORNEY.
It shall be the duty of the town attorney to prosecute and defend suits against the town; to
advise the mayor, board of commissioners and other town officials with respect to the affairs of
the town; to draft all legal documents related to the affairs of the town; to draft proposed
ordinances when requested to do so; to inspect and pass upon all agreements, contracts,
franchises and other instruments with which the town may be concerned; to attend all meetings
of the board of commissioners when required by the board; and to perform such other duties as
may be required of him by virtue of this position as town attorney.
§ 7-2 INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
As soon as possible after the close of each fiscal year, an independent audit shall be made
of all books and accounts of the town government by a certified local government commission.
The audit shall be secured in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Budget
and Fiscal Control Act.
CHARTER
ARTICLE VIII
POLICE
§ 8-1 JURISDICTION.
(A) In addition to their authority within the corporate limits, town policemen shall
have all powers invested in law enforcement officers by statute or common law within that
territory outside the corporate limits and within one mile thereof which does not lie within the
corporate limits of any other municipality.
(B) The jurisdiction of the police force is hereby extended to include all town-owned
property and facilities whether located within or outside of corporate limits, and all members of
the police force shall have upon and within such property and facilities all rights, power and
authority as they have within the corporate limits.
CHARTER
ARTICLE XI
CLAIMS AGAINST THE TOWN
Editor’s note: There is no Article IX or X.
§ 11-1 PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS; SUIT UPON CLAIMS.
(A) All claims or demands against the Town of Aberdeen arising in tort or in contract
shall be presented to the board of commissioners in writing, signed by the claimant or his
attorney or agent, within ninety days after the claim or demand is due or the cause of action
accrues. No suite or action shall be brought thereon within thirty days or after the expiration of
twelve months from the time said claim or demand is so presented. Unless the claim or demand
is so presented within ninety days after the cause of action accrues and unless suite is brought
within twelve months thereafter, any action thereon is barred.
(B) No action shall be instituted against the town for damages to or compensation for
real property taken or used by the town for any public purpose, or for the ejectment of the town
therefrom, or to remove a cloud upon the title thereof, unless, within two years after such alleged
use, the owner, his executor, administrator, guardian or next of kin shall have given notice in
writing to the board of commissioners of the claim, including in the notice the date the alleged
use commenced, a description of the property alleged to have been used and the amount of the
damage or compensation claimed.
(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) and (b) of this section, if a
complainant suffers from physical or mental capacity that renders it possible for him to give
notice, his action shall not be barred if notice of claim is given by him or on his behalf within six
months after the termination of his incapacity; provided, that minority shall not of itself
constitute physical or mental incapacity. If the complainant is a minor, his action shall not be
barred if notice of claim is given on his behalf within three years after the occurrence of the
infliction of the injury complained of; or if the minor suffers from physical or mental incapacity
that renders it impossible for him to give notice, his action shall not be barred if notice of claim
is given on his behalf within six months after termination of the incapacity, or within three years
after the occurrence or the infliction of the injury complained of, whichever is the longer period.
The town may at any time request the appointment of a next of kin to represent any person
having a potential claim against the town and known to be suffering from physical or mental
incapacity.
TOWN OF ABERDEEN
WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM EXTENSION
AND CONNECTION POLICY
Adopted by the Aberdeen Board of Commissioners: 8/11/08
Effective Date: 8/11/08
Amended: 12-10-18
1.0 Purpose.
2.0 Coverage.
3.0 General.
4.0 Fees.
5.0 Utility System Extension and Connection.
6.0 Town Funded Utility Extensions.
7.0 Utility System Infrastructure Reimbursements for Proposed New Development.
1.0 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this policy is to provide an equitable mechanism by which the
Town of Aberdeen can plan and extend its municipal water and wastewater systems to
serve the needs of the citizens of Aberdeen and those in the Town of Aberdeen utility
service area (hereafter the “utility service area”).
2.0 COVERAGE.
This policy upon adoption by the Board of Commissioners shall be applicable to
all areas within the utility service area. All new development connecting to the Town
utility system shall have access to public water and sanitary sewer in accordance with the
most recent version of this policy.
3.0 GENERAL.
(A) All utility infrastructure including, facility upgrades and system
improvements, new facilities and system extensions shall fully comply with all applicable
Town design standards and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with any
adopted long-range utility plans or as approved by the Director of Public Works.
(B) Requests for utility extensions and/or connections shall be submitted to the
Town. Applications for utility extensions shall be accompanied by engineering design
plans sealed by a licensed Professional Engineer. All proposed water and/or sewer
extensions or facility upgrades shall be approved by the Town prior to construction.
(C) Sanitary Sewer Design criteria will comply with all state rules and
regulations set by North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality. The primary
method of Sanitary Sewer System collection in the Town of Aberdeen will be a gravity
2
system. In the event that a gravity system cannot be achieved due to general topography
of the service area, a consolidated pump station with gravity lines as the collection
method may be designed to mitigate the topography challenges. Any alternate method to
the two listed above will require a variance to be submitted to the Public Works Director.
Possible alternate methods include but are not limited to Low-Pressure Systems, Septic
Tank to Pretreat (STEP) Systems and Vacuum Sewer Systems.
(D) All utility easements required for system extensions or facility upgrades
shall be dedicated to the Town in accordance with the Town’s specification and detail
requirements.
(E) When a property that has been supplied by a well or alternate source of
water requests a connection to the Town water system, the well shall be completely
disconnected from any structure connected to the Town water system. Under no
circumstance shall a well be cross connected to the Town water system.
(F) In the event that a sewer extension is installed within twenty-five (25) feet
of a private well, the well shall be abandoned in compliance with State regulations and
the property owner shall be required to connect to the Town water system regardless of
proximity to the nearest water main.
(G) In the event that a resident requests sewer service only and the resident is
not required to connect to the Town water system, the resident will be required to install a
meter on their well or other source of water for the purpose of sewer billing.
(H) In order to minimize public health and safety risks, such as septic failure,
well failure, inadequate water supply for fire protection or substandard water quality from
well water, the Board of Commissioners may order utility extensions into unserved areas
without request of the property owners in the area.
4.0 FEES.
4.1 Fee Schedule.
The schedule of fee rates is available for public viewing at the Town Water
Department or Public Works. This fee schedule may be amended from time to time at
the discretion of the Town Board of Commissioners.
4.2 Utility Connection Fees.
(A) Except as provided herein, utility connection fees shall be due for all water
and sewer connections to the Town utility system without exception, regardless of who
makes the connection.
(B) Utility connection fees shall be required for all individual connections to
an existing or proposed utility main. The utility connection fees have been established to
3
reimburse the Town for expenses incurred while Town staff members or persons under
contract to the Town make the requested utility connection(s).
(C) Utility connection fees shall be paid to the Town before a work order will
be issued. The utility connection fees include setting a meter and providing service to
water and sewer mains. For individual requests, all required site restoration work
including pavement repair, curb and gutter repair, sidewalk repair and boring shall be
included in the utility connection fees.
(D) For Town funded projects constructed by outside contractors, utility
connection fees will also be levied. With Town funded projects, discounts of standard
connection charges may be allowed. See section 6.5 for further details.
(E) When tapping new mains under construction or active mains under
warranty, developers shall be required to make their own utility taps by setting meter
boxes and sewer connections, and they are not required to pay the utility connection fees
established herein. All other fees, which may include, but are not limited to, fees for
pavement repair, curb and gutter repair, sidewalk repair and boring, shall be paid in
accordance with the adopted fee schedule of the Town of Aberdeen.
4.2 Availability Fees.
The Town may collect availability fees from all property owners inside the
corporate limits where water and/or sewer service has been made accessible and adjacent
to existing developed property, but the property owner has chosen not to connect. Any
property with a residential dwelling or operating commercial or institutional
establishment shall be liable for the payment of availability charges. The availability fees
shall be collected to reimburse the Town for the construction and maintenance costs of
water and/or sewer mains adjacent to the property. In cases where the property owner
chooses to connect to the existing utility service, the availability charge(s) will cease to
be collected upon the owner’s payment of all applicable fees for connection(s) to the
utility system.
5.0 UTILITY SYSTEM EXTENSION AND CONNECTION.
5.1 Improvements to Existing Property Within the Town Limits.
Any improvements to existing developed property within the corporate limits
requiring either new or expanded well and/or septic capacity shall connect to the Town
utility system when the property is adjacent to an existing water and/or sewer main and
another owner’s private property does not have to be crossed to make the connection. In
the event that there are no adjacent water and/or sewer mains available, the property
owner may construct a private well and/or septic system as approved by the Moore
County Health Department or the N.C. Department of Environmental Quality, Division
of Environmental Health.
4
5.2 Utility System Extension and Connection Outside the Town Limits.
(A) All applicants requesting utility connections outside the Town limits are
required to submit a petition of annexation and/or annexation agreement along with a
utility extension and/or connection request. All voluntary annexation requests
accompanied by the corresponding utility extension and/or connection requests shall be
submitted to the Town for approval. All requests for utility extensions and connections
outside the Town Limits shall be reviewed on a case by case basis by the Town prior to
approval.
(B) A utility connection outside the Town limits will not be allowed until the
Board of Commissioners has adopted the ordinance of annexation, annexation agreement,
or except in cases of emergency. The Board of Commissioners, at its discretion, may
incorporate additional requirements as conditions for adoption of the annexation
ordinance.
(C) The applicant shall pay all required fees and fulfill the owner/developer
obligations outlined in Section 5.3 of this policy for providing all on-site water and/or
wastewater facilities, extensions and connections of the proposed water and wastewater
facilities to the existing utility system of the Town.
(D) If the applicant is allowed to connect to the utility system before the
annexation becomes effective, the applicant shall pay current outside utility rates until the
property is incorporated into the Town limits.
5.3 Proposed New Development.
(A) The owner or developer of a parcel or tract of land shall construct, at no
expense to the Town, all on-site water and/or wastewater facilities in accordance with
section 3 (c). When consistent with the Town’s long range plans, the Director of Public
Works may, in his discretion, elect to construct the facilities; however, it is the
responsibility of the owner or developer to pay for such installation. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Town may agree to pay some or all of the cost of construction of proposed
facilities. Any such agreement shall be memorialized in a development agreement
approved by the owner or developer and the Board of Commissioners and when
applicable, the requirements of Section 7.0, below, shall apply.
(B) The developer shall provide all connections and extensions of the water
and wastewater facilities from the development, including all properties inside the
development, to the existing utility system of the Town in accordance with all applicable
Town standards, specifications and long range utility plans. All planned extensions of
the Town water and wastewater system shall have engineering design plans prepared and
submitted to the Town for review and approval prior to construction. No water and
wastewater facilities, extensions or connections shall be constructed without written
approval and inspection by the Town and all required approvals by the Moore County
Health Department and the N.C. Department of Environmental Quality.
5
6.0 TOWN FUNDED UTILITY EXTENSIONS.
6.1 Existing Developed Property.
(A) Owners of developed property inside the Town limits with existing
structures on their property, including newly annexed residents may petition the Board of
Commissioners for the extension of water and/or sewer mains funded by the Town.
(B) Applicants who choose to request water only or sewer only may be
required to request both water and sewer at the discretion of the Town. Factors that will
be considered for approving Town funded utility extension projects are the size of the
area, number of property owners requesting utility connections, proximity to the existing
Town system, buyout arrangements with the current service provider, funding limitations
and the age of existing facilities.
6.2 Eligibility Requirements.
In addition to meeting the requirements of Section 6.3, below, property will not be
considered for Town funded utility extension projects without meeting the following
eligibility requirements prior to the submission of a petition:
(1) The property must be within the Town’s corporate limits,
(2) The property must be developed,
(3) The property must have a dwelling or other operational structure onsite,
(4) The property shall be subdivided in accordance with Town Subdivision
Regulations,
(5) The property shall not be undergoing rezoning, and
(6) Individual properties shall not be undergoing expansion or improvement.
In compelling cases, the Board of Commissioners may waive any or all of these
eligibility requirements.
6.3 Minimum Area Requirements.
In addition to meeting the requirements of Section 6.2, above, property will not be
considered for Town funded utility extension projects without meeting the following
minimum area requirements prior to the submission of a petition:
(1) The minimum area shall not be less than a street length between intersections
and shall consist of at least ten (10) properties requesting utility connections;
(2) For water extension requests, the area shall extend to the nearest available
Town water main. In certain cases, it may not be possible to connect the
proposed area to the closest water main because of access limitations. In these
cases, the closest available water main along a passable alignment shall be
considered;
(3) For sewer extension requests, the area shall extend to the closest available
existing Town sewer main within the same drainage basin as the area under
6
consideration. For sewer construction, the closest available Town sewer main
shall be one that is at a lower elevation than the proposed area and for which a
passable route exists between the proposed area and the existing sewer main;
and
(4) Additional requirements as recommended by the Public Works Department
based on sound engineering practices.
The Town may decide to increase the minimum area requirements based on the overall
size and type of area under consideration for proposed utility extensions. In compelling
cases, the Board of Commissioners may waive any or all of these minimum area
requirements.
6.4 Petition Requirements.
(A) Petitions for Town funded water and/or sewer extensions shall sufficiently
satisfy the following criteria. Petitions that do not sufficiently meet the following criteria
will not be considered:
(1) The petition must be signed by more than fifty (50%) percent of the owners of
property adjacent to the proposed utility extension(s), and those property
owners shall own more than fifty (50%) percent of the road frontage along the
alignment of the proposed extension(s). The proposed alignment must extend
to the existing Town utility system.
(2) All persons and entities listed on the property deed as record owners of a
property must sign the petition. In the case of entities such as corporations or
estates, a representative authorized by law may sign the petition on behalf of
the entity.
(3) Property owners who own more than one property adjacent to proposed utility
extensions must sign the petition for each of their properties within the project
area.
(B) All sufficient petitions shall require language notifying the property
owners of the following items:
(1) A statement of the connection fees in effect at the time of petition signing.
(2) A statement of all applicable discounts available by participating in the
petition for water and/or sewer service.
(3) A statement that all applicants registering on the petition will be required to
pay their connection charges prior to the Town extending utility mains.
(C) All petitions shall be submitted to the Public Works Department to verify
sufficiency prior to being considered for approval by the Board of Commissioners. Only
verified, sufficient petitions will be considered. After a petition has been deemed
sufficient and the property owners have met all established requirements, staff will
prepare a recommendation for the Board of Commissioners to order the extension of
utilities. The Board shall have the option of ordering the utilities installed, requesting
7
additions or modifications to the service area, rejecting the request, or submitting the
request to further deliberation. The Board’s decision shall be final and rejected requests
will not be reconsidered for two (2) years after the first request was rejected unless
initiated by the Town. If the improvements are ordered, Town funding will be allocated
to complete the proposed work.
6.5 Incentives and Discounts.
If the petition is approved, the residents that petitioned petitioning for water and
sewer service will be eligible for a waiver of fifty percent (50%) of the applicable
connection charges. In order to receive the fifty percent (50%) discount, residents must
apply to the Town either by petition or by contacting the Public Works Department
following petition approval. Requests initiated after construction has begun on the
project will not be eligible for the discount.
6.6 Implementation of Town Funded Utility Extension Project.
(A) Upon approval of a petition by the Town Board of Commissioners, the
Town will prepare plans to extend utility mains into the area requesting service.
(B) Property owners petitioning for utility extensions will have the option of
(1) paying their required connection charges in full, prior to the Town advertising
the construction contract for the installation of the utility mains; or
(2) paying their connection charges in three (3) equal installments. The first
installment would be due within sixty (60) days after the petition has been
approved by the Board of Commissioners. The second installment would be
due prior to the Town advertising the construction contract for installation of
the proposed water and sewer mains. Advertising for a Contractor to install
the proposed water and sewer mains will not begin until the second
installment has been received by all of the petitioning property owners. For
property owners who connect to the newly extended utility service and initiate
a utility account with the Town, the final installment will be due prior to
activating their utility service. For property owners who do not wish to
connect to utility service, their final installment will be invoiced and billed to
them no sooner than (60) sixty days after the utility construction has been
completed by the Town. Construction will be deemed complete after final
payment has been made to the Contractor.
(C) Property owners who have paid their connection charges in full, prior to
construction will be permitted to connect to Town utility service as soon as the newly
constructed water and/or sewer mains have been accepted by the Town. They will be
required to obtain a plumbing permit from the Planning and Inspections Department prior
8
to installing their private utility service lines. Potential water customers will also be
required to apply for a water meter.
(D) The Town reserves the right to withdraw support for utility extension
projects in cases where all petition applicants fail to pay the required fees and connection
charges in accordance with the schedule of payments outlined herein. In such cases fees
paid by applicants will be refunded to them.
6.7 Non-Petitioning Property Owners.
(A) Property owners who did not petition for water and/or wastewater service
may request service within ninety (90) days of being contacted by the Town. The Town
will contact these property owners after the construction contract for the utility extension
project has been advertised. Property owners who request water and/or wastewater
service and pay the full connection charge within this ninety (90) day period shall receive
the fifty percent (50%) discount set forth in Section 6.5. After the ninety (90) day period
expires, any forthcoming requests shall be subject to the non-discounted utility
connection fees, which shall be payable prior to the establishment of a utility connection.
(B) Property owners applying for utility service under this Section, shall be
solely responsible for obtaining their plumbing permit and installing the private service
line from their structure to the public right-of-way.
(C) Property owners that choose not to connect to newly extended water
and/or sewer service shall be liable for the payment of availability fees. The availability
fees will be billed to the property owner after the service has been made available and the
ninety (90) day period specified in this Section has elapsed. The availability fees will be
billed monthly until such time as the property owner connects to the utility service.
6.8 Alignment and Location of Proposed Utility Mains.
(A) The Town reserves the right to choose the alignment and location of the
requested utility mains. The Town shall not be obligated to replace landscaping,
irrigation systems, or any other privately owned obstructions within the existing right-ofway
or utility easement at the time of construction, nor will the Town be obligated to
compensate property owners for the removal of such obstructions.
(B) In isolated cases, sewer connections requested by property owners may
not be feasible, as determined by the Public Works Director, due to the unique
topography of the area. In these cases, the property owners shall be responsible for
installing private pumps stations or other alternate methods as necessary to connect to an
adjacent sewer main extended by the Town. Should the property owner decide not to
install a private pump station or alternate connection to the sewer system, the property
owner shall be solely responsible for maintenance and repair of the existing septic or
waste disposal system serving the property.
9
7.0 UTILITY SYSTEM INFRASTRUCTURE REIMBURSEMENTS FOR
PROPOSED NEW DEVELOPMENT.
(A) In instances where Town funding is available for the types of system
extensions and facility upgrades that are beyond the scope of infrastructure required for a
specific development project, the developer may enter into a development agreement or
other reimbursement agreement (collectively referred to herein as “reimbursement
agreements”) with the Town. The Public Works Director and, when appropriate, the
Planning Director shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners regarding
all reimbursement agreements, and the Board of Commissioners shall approve or deny all
such agreements. Approval of facilities under these agreements shall be contingent upon
receipt of all Town and State approvals and the availability of sufficient water supply
and/or wastewater treatment capacity.
(B) Reimbursement agreement shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The developer shall be responsible for the full cost of installing
water and/or wastewater facilities within their own properties and
for the connection of their system to the Town’s existing utility
system. The Town may share in the cost of constructing oversized
facilities when larger sizes are required to serve other tracts outside
of the tract being developed.
(2) Town reimbursement of developer funded facilities will be made
for the difference in cost between facilities required for the
development and oversized facilities required by the Town. The
methodology of sizing facilities shall be as specified by the Town’s
long range plans and as approved by the Public Works Director. In
no instance shall the Town of Aberdeen reimburse for water or
wastewater lines eight inches (8”) or less in diameter.
(3) Costs eligible for reimbursement shall include all off-site water
and/or wastewater facilities and on-site facilities of a regional
nature. Only construction costs shall be eligible for
reimbursement.
(4) All reimbursement contracts shall be two party agreements
between the Town of Aberdeen and a developer or coalition of
developers and shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners
prior to construction of the water and/or wastewater facilities.
(5) The term of any reimbursement contract shall run from the
execution of the contract by all parties for ten (10) years or until
the Town’s obligation for reimbursement has been met, whichever
occurs first.
10
(6) The developer shall prepay all fees to the Town, prior to award of
any construction contract utilizing a reimbursement agreement..
(7) By entrance into a reimbursement agreement, the Town makes no
guarantee as to the availability of water supply and/or wastewater
treatment capacity beyond that which would be available to any
other developing properties.
(8) It may be feasible in certain cases to utilize developer-funded,
reimbursement agreements in addition to assessments to fully fund
utility extensions. In these cases, the Town shall be responsible for
the design, construction, easement acquisition and all approvals for
the utility extension project and the following conditions shall
apply:
(a) The developer shall remit to the Town in one lump sum the
difference between the total project cost derived from actual bid
amounts plus a fifteen percent (15%) contingency.;
(b) In lieu of satisfying subsection (a), the developer may provide
surety in the form of a surety bond, an irrevocable letter of credit,
or other surety acceptable to the Board of Commissioners. The
type of performance guarantee used shall be at the election of the
developer. The surety shall be for the cost derived from actual
bids plus a fifteen percent (15%) contingency;
(c) Following completion of construction, the final project costs shall
be calculated, as well as any applicable assessment fees, to
determine the reimbursable amount; and
(d) Following acceptance of the project(s) by the Town, the cash or
surety shall be released by the Town of Aberdeen.
(C) Developer Funded Construction With No Reimbursement.
In those instances where funding is not available under any other provisions of
this policy statement or when the Board of Commissioners elects to not enter into a
reimbursement agreement, the developer shall fund the full cost of installing all water
and/or wastewater facilities and utility system extensions with no reimbursement. All
facilities installed under this method shall fully comply with Town design standards and
all long range water and/or wastewater system design plans. No waivers shall be granted
without the written consent of the Director of Public Works.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated The Code of Ordinances of the Town of Aberdeen, North Carolina and may be
so cited. Such code may also be cited as Aberdeen Town Code.
(’75 Code, § 1-1)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
(A) Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as
those governing the interpretation of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
(B) Where a section of this code is followed by a reference to the General Statutes of
North Carolina, the reference indicated that the section is analogous or similar to the cited
sections in the General Statutes of North Carolina. Footnotes, cross-references and other
comments are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any
section.
(C) Nothing herein contained is intended to conflict with or supersede applicable state
or federal laws.
(D) Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as
contained in the code.
§ 10.03 CAPTIONS.
The captions of the several sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections
nor as any part thereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of
such sections, including the captions, are amended or reenacted.
(’75 Code, § 1-4)
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically provided, the following
words and phrases shall have the following meanings.
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS or TOWN COUNCIL. The governing body of the
Town of Aberdeen, North Carolina. The term BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS shall be
deemed to be interchangeable with the term TOWN COUNCIL.
COUNTY. Moore County, North Carolina.
DEVELOPMENT. That which is to be done pursuant to a certificate of zoning
compliance, special use permit, conditional use permit, or sign permit.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an OATH, and in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent
to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
OWNER. When applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property.
PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other
group acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property as herein
defined.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING. Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SHALL and MAY. The word SHALL is mandatory and the word MAY is permissive.
SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line
intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. A mark when a person cannot write.
STATE. State of North Carolina.
STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley,
lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the town and shall mean the entire width
of the right-of-way between abutting property lines.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the
chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of
sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land shall include any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TOWN. The Town of Aberdeen in the County of Moore and the State of North Carolina.
TOWN MANAGER. The chief administrator of the Town of Aberdeen.
WRITING or WRITTEN. Shall include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letter.
YEAR. A calendar year
(’75 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
Similar statutory definitions, see G.S. § 12-3
§ 10.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the
same ordinance.
(A) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written and/or, if the
sense requires it.
(B) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall
be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the
plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.
(C) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be
limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
(D) Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language. However, technical words and
phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be
construed and understood according to that meaning.
(E) Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided by
law, shall be computed in the manner prescribed by Rule 6 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil
Procedure. (G.S. § 1-593)
(F) Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or
officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers,
unless otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority. (G.S. § 12-3(2))
Statutory reference:
Similar statutory rules of construction, see G.S. § 12-3
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of the codified ordinances
conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the latest passage date shall
prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed
so as to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the subject matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Commissioners that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable and if any phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid
by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality
or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and
sections of this code, since they would have been enacted by the Board of Commissioners
without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section.
(’75 Code, § 1-5)
§ 10.08 PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF
EXISTING ORDINANCES.
The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances
adopted prior to the adoption of this code and included herein, shall be considered as
continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
(’75 Code, § 1-3)
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall
extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or
renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or
revision.
§ 10.10 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or
employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision,
irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.11 ERRORS AND OMMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission
of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a
word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another
word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted that will conform with the manifest intention, and
the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text
as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding
the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.12 OFFICIAL TIME.
Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in this town.
§ 10.13 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or
requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the
time which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
(B) In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this code, by order of
any court, or by any applicable statute, such computation shall be in the manner prescribed by
Rule 6 of the North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, form and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general
nature pertaining to the subject herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining
to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this code.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to
subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.16 ORDINANCES SAVED.
Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the legislative body or a
certain town officer or employee to make additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of
carrying out the intent of the ordinances, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature
serving that purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain
in effect and are saved.
§ 10.17 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by ordinances passed
subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code
and printed for inclusion herein. Any chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent
ordinances may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. Subsequent
ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until
the legislative body of the town adopts a new code of ordinances.
(’75 Code, § 1-8)
§ 10.18 EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION FOR ENFORCEMENT
OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES.
(A) Within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the town shall exercise all corporate powers
available to it pursuant to G.S. § 160A-360.
(B) The boundaries of the town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be delineated on the
face of a map entitled Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the Town of Aberdeen, which is hereby
adopted by reference.
(C) The official copy of this map shall be on record in the office of the Town Clerk
for public inspection during normal business hours. The Town Clerk shall cause a certified copy
of this provisions and map and any subsequent amendments to be recorded in the office of the
register of deeds of the county. The Town Clerk shall cause signs, signposts or similar readilyidentifiable
markers to be installed at all points of intersection of the above-described boundary
with all roads, streets, highways and railroads.
(’75 Code, § 1-6)(Ord., passed 6-16-72; Amended 2-12-07; Am. Ord., passed 9-10-07)
§ 10.98 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) (1) Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4 and except as provided in subdivisions (A)(2) and
(A)(3) any person who violates any provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be guilty of a
Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $50. (Amended 8-13-01, Amended
8/9/10)
(2) Any person who violates any provision of this Code regulating the
operation or parking of vehicles shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay
a penalty of not more than $50.
(3) Any person who violates any provision of this Code pertaining to pickets,
parades, public assemblies, and special events (Code § 96.01 through 96.31) shall be guilty of a
Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00. See Code § 96.32. (Amended
8/9/10)
(B) Any provision of this code or any other town ordinance may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the
general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate and it
shall not be a defense to the application of the town for equitable relief that there is an adequate
remedy at law.
(C) Any provision of this code or any other town ordinance that makes unlawful a
condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of
abatement, and the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a
violation of such a provision occurs, the town may apply to the appropriate division of the
general court of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement
commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of
the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil
proceedings, including the State Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.
(1) In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a
part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other
structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other
removable property be removed from buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that
improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the
property into compliance with this code or the ordinance.
(2) If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an
order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt and the
town may execute the order of abatement. The town shall have a lien on the property for the cost
of the executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien.
(3) The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying
all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be
given with sureties approved by the clerk of superior court in an amount approved by the judge
before whom the matter’s heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant’s full compliance with
the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge.
(4) Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an
injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
(D) The provisions of this code and any other town ordinance may be enforced by any
one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this section.
(E) Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day’s continuing violation of any
provision of this code or any other town ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(F) A violation of any provision of this Code, other than the provisions of Chapter 71
(Parking Regulations), the provisions of Chapter 74, Schedule II (Parking of Through-trucks and
Loading Zones); the provisions of Subsections 70.40(E) and 70.43(B); Subsection 110.48(A)
(Civil Penalties and Unpaid Taxes); and Chapter 152 (the Unified Development Ordinance) shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). A violation of the provisions of
Chapter 71 (Parking Regulations), the provisions of Chapter 74, Schedule II (Parking of
Through-trucks and Loading Zones) and the provisions of Subsections 70.40(B) and 70.43(B),
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of ten dollars ($10.00). A violation of Chapter 152
(Unified Development Ordinance) shall subject the offender to civil penalties as provided for in
that chapter. A violation of Subsection 110.48(A) (Civil Penalties for Unpaid Taxes) shall
subject the offender to civil penalties as set forth in that Subsection. (Amended 5/2/13)
For violations of the Unified Development Ordinance, see also Code of Ordinances Chpt.
152, Art. VII, “Enforcement”.
(G.S. § 160A-175) (’75 Code, § 1-7) (Am. Ord., passed 5-30-02, Amended 8/9/10, Amended
6/13/11)
§ 10.99 CIVIL PENALTIES (GENERAL PENALTY).
(Repealed 8-13-01)
ADMINISTRATION
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
§ 30.01 MEETINGS.
The time and place of the regular meetings of the Board of Commissioners at their
organizational meeting following their election.
(’75 Code, § 2-6)
ADMINISTRATION
DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 30.10 THROUGH 30.15 REPEALED ON 6/13/11.
APPEARANCE AND BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
§ 31.01 COMPOSITION; TERM; APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION.
(A) The Town Appearance and Beautification Commission shall consist of seven
members, all of whom shall be residents of the town area of planning and zoning jurisdiction or
operators of businesses within such jurisdiction. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Board of Commissioners. Three of the members shall be appointed for terms of one year; two
for two years; and two for three years. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three
years. Vacancies occurring for reasons other than the expiration of terms shall be filled as they
occur for the period of the unexpired term.
(B) Members may be immediately reappointed to the commission upon the expiration
of terms, and they may be removed from the commission by the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners for due cause. Faithful attendance at the meetings of the commission and
conscientious performance of the duties of members shall be considered a prerequisite for
continued membership on the commission.
(C) In making appointments to the commission, the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners shall seek to appoint persons with impartial and broad judgment and, when
possible, persons with training or experience in a design profession. As wide a range of
community interests as possible should be represented on the commission.
(D) Members of the commission shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for
actual expenses incident to the performance of their duties within the limits of funds available to
the commission.
(‘75 Code, § 2-32)
§ 31.02 ORGANIZATION; RULES; RECORDS; MEETINGS.
Within 30 days after its appointment, the Appearance and Beautification Commission
shall meet and elect a chairman. It shall create and fill such offices as it may determine. The
term of the chairman and other officers shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The
commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its
members’ attendance and recommendations, which records shall be open to the public. The
commission shall hold at least one meeting monthly and all of its meetings shall be open to the
public. For the purpose of taking any official action authorized or required by this article, there
shall be present a quorum of four members.
(‘75 Code, § 2-33)
§ 31.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Appearance and Beautification Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
(A) To initiate, promote and assist in the implementation of programs of general
community beautification in the town and its environs.
(B) To seek to coordinate the activities of individuals, agencies, organizations and
groups, public and private, whose plans, activities and programs bear upon the appearance of the
town and its environs.
(C) To direct the attention of the Mayor and the Board of Commissioners to ways in
which the town government may take direct action affecting the appearance of the town and its
environs.
(‘75 Code, § 2-34)
§ 31.04 ANNUAL REPORT; RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
(A) The Appearance and Beautification Commission shall report at least twice a year
to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners. It shall submit its requested budget of funds needed
for operation during the ensuing fiscal year to the Town Manager no later than April 15. All
accounts and funds of the commission shall be administered in accordance with the requirements
of the Municipal Fiscal Control Act.
(B) The Appearance and Beautification Commission is hereby authorized to receive
contributions from private agencies, foundations, organizations, individuals, the state or federal
government or any other source in addition to any sums which may be appropriated for its use by
the Board of Commissioners. Such funds will be expanded in accordance with town policy.
(‘75 Code, § 2-35)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.10 APPOINTMENT AND SUPERVISION OF FIRE CHIEF.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by the Town Manager and shall be
subject to the supervision of the Town Manager (see Charter Article III, § 3-3).
(’75 Code, § 8-20)
§ 31.11 DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to:
(A) Supervise and direct the extinguishing of fires.
(B) Preserve, maintain and account for all equipment of the Fire Department.
(C) Compel, when necessary, all persons to aid in extinguishing fires.
(D) Enforce all rules and ordinances relative to fire prevention.
(E) Examine all premises and have removed all combustible material not stored
according to town ordinances.
(F) Have the right to enter all buildings and premises at reasonable hours for the
purpose of making inspection.
(G) Perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the Town Manager,
provision of this Code, other ordinances of the town or state law.
(’75 Code, § 8-21)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.20 CHIEF OF POLICE; APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL.
The Town Manager shall appoint a Chief of Police and shall have the power to remove
the Chief of Police.
(’75 Code, § 20-1)
§ 31.21 DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to:
(A) Supervise the Police Department;
(B) Preserve the peace by suppressing all disturbances and apprehending all
offenders;
(C) Assign such duties as he deems best to police officers of the town;
(D) Cooperate with the Fire Department in the protection of property; and
(E) Carry out such further orders as may be assigned to him by the Town Manager,
provisions of this Code, other ordinances of the town or state law.
PLANNING BOARD
§ 31.30 THROUGH 31.44 REPEALED ON 6/13/11.
§ 31.30 PLANNING DEPARTMENT.
(A) The Planning Department shall consist of a planning director and as many other
employees as the Board of Commissioners may authorize from time to time.
(B) The Planning Department shall be responsible for conducting planning studies,
enforcing ordinances related to regulation and control of development, including but not limited
to the Unified Development Ordinance and the minimum housing code, and enforcing the State
Building Code. The Planning Department shall also perform any other duties assigned to it by
the Manager.
(Amended 6/13/11)
§ 31.31 PLANNING BOARD.
There shall be a Planning Board, whose establishment, powers and duties are provided
for in Chapter 152, Article III, Part 1 of this code.
(Amended 9-14-09; Amended 6/13/11)
§ 31.32 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
There shall be a Board of Adjustment, whose establishment, powers and duties are
provided for in Chapter 152, Article III, Part 2 of this code.
(Amended 6/13/11)
§ 31.33 THROUGH 31.44 REPEALED ON 6/13/11.
§ 31.40 THROUGH 31.44 REPEALED ON 9/8/08.
§ 31.40 Board of Adjustment.
Repealed on 12/12/2016.
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 31.50 CREATION, NAME, NUMBER OF MEMBERS, TITLE.
There is hereby created a Committee composed of seven (7) members to be known as the
Town of Aberdeen Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee. This ordinance shall be known
as the Aberdeen Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee Ordinance.
§ 31.51 COMMITTEE, POWERS AND DUTIES.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall serve as the advisory body for the
Town of Aberdeen area on issues relative to parks and recreation. The Parks and Recreation
Advisory Committee shall advise the Parks and Recreation Director, the Town Manager and the
Commissioners within its responsibilities and powers as stated in this ordinance.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall serve as a liaison between the Parks
and Recreation Department and the citizens of Aberdeen.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall consult with and advise the Parks
and Recreation Department in matters affecting recreational programs, park facilities, greenways
and open space and the acquisition and disposal of lands and properties and its long-range,
projected plan for parks and recreation.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall also assume specific duties and
responsibilities as follows:
(A) To assist the Park and Recreation Department staff in investigating and
determining the needs, interests and goals of the community for park facilities and recreation
programs.
(B) To make recommendations to the Parks and Recreation Director, the Town
Manager and the Board of Commissioners to meet the above mentioned identified needs and
goals.
(C) To inform and educate the public of the importance and need for parks,
recreational programs, greenways, open space, facilities and services.
(D) To seek and make recommendations on the acceptance of grants, gifts, requests,
donation and personal or real property for park and recreation purposes.
(E) To assist the Park and Recreation Department in developing cooperative ventures
with other organizations and private groups, when it will further the objective of providing more
and diverse kinds of parks and recreation programs for the citizens of Aberdeen.
(F) To assist the Parks and Recreation Department in recruiting volunteers to assist
with the programs and activities.
(G) To assist in matters relating to maintaining the highest standards in park
development and operation, parks and recreation leadership and in providing a well balanced
program.
(H) To assist in development a plan to meet the present and future needs for
programs, services, parks, facilities, open spaces, trails and greenways and to advise in
developing priorities for each of these.
(I) To receive information and reports from staff concerning the evaluation of
programs, facilities, fees and policies and procedures.
(J) Upon request, recommend approval of rules and procedures pertaining to the use
of public parks and facilities including suggested fees and charges.
(K) To represent the Parks and Recreation Department at sponsored events and
activities.
(L) Carry out any other assigned duties as determined appropriate by the Parks and
Recreation Director and/or Town Commissioners.
§ 31.52 APPOINTMENT OF THE COMMITTEE.
The Aberdeen Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall consist of seven (7)
members all of whom shall be appointed by the Town Board of Commissioners. The seven
appointed members should consist of Aberdeen citizens from these areas of the community:
(A) Arts.
(B) Athletics.
(C) Two (2) citizens at large.
(D) Local business.
(E) Senior citizens.
(F) Teen.
One Town Commissioner and the Park and Recreation Director shall serve as ex-officio
members of the Aberdeen Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee.
The terms of office for the members shall be for three (3) years; except for the initial
terms of office. Two (2) members shall be appointed for one (1) year, two (2) members shall be
appointed for two (2) years and three (3) members shall be appointed for three (3) years. All
subsequent terms shall be for three (3) years.
Vacancies arising on the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall be filled by the
Town Board of Commissioners for the balance of the unexpired term. All appointments will be
made by the Town Board of Commissioners in accordance with the policy governing
appointments to Board and Committees.
Any committee member who misses more than three regular meetings with a year, loses
his/her membership status.
§ 31.53 OFFICERS.
The members of the Aberdeen Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall elect
annually from their own membership a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary and other officers
as they deem essential. Duties of each officer shall be established in the committee by-laws.
§ 31.54 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.
The members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall serve without
compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for subsistence and travel to approved
professional recreation meetings, conferences and workshops with such reimbursement in
compliance with the Town’s policies.
§ 31.55 MEETINGS.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall meet at least monthly. The
Committee can meet at other times as deemed necessary to transact business, by the following
methods:
(A) Upon the call of the Parks and Recreation Director.
(B) Upon the call of the Chairman.
(C) By a majority of the committee members.
(D) Upon the call of the Board of Commissioners.
A quorum of the committee shall be in attendance before any official action can be taken.
General parliamentary rules, as given in “Robert’s Rules of Order”, as modified by rule
san regulations of the Advisory Committee shall be observed in conducting meetings.
§ 31.56 SUBCOMMITTEES AND STANDING COMMITTEES.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall organize temporary or standing
subcommittees as it deems necessary in order to carry out the responsibilities of the Committee.
Such subcommittees shall be appointed by the Chairman.
Staff members of the Parks and Recreation Department shall be assigned as ex-officio
members to sub-committees.
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee may refer any matter to a subcommittee
before action is taken on the subject by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee and
referred to the Town Board of Commissioners for approval.
(Ord., passed 9-13-04)
ADMINISTRATION
ELECTIONS
§ 32.01 CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS.
The County Board of Election shall conduct all municipal elections within and for the
town.
(’75 Code, § 5-1)
§ 32.02 REGISTRATION BOOKS.
The registration books of the county for the town precincts shall be the official record of
registration of persons qualified to vote in municipal elections.
(’75 Code, § 5-2)
ADMINISTRATION
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 33.01 AD VALOREM TAX DISCOUNT RATES.
Discounts shall be in effect, unless otherwise provided, as follows:
(A) One and one half percent if paid from July 1 to July 30; or
(B) One percent if paid from August 1 to August 31; and then payable at par from
September 1 to December 31.
(’75 Code, § 7-1)(Ord, passed 3-13-72)
§ 34.01 DISPOSING OF TOWN PROPERTY IN GENERAL;
DEFINITIONS.
(A) The Town of Aberdeen shall dispose of town-owned real and personal property
only in accordance with the town Code of Ordinances; G.S. Chpt. 160A, Art. 12, “Sale of
Property”; and such other laws as may apply.
(B) For the purposes of this section and sections 34.02 through 34.04, the term
“exchange” means to “trade property for other property for other property or to trade property for
credits that can be applied to reduce the cost of a subsequent purchase of other property.”
(Amended 9/13/10)
§ 34.02 DISPOSING OF PERSONAL PROPERTY WORTH $7,500.00 OR
LESS.
(A) The town Manager, on behalf of the town, may sell or exchange any town-owned
personal property, which may include a single item or a group of items, valued at $7,500.00 or
less by private negotiation and sale or by private negotiation and exchange, provided the
Manager complies with the following requirements:
(1) The Manager shall take reasonable steps (i) to secure for the town fair
market value for the property to be sold or exchanged and (ii) to ensure that the disposal is
conducted efficiently and economically;
(2) Notice of the proposed sale or exchange shall be posted on the town
bulletin board and town Web site at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale;
(3) The Manager shall keep a record of all property sold or exchanged
pursuant to this section. The record shall include a general description of the disposed property,
to whom the property was sold or exchanged, and the amount of money or other consideration
received for the sale or exchange;
(4) At least once a year, the Manager shall provide the Board of
Commissioners a report summarizing the personal property sold or exchanged by the Manager
pursuant to this section.
(B) The town Manager, in his or her discretion, may refer the disposition of any townowned
personal property worth $7,500.00 or less to the Board of Commissioners, which shall
consider the matter in accordance with sections 34.03 and 34.04.
(Amended 9/13/10)
§ 34.03 DISPOSING OF PERSONAL PROPERTY WORTH MORE THAN
$7,500.00 AND LESS THAN $30,000.00.
The town may sell or exchange any town-owned personal property, which may include a
single item or a group of similar items, valued at more than $7,500.00 and less the $30,000.00 by
private negotiation and sale or by private negotiation and exchange, provided the town complies
with the following requirements:
(A) The department head proposing the sale or exchange, or the town manager in the
absence of a department head, shall take reasonable steps (i) to secure for the town fair market
value for the property to be sold or exchanged and (ii) to ensure that the disposal is conducted
efficiently and economically.
(B) The Board of Commissioners must approve the sale or exchange by resolution,
and no disposal of property may be completed until a resolution has been approved; and
(C) Notice of the proposed sale or exchange shall be posted on the town bulletin
board and town Web site at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting when the Board of
Commissioners is scheduled to first consider the resolution approving the disposal of property.
(Amended 9/13/10)
§ 34.04 OTHER METHODS OF DISPOSING OF TOWN-OWNED
PEROSNAL PROPERTY
In addition to private sale and exchange, the town may dispose of town-owned personal
property worth less than $30,000.00 by any other method authorized by G.S. Chpt. 160A, Art.
12.
Statutory Reference – Rules for sale and exchange of property, G.S. 160A-266(c).
(Amended 9/13/10)
PUBLIC WORKS
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
CONNECTIONS AND EXTENSIONS
§ 50.01 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS.
All extensions of and connections to the Town of Aberdeen water and wastewater
systems shall be in accordance with the Town of Aberdeen Water and Wastewater Extension and
Connection Policy, adopted on August 11, 2008, and as amended from time to time by the Board
of Commissioners. (Adopted 8/11/08)
(’75 Code, § 24-1) (Am. Ord., passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord., passed 3-14-94; Am. Ord, passed 2-13-
95) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.02 THROUGH 50.09 REPEALED ON 8/11/08.
WATER METERS
§ 50.15 WATER METERS REQUIRED.
(A) Every separate user who receives his water supply from the town shall have a
water meter installed upon the line furnishing such water.
(B) Irrigation Meters.
Irrigation Meter Requirement
All new in-ground irrigation systems installed after application of this section that
will be supplied water from the Town of Aberdeen water system shall be
independently connected to the system and water consumption shall be measured
through a separate irrigation meter.
Methods of Connection
An irrigation service line may be installed by a direct tap into the main (separate
tap) or by a split line off the non-irrigation service line at a point between the
main and the non-irrigation meter (split tap). Either method of connection shall
be performed by the Town of Aberdeen Public Utilities Department or a licensed
contractor. A licensed contractor must obtain a permit from the Town of
Aberdeen prior to installing an irrigation service line.
Technical and Other Requirements
An irrigation service line, the irrigation meter and all related appurtenances shall
be installed in accordance with the same regulations, policies and procedures that
apply to non-irrigation meters.
(Amended 9-3-09)
(C) Backflow Prevention Program
Objectives of Ordinance
The objective of the backflow prevention ordinance for the Town of Aberdeen is:
To protect the potable water supply of the Town of Aberdeen. This will be
accomplished by requiring the use of appropriate backflow protection methods. The possibility
of contamination will be minimized by confining within the customer’s private water system
those contaminants or pollutants which could, under adverse conditions, backflow through
uncontrolled cross-connections into the public water system.
(D) Definitions
AIR GAP SEPARATION: The unobstructed vertical distance through the
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank,
plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. An “approved air-gap
separation” shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap
separation be less than one (1) inch.
APPROVED: In reference to backflow prevention assemblies or methods, those
assemblies or methods which have been accepted by the Director as an effective means or
method to prevent backflow.
BACKFLOW: Any flow of water, liquid, gas or other substances, or any
combination thereof into the distribution piping of a potable water supply from any source or
sources.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An approved assembly or method
used to prevent backflow from occurring in the potable water supply.
BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW: Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank,
boiler, or other means that could create pressure with the system greater than the supply pressure.
BACK-SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW: A reversal of the normal direction flow in
the pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line with the
backflow source subject atmospheric pressure.
CERTIFIED TESTER: A person who has proven his/her competency to test,
repair, overhaul and prepare reports on backflow prevention assemblies as evidenced by
certification of successful completion of a training program approved by the Director.
CONSUMER/CUSTOMER: Any person, firm, or corporation using or receiving
water from the Town of Aberdeen water system.
CONTAINMENT: Prevention of possible contamination from a private water
system by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly.
CONTAMINATION: The degradation of the quality of water so as to constitute
a hazard or impair the usefulness of water.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection between the city’s water
supply system and any other source. This includes piping systems, sewer fixtures, containers, or
devices whereby water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances may flow into or enter the city’s
water supply system.
CROSS-CONNECTION INSPECTOR: An employee of the Town of Aberdeen
designated by the Director to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
DEGREE OF HAZARD: Derived from an evaluation of the health, system,
plumbing or pollution hazards.
DIRECTOR: The Director of the Town Water and Sewer Department.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of two (2)
single, independently-acting approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves
located at each end of the assembly, and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of
each check valve.
DOUBLE CHECK-DETECTOR CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly
composed of an approved double check valve assembly with a bypass water meter and a metersized
approved double check valve device. The meter shall register accurately for very low flow
rates and shall register all flow rates.
HIGH HAZARD: An actual or potential threat of contamination to the public
water system or to a private water system to such a degree or intensity that there could be a
danger to health.
IMMINENT HAZARD: An actual threat of contamination that presents a danger
to the public health with consequences of serious illness or death.
MODERATE HAZARD: One that presents foreseeable and significant potential
for pollution, nuisance aesthetically objectionable or other undesirable alterations of the drinking
water supply.
POINT OF DELIVERY: The terminal end of a service connection from the
public potable water system, i.e. where the Director loses sole jurisdiction over the water; the
point where water leaves the public water system and enters a private water system.
POTABLE WATER: Water from any source, which has been approved for
human consumption by the appropriate agency of the State of North Carolina.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: A system of pipes or other associated facilities
that is not part of the town’s public water system and is used to move or receive water, regardless
of the source of water in such system.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY: An assembly containing
within its structure a minimum of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves, together
with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves. The first check valve reduces the supply pressure by a predetermined amount so that
during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be
less than the supply pressures. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief
valve, by discharge to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks
less than the supply pressure. The assembly must include properly located test cocks and tightly
closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE-DETECTOR ASSEMBLY: An assembly
composed of an approved reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly with a bypass water
meter and a meter-sized approved reduced pressure devices. The meter shall register accurately
for very low flow rates and shall register all flow rates.
WATER SUPPLY (APPROVED): Any public potable water supply, which has
been investigated and approved by the appropriate agency of the State of North Carolina. The
system must be operating under a valid health permit.
(E) Elimination of Cross-Connections
1) No private water system may be connected in any manner to the public
water system unless the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable laws have been
satisfied.
2) Only an approved device can be installed to meet the requirements of this
ordinance. The installation of any backflow prevention assembly, which is not approved, must
be replaced with an approved backflow prevention assembly.
(F) Installation, Testing and Maintenance of Backflow Prevention Assemblies
1) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions and those furnished by the Town of Aberdeen. Only backflow
preventers approved by the Town of Aberdeen shall be installed.
2) All backflow prevention assemblies required by this ordinance must be
installed and maintained on the customer’s premises as part of the customer’s water system.
3) Ownership, testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assembly
will be the responsibility of the customer. Each assembly required in this ordinance must be
functioning properly at all times.
4) Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be conducted by a
certified tester, at the customer’s expense. Tests shall be conducted upon installation and
annually thereafter with a record of all testing and repairs retained by the customer. A copy of
the certified record for each test or repair must be sent to the Town of Aberdeen by such
customer within thirty (30) days after the completion of each test or repair, such records must be
maintained on forms provided by the Town of Aberdeen.
5) Each backflow prevention assembly required under this ordinance must be
accessible to the Town of Aberdeen.
6) When it is not possible to interrupt water service, the customer shall
provide for the parallel installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly. The Director
will not accept an unprotected bypass around a backflow prevented when the assembly is in need
of testing, repair or replacement.
7) Any time that repairs to backflow assemblies are deemed necessary,
whether through annual testing or routine inspection by the owner or by the Town of Aberdeen.
These repairs must be completed within a time specified in accordance with the degree of hazard.
Repairs on a private water system considered to be an imminent hazard shall be completed
within twenty-four (24) hours, a high hazard shall be completed within ten (10) days, and all
other repairs within twenty (20) days for any other private water system. Failure to comply can
result in termination of a customer’s water service.
8) Upon determination that a backflow prevention assembly is required to be
installed on a customer’s private water system, the customer will be notified in writing of the
approved backflow prevention assembly which is required, on existing systems, the customer
will have the following time periods within which to install the specified backflow prevention
assembly.
Air-gap separation 30 days
Reduced pressure principle assembly (3/4” – 2”) 30 days
Double check valve assembly (3/4” – 2”) 60 days
Reduced pressure principle assembly (2-1/2” and larger) 60 days
Double check valve assembly (2-1/2” and larger) 60 days
Other approved backflow prevention assembly 30 days
9) The Director may require the installation of the required backflow
prevention assembly immediately or within a shorter time period than specified above if he
determines that any condition poses an unreasonable threat of contamination to the public water
system. All devices required for new construction shall be installed prior to occupancy. All new
construction plans and specifications shall be made available to the Director for approval and to
determine the degree of hazard.
10) The customer shall notify the Director when the nature of the use of
property changes so as to change the hazard classification of the property if necessary.
(G) High Hazard Facilities and Methods of Correction
1) All high hazard facilities and must have an approved reduced pressure
principle assembly as a minimum containment device.
2) High hazard facilities include, but are not limited to any private water
system used or designed pump or which may become pressurized for use with a booster for any
reason to the extent that back pressure may occur, any private water system, which contains
water which has been or is being re-circulated, a building with five or more stories above ground
level, brewery, car wash with recycling system, bottling plant, chemical plant, dentist’s office,
dry cleaning plant, fertilizer plant, film laboratory, fire sprinkler or standpipe system with
chemical additives, hospital, clinic, medical building, irrigation system with chemical additives,
laboratory, commercial laundry (except self- service laundry), metal processing plant, morgue or
mortuary, nursing home, pharmaceutical plant, power plant, swimming pool, sewage treatment
plant, tire manufacturer, veterinary hospital or clinic, restaurants, battery manufactures,
exterminators and lawn care companies, dairies, canneries, dye works, recycling facilities.
3) If a cross-connection inspector does not have sufficient access to every
portion of a private water system to permit the complete evaluation of the degree of hazard
associated with such private water system, an approved reduced pressure principle assembly
must be installed.
4) All existing lawn irrigation systems are high hazard facilities and must
have a reduced pressure principle assembly (RPZ) device.
(H) Moderate Hazard Facilities and Methods of Correction
1) Moderate hazard facilities include, but are not limited to: fire sprinkler
systems without booster pump facilities or chemical additives; connections to tanks, lines and
vessels that handle non-toxic substances; lawn sprinkler systems without chemical injection or
booster pumps; all industrial and most commercial facilities not identified as high hazard
facilities.
2) All moderate hazard facilities must have a double check valve assembly as
a minimum containment device.
(I) Fire Sprinkler Systems
1) All unmetered fire sprinkler systems without booster facilities or chemical
additives must have a double check-detector check valve assembly as a minimum containment
device.
2) All unmetered fire sprinkler systems with a booster facility or chemical
additives must have a reduced pressure principle-detector assembly as a minimum containment
device.
(J) Imminent Hazards
If the Director determines that a customer’s private water system constitutes an imminent hazard,
such customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly as may be specified by the Director
within twenty-four (24) hours after notice of the Director’s determination. If the customer fails
to take corrective measures in a timely manner, or refuses to install the specified assembly, water
service to the customer’s private water system may be terminated. If the Director is unable to
give notice to such customer or his representative within twenty-four (24) hours after the
determination that an imminent hazard exists, despite reasonable efforts to provide such notice,
the Director may terminate water service to the private water system until the specified corrected
measures are taken. Upon correction of the existing problem and with the Director’s approval,
water service will be continued.
(K) Right of Entry
1) The Director of his authorized agent shall have the right to enter any
building, structure or premises during normal working hours to perform any duty imposed upon
him by this ordinance. Duties may include sampling and testing water, or inspections and
observations of all piping systems connected to the public water supply. Prior notice will be
given unless an imminent hazard has been reported.
Refusal to allow entry for these purposes may result in termination of the water service.
2) At the request of the Director, the customer shall furnish any pertinent
information regarding the piping and chemical storage on such property where cross-connections
are deemed possible.
(L) Responsibility of Customer
1) The customer shall be responsible for the elimination of or protection against all
cross connections on his premises.
2) The customer shall maintain any backflow prevention assembly within his
premise in good operating condition. The customer shall correct any malfunction of the
backflow prevented, which is revealed by periodic testing.
3) The customer shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for annual testing,
re-testing in the case that the assembly fails to operate correctly, and repairs.
4) A customer must immediately notify the Town of Aberdeen if the customer has
reason to believe that backflow has occurred from the customer’s private water system to the
public water system.
(M) Unapproved Source of Supply
1) No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of water not
approved by the State of North Carolina to the public water supply system.
2) Where a connection to a city water line is made, and the property owner continues
to have a well or other source of water, it shall be unlawful for the plumbing servicing any
building upon such property to be so connected that any water outlet within the building may be
served with water from any source other than the city connection, and it shall also be installed
that unlawful to have plumbing cross-connected or so installed that water from the city water
system or the private water system may in any way become intermingled.
(N) Violations
1) A written notice of violation shall be given to any person which is determined to
be in violation of any provision of this ordinance.
2) Such notice shall set forth the violation and the time period within which the
violation must be corrected. The violation must be corrected within a reasonable time, as
specified in the notice, not to exceed thirty (30) days from receipt of the violation notice. If the
Director determines that the violation is occurring on a customer’s private water system and that
such violation has created or contributed to the existence of an imminent hazard, the customer
may be required to correct the violation immediately.
3) Water service may be terminated to a customer if the customer fails to correct a
violation or to pay any civil penalty or expense assessed under this section. Termination of
water service will be without prejudice to the Town’s ability to assert any other remedy available
to the Town against the customer or any other person responsible for the violation.
4) The violation of any provision of this ordinance shall subject the violator to a civil
penalty. Each subsequent day that a violation listed in (i) – (iv) continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense according to the following schedule:
i. Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is
an imminent hazard - $1,000/day
ii. Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is a
high hazard - $750/day
iii. Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is a
moderate hazard - $500/day
iv. Unprotected cross-connection for which no other civil penalty is
prescribed - $250/day.
Each violation listed in (v) – (ix) shall be considered a onetime violation subject to the following
schedule:
v. Falsifying records which are required to be submitted by this ordinancetester
may be removed from the approved certified tester list and/or $500
vi. Submitting incomplete records or failing to submit records which are
required by this ordinance – tester may be removed from the approved
certified tester list and/or $250
vii. Failing to test backflow prevention assemblies as required - $100
viii. Failing to maintain backflow prevention assemblies as required - $100
ix. Any other violation of the provisions of this ordinance - $100
5) The Director may increase any civil penalty assessed under this section by $100
or fifty percent (50%) of the maximum civil penalty associated with the violation, whichever is
greater, for a second violation of the same provision within a two-year period. Water service
may be terminated after a third violation of the same provision within a two-year period. Any
person violating any provision of this ordinance shall pay to the Town all expenses incurred by
the Town in repairing any damage to the public water system caused in whole or in part by such
violation and any expense incurred by the Town in investigating such violation. All such
expenses are deemed to be a part of the civil penalty assessed with the violation.
(O) Right of Appeal
Upon notice of the backflow prevention method required, the owner may request a hearing to
review the selection process with Town Water and Sewer Department personnel. If the owner is
dissatisfied with the results of this review, a written request for a hearing must be sent to the
Director within ten (10) days of the Departmental review. Within ten (10) days, a formal hearing
with the Director will be scheduled. A written response will be issued within ten (10) days after
the hearing. The owner shall thereafter have the right of further appeal to the Town Council.
(P) All water meters shall be installed under the supervision of the town Public
Works Director and pursuant to the specifications of the town.
(’75 Code, § 24-10) Penalty, see § 50.99
(Amended 9-14-09)
§ 50.16 INSTALLATION FOR USERS RECEIVING SEWER SERVICE
ONLY; FAILURE OF METER.
(A) Every person who receives his water supply from the town shall have a water
meter installed upon the line furnishing such water.
(B) All water meters shall be installed under the supervision of the town and pursuant
to the specifications of the town.
(’75 Code, § 24-10)
(C) All users of the town sewer system not served by town water will be responsible
for the installation and maintenance of an approved water meter that functions properly.
(D) In the event that a water meter fails to operate for any purpose, an estimated bill
will be prepared, based upon an average of the three highest bills within the last year. In the
event the previous years’ billing has been irregular and does not form a sound base for estimating
cost, a bill will be determined by the Town Manager. If the user disagrees with the Town
Manager’s cost determination, the cost will then be set by the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners.
(’75 Code, § 24-11) Penalty, see § 50.99 (Am. Ord., passed 8-14-00)
§ 50.17 TAMPERING PROHIBITED.
No unauthorized person shall in any manner tamper with any water meter which is the
property of the town.
(’75 Code, § 24-12) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.24 SUPERVISION OF CONNECTIONS.
(A) All water and sewer connections shall be made under the supervision of the
Public Works Director and according to the specifications of the town.
(B) If a plumber or other contractor taps a town sewer line without the supervision of
the town, the Public Works Director may, in his or her discretion, require that the line be
uncovered, the connection removed and the line reconnected under the supervision of the town.
(Adopted 8/11/08)
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
§ 50.25 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM; DUTY TO KEEP PIPES FREE
FROM OBSTRUCTION.
The owner, tenant or occupant of the property shall be continuously responsible for
maintaining and keeping the sewer pipes leading to and between the plumbing system of his
premises to the town’s main sewer clean and free from obstruction and shall not cause, suffer or
permit any article or thing to be introduced into the pipe which causes a stoppage thereof.
Failure to deep the sewer pipes leading from the plumbing system to the sewer main clean and
maintained in proper condition shall give the town the right to cut off the water connection,
which shall not be reconnected until sewer pipes are cleaned and maintained properly.
(’75 Code, § 24-14) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.26 DISCHARGE INTO SEWER SYSTEM.
(A) For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SANITARY SEWER. Any pipe, tile, tube or conduit owned by the town and for the
purpose of carrying any combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
STORM SEWER. Any pipe, tile, tube or conduit owned by the town and for the purpose
of carrying storm and surface waters and drainage waters.
(B) No storm, drainage or surface waters shall be discharged into the sanitary sewers
of the town.
(’75 Code, § 24-16)
(C) No substances, other than storm and surface waters and drainage waters shall be
discharged into the storm sewers of the town.
(’75 Code, § 24-17)
(D) (1) No person shall make or maintain any connection with any sewer or
appurtenance thereof whereby there may be conveyed into such sewer any suffocating, corrosive
or inflammable or explosive liquid, gas, vapor, substance or material.
(2) No person shall willfully pour oils or greases in to the sewer system of the
town or place oils or greases in such a position that they may enter the sewer system by gravity
or in any other manner.
(’75 Code, § 24-18)
(E) (1) Any person who operates a wash pit shall be permitted to connect such
wash pit with the town’s sanitary sewer system; provided, that the connection is equipped with
an oil, grease or grit interceptor approved by the town and so constructed and used that no oil,
grease, dirt, silt, grit or other foreign matter shall be allowed to enter the town’s sanitary sewer
system.
(2) The operator of any service station or garage who shall permit such
foreign matter to enter the town’s sanitary sewer system shall immediately disconnect such wash
pit.
(’75 Code, § 24-19) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.27 DEVICE REQUIRED; APPROVAL OF PLANS.
(A) Storage tanks. In order to equalize flows over a 24 hour period, each person
discharging a waste into the town’s sanitary sewers having a volume in excess of 75,000 gallons
(10,000 cubic feet) in any one day, shall construct and maintain at his own expense a suitable
storage tank. Such tank shall have a capacity of at least 80% of the normal volume of one 24
hour production period of waste and whose outlet to the sewer is controlled by a water works
type rate controller, or other approved devices, setting of which shall be directed by the town.
(B) Control manhole. Any person discharging industrial waste into the town’s
sanitary sewer shall construct and maintain a suitable control manhole, down stream from any
pretreatment, storage or other approved works to facilitate observation, measurements and
sampling of all wastes, including domestic sewage, from the industry. The control manhole shall
be constructed at a suitable and satisfactory location and built in a manner approved by the town.
(C) Measuring devices. Where a storage tank is not required, the control manhole
shall be equipped with a permanent type volume measuring device such as a nozzle or other
suitable devices as may be approved by the town. The manhole shall be installed at the expense
of the person discharging the wastes and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe, accessible
and in proper operating condition at all times.
(D) Plans for the construction of such storage tank, control manhole and controlling
devices shall be approved by the town’s consultant prior to the beginning of construction.
(E) All establishments with the capacity for preparing or processing food with the
sole exception of private, self-contained residential units will be required to install at their own
expense on their own property a suitable grease trap. Installed grease traps shall comply with the
standards and specifications of the town. The property owner is solely responsible for
maintaining the grease trap. Existing food service establishments will be given 180 days from
official notification by the town in which to comply with this requirement. Failure to comply
will result in the town having a grease trap installed on public property with all costs plus $100
per billing being added to the customer’s monthly utility bill until the premises is brought into
compliance.
(’75 Code, § 24-24) (Ord., passed 5-14-73; Am. Ord., passed) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.28 RESTRICTIONS ON WASTE WHICH MAY BE INTRODUCED
INTO SYSTEM.
(A) No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following waste materials into any
town’s sewer:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit.
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil or grease, exclusive of soap.
(3) Any flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, including, but not limited
to gasoline, benzene, naphtha or fuel oil.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewage works.
(6) Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 5.5 or higher that
9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and personnel of the sewer works.
(7) Any waters or wastes having a biochemical demand in excess of 1,000
parts per million (mg.1).
(8) Any waters or wastes containing more than 600 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids.
(9) Any concentration of chloride higher than 250 parts per million.
(10) Any waters or wastes having an objectionable color which is not
removable in the existing sewage treatment plan processes.
(11) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance or any
other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, or
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving stream at the
sewage treatment plant.
(12) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the average
sewage treatment plant.
(13) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
(B) The town, without limitation by other sections of this subchapter, may authorize
any person to discharge industrial waste of unusual strength or character in to the sewers of the
town under approved conditions or pretreatment. The town may prohibit entry of particular
industrial wastes in to the sanitary sewer whenever such action is necessary to prevent damage to
the system or to determine the effects of such wastes on the sewage system.
(’75 Code, § 24-25) (Ord., passed 5-14-73) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.29 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY PROVISIONS.
For provisions concerning the penalty for violations of this chapter, see § 50.99.
§ 50.30 INSPECTION BY TOWN.
The duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(’75 Code, § 24-26) (Ord., passed 5-14-73)
§ 50.31 ABANDONMENT OF SEPTIC TANKS
Whenever a septic tank is abandoned, it shall be solely be the property owner’s
responsibility to dispose of the septage and fill in or remove the tank such that it shall not create
a health or safety hazard. The property owner should consult with the Moore County
Environmental Health Department as to the proper procedure for abandoning a septic tank, and
in the absence of such advise, it shall be mandatory that all tanks be pumped empty and filled
with sand or torn out. Tanks deemed by the Town to present a health or safety hazard shall be
required to be pumped, filled in, or removed. (Adopted 8/11/08)
§ 50.32 REPEALED ON 8/11/08.
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.40 DEPOSITS.
Any person making application for water or sewer services to his property shall deposit
the amounts required by the schedule on file with the Town Clerk.
(’75 Code, § 24.20)
§ 50.41 MONTHLY OR BI-MONTHLY WATER RATES.
(A) The monthly or bi-monthly rates for water sold and delivered to each family or
business unit served within the corporate limits shall be as set out in the schedule on file of the
Town Clerk.
(B) The rates for water sold and delivered to each family or business unit served
beyond the corporate limits shall be 200% of the rates in each category set forth in division (A)
of this section.
(C) The minimum rates for water sold and delivered to each family or business unit
served shall be as per the schedule on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(D) The collection of delinquent accounts shall be made by the town pursuant to the
authority granted the town by G.S. 160A-314.
(’75 Code, § 24-21) (Amended12-10-18)
§ 50.42 MONTHLY OR BI-MONTHLY SEWER RATES.
(A) The monthly or bi-monthly rate for sewer service furnished shall be as per the
schedule on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(B) The rates for sewer service furnished and served beyond the corporate limits of
this town shall be 200% of the rates set forth in division (A) of this section.
(C) The minimum rate for sewer service furnished shall be as per the schedule on file
in the office of the Town Clerk.
(D) The collection of delinquent accounts shall be made by the town pursuant to the
authority granted the town by G.S. § 160A-314.
(’75 Code, § 24-22) (Amended 12-10-18)
§ 50.43 COMPUTATION OF SEWER CHARGES; PRIVATE METERS
REQUIRED FOR WASTES FROM NONPUBLIC WATER
SOURCES.
(A) The volume of flow used in computing regular waste charges or surcharges shall
be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained
by the town’s billing department. In the event that a person discharging wastes into the sanitary
sewer system produces evidence to the town that a substantial part of his water used does not
reach the town’s sanitary sewer, the user may apply to the town for a reduced percentage of total
water consumption to be used in computing sewer charges.
(B) Where the person discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewers of the
town procures any part, or all, of his water supply from sources other than the town’s water
department, all or part of which is discharged in to the sanitary sewer, the person discharging
such waste shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by the
town for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow to be charged. The town has a
right to read such private meters.
(’75 Code, § 24-28) (Ord., passed 5-14-73)
§ 50.44 SURCHARGE FOR TREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
(A) All persons discharging industrial wastes into the town’s sanitary sewer system
shall be rendered a monthly bill as a surcharge covering the entire costs to the town incurred by
treating all wastes having a biochemical oxygen demand in excess of 250 parts per million or
suspended solids in excess of 250 parts per million. Such surcharge shall be imposed as herein
provided in addition to any existing sewer service charge and to any sewer charge imposed after
the adoption of this subchapter. The aforesaid surcharge shall include:
(1) All fixed charges and amortizations costs of additional plant capacity
required for treating such industrial wastes.
(2) A charge covering the cost incurred by the town in treating such wastes in
the municipal sewage treatment plants.
(B) The surcharge, as set forth in division (A) of this section, shall be billed and
payable monthly on a separate bill rendered to the proper persons by the town’s billing
department.
(’75 Code, § 24-30) (Ord., passed 5-14-73)
§ 50.45 BILLING; DELINQUENCY.
(A) Billing will be sent through the United States mail notifying all persons of the
amount and date due. Failure to receive notice is not an excuse for nonpayment of bills.
(B) Persons not having paid their bills within 20 days of date of billing will be
delinquent. If a bill remains unpaid by the 5th of the following month from the date of billing,
the water connection serving the premises will be turned off and will not be turned on again until
such bill is paid, plus any penalty to restore service.
(C) In case a person discharging wastes into the town’s sanitary sewer system does
not procure his water supply from the town and becomes delinquent in his payment of the
aforesaid surcharge, his connection with the town’s sewer system will be severed and will only
be reconnected at his expense.
(’75 Code, § 24-29) (Ord., passed 5-14-73)
§ 50.46 FEE FOR RECONNECTION AFTER TERMINATION FOR
DELINQUENCY.
In addition to the payment of any delinquent charge and interest and penalties thereon,
there shall be paid to the town a fee as per the schedule on file in the office of the Town Clerk
before water service shall be restored to a use when such service has been terminated because of
a delinquency in the account of such user.
(’75 Code, § 24-33)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
Any person discharging unapproved domestic or industrial waste into the sanitary sewers
of the town or otherwise violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to the penalties
set forth in § 10.98 of this code, and the town may seek any of the equitable remedies set forth in
§ 10.98. Further, such persons may be held liable for the cost of the abatement by the town if the
violation is found to constitute a public nuisance as provided in § 53.01 through 53.11.
(Amended 8-9-10)
PUBLIC WORKS
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 51.01 COLLECTION SCHEDULES.
(A) Residences.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except in the case of emergency arising from an
act of God or under circumstances over which the Department of Public Works has no control,
the department shall collect, remove, and dispose of certain refuse in residential sections of the
town, once per week curbside pick up only.
(B) Businesses.
The department shall collect, remove and dispose of such refuse from business buildings once
per week curbside pick up only.
(C) Collection Days.
Residential and business refuse will be picked up only according to the annually posted schedule
on the Town website and in the water billing department.
(’75 Code, § 9-5) (Am. Ord., passed 8-8-09) (Amended 12-10-18)
§ 51.02 INDUSTRIAL SOLID WASTES.
Industrial solid wastes shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the operator of the
factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing the same in accordance with applicable provisions
of this Code.
(’75 Code, § 9-5)
§ 51.03 BUILDING RUBBISH.
Building rubbish shall be collected, removed and disposed of by the contractor or builder,
or in case of their failure to do so, by the owner of the property.
(’75 Code, § 9-5)
§ 51.04 COLLECTION FROM VACANT LOTS; TREE TRUNKS, ROCKS
AND THE LIKE.
(A) Yard waste generated by normal lawn care that is separated and placed at the curb
shall be picked up by the Town. Separation shall be as follows:
(1) Pine straw, pine cones and leaves can be together.
(2) Vines separate.
(3) Sticks and twigs can be together.
(4) Limbs and branches together with cut ends facing street.
(B) Limbs and branches no larger than 4 inches in diameter and 6 feet in length will
be picked up by the Town. They must be placed at the curb for pick up. An amount of limbs 4
feet high, 8 feet long and 6 feet wide is the most that can be put at the curb for pick up at any one
time. If this amount is exceeded, it will not be picked up.
(C) No debris or yard waste generated by a contractor will be picked up by the Town.
(D) No land clearing debris will be picked up by the Town.
(E) No building materials, demolition materials, shingles or cross-ties will be picked
up by the Town.
(F) No tree trunks, tree stumps, rocks or masonry products will be picked up by the
Town.
(G) The Town shall collect scrap metal and appliances and other metal products for
recycling. Refrigerators, freezers and any other appliances which utilize Freon, must have Freon
removed and a certification of the Freon removal must be provided before pick up. The Town
shall not collect appliances generated by a commercial enterprise.
(H) No collection shall be made from vacant lots.
(’75 Code, § 9-5) (Am. Ord., passed 10-12-98)
§ 51.04(a) MEDICAL WASTE; DISPOSAL OF SHARPS.
SHARPS. Needles, capillary tubes, slides and cover slips and scalpel blades.
All sharps must be packaged in a container that is rigid, leak proof when in an upright
position and puncture resistant. This package then may be disposed of with your regular solid
waste pick up.
(Ord., passed 10-12-98)
§ 51.05 COLLECTION OF LEAVES.
The Town shall collect leaves, straw, grass clippings, bush trimmings and other trash
generated as a result of normal lawn care.
(’75 Code, § 9-11) (Am. Ord., passed 10-12-98)
§ 51.06 CHANGES IN COLLECTION ROUTES.
Once a collection route is established, any changes must be advertised on the Town
website 15 days before the change takes effect.
(’75 Code, § 9-7) (Amended 12-10-18)
§ 51.07 PLACEMENT FOR SPECIAL COLLECTION.
All materials to be collected shall be placed on the curb line at the street or in an area
close by, without blocking street, sidewalks, etc. These materials shall be in neat compact piles.
(A) Carpet, padding, etc. The Town of Aberdeen shall pick up the above items
provided that they are cut into 36 inch strips, rolled, tied and placed at the curb for pickup.
(B) Chairs, couches, mattresses, etc. The Town of Aberdeen shall pick up the above
items during normal garbage collection days or each Wednesday.
(C) In the event of a major storm, some or all of the yard waste regulations may be
waived for a short period of time.
(’75 Code, § 9-9) (Am. Ord., passed 10-12-98)
§ 51.08 PERMITS REQUIRED FOR COLLECTING BUSINESSES.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, hauling or transporting any waste in
the town without first obtaining a permit from the Board of Commissioners.
(’75 Code, § 9-5)
§ 51.09 PREPARATION OF MATERIALS FOR COLLECTION.
(A) Liquids; covering of containers. All garbage and refuse shall have the liquid
drained therefrom before it is placed in the container for collection. All lids to containers shall
fit tight after the containers are filled. The covers shall be kept on the containers at all times,
except when being filled or emptied.
(B) Tree trimmings, grass, etc. Any person desiring to place tree trimmings, hedge
cuttings, grass or similar materials for free collection shall cause the material to be placed on the
curb line at the street on the area between the sidewalk and the curb on the day designated for
such pick up.
(C) Crushing of cardboard boxes. All cardboard boxes shall be crushed flat before
collection.
(D) Separation of trash. All trash placed at the curb for pick-up must be separated
according to type of trash, as follows:
(1) Limbs and building scraps must be separated from grass clippings, pine
straw, cones or vines.
(2) Vines must be separated from all other materials.
(3) Metal products must be separated from all other materials.
(’75 Code, § 9-6) (Am. Ord., passed 8-8-94)
§ 51.10 CONTAINERS.
(A) Shall use containers provided by the Town of Aberdeen.
(1) Each residence will be provided one 95 gallon roll-out container for once a
week pick-up.
(2) Garbage and/or refuse must be bagged in biodegradable 30 gallon capacity
plastic bags and tied securely for storage in containers until collection.
(3) No garbage shall be collected unless it is in containers approved in this
chapter. Each residence and small business shall have a town provided container. Containers in
violation of this chapter will not be emptied after 12/1/09.
(B) Required for businesses.
Businesses are allowed one 95 gallon roll-out container. Businesses that have larger garbage
amounts may request from the Public Works Director up to a total of three 95 gal containers. All
containers requested must be utilized every week or some containers will be picked up and redistributed.
Any business that exceeds three 95 gal containers must have a dumpster provided by
an outside waste hauler.
(C) Under certain circumstances where there is no adequate space for dumpster
location they may request with the Public Works Director additional containers at additional
monthly fees.
(D) Storage of cardboard boxes; automatic containers required for central business
district. Persons occupying business buildings shall store cardboard boxes inside the building,
unless such boxes are stored in automatic containers.
(E) Prohibited containers. No wooden boxes, pail or other wooden or cardboard
containers shall be used for garbage and refuse. If used, such containers shall be confiscated by
the town. This provision also includes 55 gallon drums or parts thereof.
(F) Transportation. No swill, slops, garbage, bones, offal, kitchen waste or refuse
shall be carried through the streets of the town, except in watertight metal containers with tight
fitting covers.
(‘75Code, § 9-8) (Am. Ord., passed 8-8-09)
PUBLIC WORKS
STREET AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
(A) Except as set forth in division (D), no person shall place or deposit upon the
public streets or sidewalks of the town any object that shall obstruct or tend to obstruct such
street or sidewalk.
(B) Division (A) of this section shall not apply to materials necessarily placed on
sidewalks in the course of alteration or construction of any building, when such materials are
placed thereon by a person duly bonded for such purpose and when the objects or materials are
illuminated at night by red lanterns, red lights or torches.
(C) Division (A) of this section shall not apply to benches or decorative flowerpots
placed on the sidewalks with the permission of the Board of Commissioners.
(D) Display of merchandise within the B-1 Central Business District
(1) Time of Display. Merchandise being displayed or for sale on the exterior
front of any building shall only be displayed during business hours. Every merchant shall be
responsible for removing all items being displayed at the close of business each day. Each
merchant shall also be responsible for removing all litter and other trash associated with the
display of merchandise at the close of each business day.
(2) Location of Merchandise. All merchandise being displayed or for sale on
the exterior front of any building shall be set back a minimum of six (6) feet from the edge of the
curbing.
(3) The maximum square footage permitted for a display shall be thirty-six
(36) square feet.
(4) Occupation of public rights-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any
merchandise to encroach into the public rights-of-way in any manner that will cause the open
pedestrian passageway to be less than three (3) feet in width, or to locate within twenty (20) feet
of any intersection, crosswalk, or driveway.
(5) Loud noises. It shall be unlawful for any person displaying merchandise
on the exterior front of their business to cause any loud or offensive noise, either from his or her
person or from any device, instrument, or equipment for the purpose of attracting attention to any
goods or services for sale.
(6) Use of public benches, utility poles, or other structures prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person displaying merchandise on the exterior front of their business to
block the use of any public bench or to use any public utility pole, tree, or shrub, or any other
public structure for displaying or promoting the sale of any goods or service.
(7) Display of merchandise on ground prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person displaying merchandise on the exterior front of their business to display goods or
merchandise on the ground, or on any cloth, plastic, or similar ground covering.
(8) Endangerment of health, safety, and/or welfare prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person displaying merchandise on the exterior front of their business to display
any goods or merchandise in any manner which would endanger the health, safety, and/or
welfare of the public.
(9) Relocation. It shall be unlawful for any person displaying merchandise on
the exterior front of their business to comply with a request from the manager, planning director,
or a police officer to move or relocate a display when such request is made to safeguard the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(’75 Code, § 22-1; Ord., passed 3-12-90, Am. Ord., passed 8-14-06, Am. Ord., passed 6-11-07)
§ 52.02 OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINS OR DITCHES PROHIBITED.
No person shall obstruct the flow of storm water by obstructing any ditch or drain on the
several alleys and streets of the town in any manner whatsoever or any natural drain located
within the town.
(’75 Code, § 22-2)
§ 52.03 MACHINERY LIABLE TO INJURE PAVEMENT PROHIBITED.
No person shall drive or permit to be driven over any hard surfaced asphalt or paved
street of the town any agricultural machinery, such as harrows and the like with sharp blades,
discs or spikes that will drag on the pavement or any traction engine with caterpillar wheels or
any heavy piece of machinery that will in any way damage or injure the pavement.
(’75 Code, § 22-3)
§ 52.04 CERTAIN SUBSTANCES AND INJURIOUS MATERIAL
PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall throw or deposit upon any street any glass bottle, glass, nails,
tacks, wire, paper, containers, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or
vehicle.
(B) Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street any
destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove such material or cause it to be
removed.
(C) Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove
any glass and other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle.
(’75 Code, § 22-4)
§ 52.05 USE FOR STORAGE OR SALE OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
No person shall use any of the streets or sidewalks within the town for the purpose of
storing junk, abandoned or used automobiles or motor vehicles, or for temporary storage of
vehicles for the purpose of sale or repair, except in emergencies.
(’75 Code, § 22-5)
§ 52.06 DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
All property owners shall obtain a permit from the town before beginning construction of
a driveway.
(’75 Code, § 22-6)
§ 52.07 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
Every occupant of a store building, in front of which the sidewalk is paved with stone,
brick, asphalt or cement shall remove snow, ice or other obstructions from such sidewalk at the
earliest possible time and as soon as the weather permits.
(’75 Code, § 22-7)
§ 52.08 FASTENING SIGNS OR CAUSING DAMAGE TO TREES OR
POLES PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to nail or otherwise fasten to any shade tree,
telephone, telegraph or electric light pole on any of the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the town
any sign or notice, or in any way damage or deface such trees or poles.
(’75 Code, § 22-8) (Ord., passed 4-1-91)
§ 52.09 PERSONS BLOCKING FREE PASSAGE OF STREET OR
SIDEWALK.
The assemblage or congregation of persons on the streets or sidewalks in such manner as
to block or obstruct free passage thereof shall not be permitted. It shall be the duty of the Chief
of Police or any police officer to disperse any such assemblage or congregation. Persons
refusing to disperse after being direct to do so by the police shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(’75 Code, § 22-9)
§ 52.10 VEGETATION PROJECTING OVER STREETS OR SIDEWALKS
PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property abutting a street or
sidewalk to allow any trees, plants or shrubs growing on such property to project over the street
or sidewalk in such manner as to obstruct or interfere with the safe passage of vehicles or
pedestrians.
(’75 Code, § 22-10)
§ 52.11 RESTRICTIONS ON VEGETATION AT INTERSECTIONS.
No plantings or other obstruction more than 30 inches high may be made on the right-ofway
between the curb and sidewalk for a distance of 50 feet from the corners of intersections.
(’75 Code, § 9-10)
EXCAVATIONS (Amended 12/10/18)
§ 52.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall do any construction or repair work involving the tearing up or relaying of
any street or part of street or obstruct, dig up or into, or in any way disturb any street or part of
street, including removal of earth from ditches, in the town without first procuring from the
Town Clerk a written permit therefore. Such permit shall be issued under such conditions as
may be prescribed by the Public Works Director or his duly authorized representative, shall
accurately describe the portion of the street to be affected, shall make provisions for the
replacement of that part of the street which is to be placed in the same condition as when
disturbed and shall be operative; provided that the permit may provide for the replacement work
to be performed by the town at the expense of the permit holder.
(’75 Code, § 22-11)
STREET AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS
§ 52.30 ASSESSMENTS.
In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be granted by general law to
the town from making street improvements, the Board of Commissioners is hereby authorized to
make street improvements and to assess the cost thereof against abutting property owners in
accordance with the provision of this section.
§ 52.31 WHEN PETITION UNNECESSARY.
The Board of Commissioners may order street improvements and assess the cost thereof
against the abutting property owners, exclusive of the costs incurred at street intersection,
according to one or more of the assessment bases set forth in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the
North Carolina General Statutes without the necessity of a petition, upon the finding by the
Board as a fact:
(A) That the street improvement project does not exceed 1,200 linear feet;
(B) That such street or part thereof is unsafe for vehicular traffic and it is in the public
interest to make such improvement;
(C) That it is in the public interest to connect two streets or potions of a street already
improved; or
(D) That it is in the public interest to widen a street, or part thereof, which is already
improved, provided that assessments for widening any street or portion of street without a
petition shall be limited to the cost of widening and otherwise improving standards established
by the town’s thoroughfare or major street plan for the particular street or part thereof to be
widened and improved under the authority granted by this section.
§ 52.32 STREET IMPROVEMENT DEFINED.
For the purpose of this section, the term STREET IMPROVEMENT shall include
grading, regarding, surfacing, resurfacing, widening, paving, repaving, the acquisition of rightof-
way and the construction or reconstruction of curbs, gutters and street drainage facilities.
§ 52.33 SIDEWALKS; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
In addition to any authority which is now or may hereafter be granted by general law to
the town from making sidewalk improvements, the Board of Commissioners is hereby
authorized, without the necessity of a petition, to make or to order to be made sidewalk
improvements or repairs according to standards and specifications of the town, and to assess the
total cost thereof against abutting property owners according to one or more of the assessment
bases set forth in Article 10 of Chapter 10A of the North Carolina General Statutes; provided,
however, that regardless of the assessment basis or bases employed, the Board of Commissioners
may order the cost of sidewalk improvements made only on one side of a street to be assessed
against property owners abutting both sides of such street.
§ 52.34 ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE.
In ordering street and sidewalk improvements without a petition and assessing the cost
thereof under authority of this section, the Board of Commissioners shall comply with the
procedure provided by Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General Statutes, except those
provisions relating to the petition of property owners and the sufficiency thereof.
§ 52.53 EFFECT OF ASSESSMENTS.
The effect of the act of levying assessments under the authority of this section shall for all
purposes be the same as if the assessments were levied under authority of Article 10 of Chapter
160A of the General Statutes.
§ 52.36 ACCEPTANCE OF CONVEYANCE IN SATISFACTION OF
ASSESSMENTS.
The Town Tax Collector, or other official or employee of the town having charge of the
collection of special assessments, shall have the right, power and authority by and with the
approval of the Board of Commissioners first obtained, to receive and accept a fee simple
conveyance to the town of any lot or parcel of land in the town, free and clear of other
encumbrances, in settlement and satisfaction of all street and sidewalk assessments outstanding
and unpaid against such property. Such right, power and authority however, shall be limited to a
conveyance of the whole of the lot or parcel of land against which the particular assessment or
assessments involved were levied. No lot or tract of land may be divided and no such right
power and authority exercised as to a part only of the property originally embraced in and
covered by said assessment or assessments. In the case of such conveyance, it shall not be
necessary that the street or sidewalk assessment or assessments against the property be
foreclosed; but the town, upon the receipt of any such conveyance, shall become and be the
absolute fee simple owner of the property as fully to all intents and purposes as if purchased in
and through foreclosure proceedings for the enforcement of such street and sidewalk assessment
or assessments.
PUBLIC WORKS
NUISANCES
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ASHES. Refuse resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible
material.
AUTOMATIC CONTAINERS. Waterproof and odor proof containers, in size from one
cubic yard to eight yards, approved by the town for use in commercial, business, industrial
residential and other approved areas.
BUILDING RUBBISH. Rubbish from construction, remodeling and repair operations
on houses, commercial buildings and other structures, including but not limited to excavated
earth, stones, brick, plaster, lumber, concrete and waste parts occasioned by installations and
replacements.
BUSINESS BUILDING. Any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for the
transaction of business, for rendering of professional services, for amusement, for the display or
sale or storage of goods, wares, merchandise, articles or equipment, including hotels, apartment
houses, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theatres, markets, restaurants,
abattoirs, warehouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for or adapted to
business purposes.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works of the town or his
agent.
GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable refuse resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food, including a minimum amount of liquid necessarily incidental
thereto.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Sawdust, shavings, feathers, excelsior, cartons, boxes, metal,
glass, paper, wood, textiles, chemicals, plastic or other waste materials from processing plants,
factories or manufacturing operations.
REFUSE. Solid waste, including but not limited to garbage, rubbish and ashes.
RUBBISH. Refuse, exclusive of garbage and ashes, including but not limited to paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, trees, bush and hedge branches, cuttings
and trimmings, yard trimmings, grass, leaves, tin cans, metals, small mineral matter, glass,
crockery, dirt, earth and dust.
WASTE. Useless, unused, unwanted or discarded materials resulting from natural
community activities, including solids, liquids and gases.
§ 53.02 CLEAN AND ORDERLY CONDITION OF PREMISES.
Every owner and every occupant or other person in control of any building or land in the
town, including vacant property, shall keep the same in a clean and orderly condition and shall
deposit refuse for collection in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations
of the Director of Public Works. Combustible and noncombustible refuse shall be stored in
containers complying with this chapter.
(’75 Code, § 9-2)
§ 53.03 WASTE ON PUBLIC LANDS OR IN WATERS PROHIBITED.
No person shall throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be thrown, dropped or deposited, on
any land in the town, vacant or occupied, including specifically streets, alleys, sidewalks and
other public and semipublic areas, and all waters under the jurisdiction of the town, any waste,
including but not limited to refuse, garbage ashes, rubbish, dead animals or fish, paper, drinking
cups, broken glass, tacks, brush, grass, weeds and anything injurious to health. If any person,
while transporting or hauling or causing to be transported or hauled, such rubbish or material, or
earth excavation, coal or other material, shall throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be thrown,
dropped or deposited such rubbish or material from the body of the vehicle, in violation of the
provisions of this section, such person must daily clean up and remove such rubbish or material
in a manner satisfactory to the Director of Public Works. If any person fails to clean up and
remove such rubbish and material the Department of Public Works may clean up and remove
such rubbish and material, and the town may recover the cost of such cleaning up and removal
from such person.
(’75 Code, § 9-3)
§ 53.04 STORAGE OF MATERIAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
(A) No person or business shall store any crates, bottles, equipment, machinery,
materials or junked motor vehicles on any property within the Town of Aberdeen, except within
an enclosure of such nature that the property so stored is hidden from public view.
(B) For the purposes of this section, the term “junk motor vehicle” means a vehicle
that does not display a current license plate issued to that specific vehicle and that it:
(a) Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
(b) Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it originally was
intended to move; or
(c) Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
(C) Any violation of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty and/or equitable
relief provided for in § 10.98 of this Code. (Amended 8/9/10)
(D) Machinery and equipment may be exempted from such provisions by the express
consent of the Board of Commissioners.
(E) Where it is impractical to store materials as provided in this section, such
materials may be stored without an enclosure with the express consent of the Board of
Commissioners, but such materials shall at all times be stacked or stored in compact units so that
they will not constitute a nuisance. The Board of Commissioners, in granting such permission,
may specify such other conditions as it may deem advisable.
(F) Weeds and grass on such lot shall be kept cut around the enclosure or machinery
so that it does not constitute a nuisance.
(’75 Code, § 15-3) (Am. Ord. passed 4-14-03)
§ 53.05 WEEDS AND OTHER CONDITIONS DEEMED TO BE A PUBLIC
NUISANCE.
The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot or other parcel of land
within the corporate limits is hereby declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to the public health
or safety and to constitute a public nuisance.
(A) The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or grass to a height in excess of 24
inches causing or threatening to cause a hazard detrimental to the public health or safety.
(B) Any accumulation of rubbish, trash or junk causing or threatening to cause a fire
hazard, or causing or threatening to cause the accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or
threatening to cause the inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is
or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
(C) Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is offensive by virtue of
odors or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is
or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
(D) The open storage of any abandoned ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building
material, building rubbish or similar items.
(E) Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the rules and
regulations of the County Health Department.
(’75 Code, § 9-13) (Ord., passed 1-8-79; Am. Ord., passed 8-10-87, Am. Ord., passed 1-8-18)
(Amended 12-10-18)
§ 53.06 INVESTIGATION OF CONDITIONS BY TOWN MANAGER.
The Town Manager, upon notice from any person of the possible existence of any of the
conditions described in § 53.05 shall cause to be made by the appropriate County Health
Department official, or town official, such investigation as may be necessary to determine
whether conditions exist which may constitute a public nuisance as declared in § 53.05.
(’75 Code, § 9-14) (Ord., passed 1-8-79; Am. Ord., passed 8-10-87)
§ 53.07 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE.
(A) If it appears that such conditions exist, the Town Manger shall cause to be posted
on property, or delivered or mailed to the owner of the property upon which the conditions exist,
a notice stating the reasons why the conditions constitute a violation and a public nuisance and,
further, shall order the prompt abatement thereof within ten (10) days from the receipt of such
written notice. The date of mailing plus three days shall constitute the date of receipt by the
property owner for purposes of this section 53 for all notices required hereunder. Notice by
posting or delivery shall occur on the actual date of posting or delivery for all purposes
hereunder.
(B) Within the ten-day period mentioned in subsection (A) above, the owner of the
property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the town manager or his or her
designee made pursuant to subsection (A) above to the town board by giving written notice of
appeal to the town clerk. The filing of the appeal shall stay the abatement of the nuisance by the
town until a final determination by the town board, unless the town manager or his or her
designee certifies to the board that, because of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property or that, because the violation is transitory in
nature, a stay would seriously interfere with the effective enforcement of this chapter. In that
case, abatement proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the town board or a court of
competent jurisdiction, issued on application of the party seeking the stay, for due cause shown,
after notice to the town manager or his designee. In the event no appeal is taken, the town may
proceed to abate the nuisance. If an appeal is conducted by the town board, the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in such hearings.
(C) The town board, in the event an appeal is taken as provided in subsection (B)
above and after hearing all interested persons and reviewing the findings of the town manager or
his or her designee, may reverse the findings made pursuant to subsection (A) above; but if the
board shall uphold the findings of the town manager or his or her designee, the board shall adopt
an ordinance or other written finding specifically declaring the condition existing on the property
to be a danger and hazard to the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town
and public nuisance and directing the appropriate town employees to cause the condition or
conditions to be abated as soon as practical.
(’75 Code, § 9-15) (Ord., passed 1-8-79; Am. Ord., passed 8-10-87, Am. Ord., passed 1-8-18)
(D) Any decision by the town board may be appealed to Superior Court pursuant to
G.S. 160A-393.
§ 53.08 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY TOWN.
(A) If the owner, having been ordered to abate such a public nuisance, fails, neglects
or refuses to abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance within 10 days from receipt
of said order or notice, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall cause the condition to be
removed or otherwise remedied by having employees of the town or a private contractor hired by
the town go upon such premises and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance under the
supervision of an officer or employee designated by the administrative officer. In such instances,
weeds or grass shall be cut to a height satisfactory to the manager or his or her designee.
(B) The actual cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise remedying a public
nuisance shall be charged to the owner of such lot or parcel of land, and it shall be the duty of the
town to mail a statement of such charges to the owner or other person in possession of such
premises with instructions that such charges are due and payable within 15 days from the receipt
thereof.
(’75 Code, § 9-16) (Ord., passed 1-8-79; Am. Ord., passed 8-10-87; Am. Ord., passes 1-8-18)
§ 53.09 FAILURE TO PAY CHARGES.
In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance are not paid within
30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges as provided for in § 53.07, such charges shall
become a lien upon the land or premises where the public nuisance existed and shall be collected
as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
(’75 Code, § 9-17) (Ord., passed 1-8-79; Am. Ord., passed 8-10-87)
§ 53.10 WHEN NOTICE CANNOT BE GIVEN.
In any case in which the Building Inspector or Town Clerk is unable to give written
notice to owner, lessee. Occupant or person in possession of premises upon which a nuisance
exists, whether by reason of inability to identify any such person or to ascertain his address, the
Building Inspector or Town Clerk shall give such notice by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation which is qualified under U.S. § 160A-597 to publish legal advertisements in
the county. At the same time, the Building Inspector or Town Clerk shall post a copy of such
notice at a conspicuous place upon the premises in question. The 10 day period provided in §
53.07 shall commence to run from the beginning date of such newspaper publication, and the
cost of such publication shall be including in the cost of removal of the conditions which
constitute the nuisance.
(’75 Code, § 9-18) (Ord., passed 1-8-79)
§ 53.11 SECOND AND SUBSEQUENT NOTICES AND VIOLATIONS
(A) Upon the third violation within a calendar year, the town shall provide a chronic
violator notice that without further notice the town may abate a chronic public nuisance. The
notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail. When service is attempted by registered or
certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed
sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not
returned by the post office within 10 days after the mailing. If service by regular mail is used, a
copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected
(B) Upon the fourth violation within a calendar year, the town may, through its agent
employees, or a contractor, enter a premises to abate any public nuisance without any notice to
the property owner.
(’75 Code, § 9-18) (Ord., passed 1-8-79; Am. Ord., passed 1-8-18)
§ 53.12 VIOLATIONS.
The procedure set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies that may
now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public nuisances and this chapter shall not
prevent the town from proceeding in a criminal action against any person, firm or corporation
violating the provisions of this chapter as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(’75 Code, § 9-19) (Ord., passed 1-8-79; Am. Ord., passed 8-10-87; Am. Ord., passed 1-8-18)
§ 53.13 CIVIL PENALTY PROVIDED.
(A) A violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in section 10.98 and as set forth below.
(B) A violation of any provision of this article shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to any cost of abatement. No penalty
shall be imposed if the offender abates the nuisance within the prescribed time or requests the
town to abate the nuisance as allowed in section 53.07. If the offender does not abate the
nuisance within the prescribed time limit, the penalty may be imposed for each day the nuisance
remained after the written notice of violation was given and terminating on the date the nuisance
was abated by the town. The town may pursue concurrently or independently violations of other
ordinances on the same property that involve relevant penalties of a lesser or greater amount than
those described herein.
(C) The offender shall be issued a written citation by delivery in person or mailed by
certified or registered mail. The civil penalty must be paid within the ten (10) days of its receipt
by the offender or property owner.
(D) The penalty may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if
the offender does not pay the penalty within the prescribed period of time after he or she has
been issued a citation.
(’75 Code, § 9-19) (Ord., passed 1-8-79; Am. Ord., passed 8-10-87; Am. Ord., 1-8-18)
TRAFFIC CODE
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
Words and phrases used in this title shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
by chapter 20 of the General Statutes of North Carolina.
(’75 Code, § 21-1)
§ 70.02 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a
police officer.
(’75 Code, § 12-2) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.03 AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN SPECIAL CASES.
In the event of fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of this chapter.
(’75 Code, § 12-3)
§ 70.04 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in
the service of the United States Government, this state, county or town, and it shall be unlawful
for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in
this title or by state law.
(’75 Code, § 12-4) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.05 EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall
apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in G.S. §§ 20-145 and 20-146, except as
follows:
(A) Unless otherwise directed by a police officer, a driver, when operating such
vehicle in any emergency, may:
(1) Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down
as may be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits, so long as he does not endanger life
or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions, so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(B) The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such
vehicle from the consequence of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(’75 Code, § 12-5) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.06 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS OR RIDING BICYCLES
OR ANIMALS TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter applicable to the drive of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which, by
their very nature, can have no application.
(’75 Code, § 12-6) Penalty, see § 10.98
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 70.15 STOP BEFORE ENTERING STOP INTERSECTION.
When stop signs are placed at stop intersections as designated on the official traffic maps,
every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the intersection, and he shall not proceed into
or across the through street until he had first determined that no conflict with traffic will ensue.
(’75 Code, § 12-6) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.16 YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS.
When yield right-of-way signs have been placed at those intersections designated as
locations for such signs on the official traffic maps, no person shall fail to yield the right-of-way
at such signs before entering such intersections.
(’75 Code, § 12-22) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.17 ONE-WAY STREETS.
Upon those streets or portions of streets designated as one-way streets on the official
traffic maps of the town, no person shall operate a vehicle except in the indicated direction when
signs have been placed, erected or installed and maintained at every intersection where
movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(’75 Code, § 12-23) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.18 VEHICLES NOT TO BLOCK INTERSECTIONS OR
CROSSWALKS.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic control signal indication to proceed.
(’75 Code, § 12-24 ) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.19 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except for authorized emergency
vehicles when the same are responding to calls.
(’75 Code, § 12-25) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.20 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction where a traffic
signal is displayed or in the business district.
(’75 Code, § 12-26) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.21 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection or over a crosswalk
and shall not, in any event or at any place, back a vehicle unless such movement can be made
safely and unless he shall have given ample warning to those who may be behind, by hand or
other signal.
(’75 Code, § 12-27) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.22 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk areas extending across
any alleyway. Upon entering the roadway, he shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on such roadway.
(’75 Code, § 12-28) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.23 DRIVING PAST, AROUND OR OVER BARRICADES
PROHIBITED.
No person shall drive any vehicle or animal past, around or over any barricade lawfully
placed upon any street by town officials or employees, which street has been closed by such
barricades, except by consent of persons authorized to give such consent.
(’75 Code, § 15-1) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.24 MOVING CARS FROM PARKED POSITIONS.
Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed or, if they are parked at an angle with
the curb, they shall back out in that angle until they have cleared the other cars and shall then
proceed in the direction they are most nearly headed in.
(’75 Code, § 12-35) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.25 SPEED LIMITS.
(A) No person shall drive a vehicle on any highway or street at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(B) It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in excess of the following speeds:
(1) Twenty miles per hour in any business district.
(2) Twenty-five miles per hour along those streets designated on the official
traffic maps of the town as streets where the speed limit shall be twenty-five miles per hour.
(’75 Code, § 12-36) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.26 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other vehicle while such
conveyance or vehicle is in motion.
(’75 Code, § 12-7) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.27 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle, or any portion thereof, not
designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee
engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, nor to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces
intended for merchandise.
(’75 Code, § 12-8) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.28 ENTERING, JUMPING ON OR RIDING VEHICLES WITHOUT
PERMISSION.
No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle without the
consent of the owner or driver.
(’75 Code, § 12-9) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.29 DUTY TO STAY INSIDE MOVING VEHICLES; HANGING ONTO
VEHICLES.
No person shall allow any part of his body to protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle in
which he is riding, except to give such signals as are by law required, and no person shall hang
onto any vehicle whatsoever.
(’75 Code, § 12-10) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.30 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF PERSONS IN FRONT SEAT.
It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any motor vehicle to permit
more than three persons, including the driver, to ride in the front or driver’s seat of a motor
vehicle.
(’75 Code, § 12-11) Penalty, see § 10.98
BICYCLES, COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE
§ 70.40 COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS
PROHIBITED ON ROADWAYS AND SIDEWALKS.
(A) No person upon roller skates or riding in, on or by means of any coaster,
skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any public roadway (except upon streets
designated by the Board of Commissioners as play streets).
(B) No person upon roller skates or riding in, on or by means of any coaster, skate
board, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any sidewalk.
(’75 Code, § 12-34) (Am. Ord., passed 5-30-02) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.41 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy
vehicle shall not attach such vehicle or himself to any public conveyance or other moving
vehicle upon any roadway.
(’75 Code, § 12-30) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.42 RIDING ON HANDLEBARS PROHIBITED.
The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not carry any person
upon the handlebars, frame or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon any
such vehicle.
(’75 Code, § 12-31) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.43 RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED; DUTY TO
USE HANDLEBARS.
(A) No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without having his
hands upon the handlebars.
(B) No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle upon any sidewalk or walkway
within the corporate limits.
(’75 Code, § 12-32) (Am. Ord., passed 5-30-02) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.44 LIGHTS REQUIRED ON BICYCLES.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lighted lamp on the front thereof, visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 300 feet in front of such bicycle, and
shall also be equipped with a reflex mirror or lamp on the rear, exhibiting a red light visible
under like conditions from a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such bicycle, when used at
night.
(’75 Code, § 12-33) Penalty, see § 10.98
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.50 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; WHEN SIGNS
REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official traffic control
device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of the town, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle in § 70.05.
(B) No provision of this chapter which provides for signs shall be enforced against an
alleged violator if, at teh time and place of the alleged violation, such official sign is not in
proper position or is insufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a
particular section does not stipulate signs, such section shall be effective without signs being
placed to give notice thereof.
(’75 Code, § 12-12) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.51 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words “Go,”
“Caution” or “Stop” exhibiting differently colored lights, successively, one at a time, the
following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate as follows:
(A) Green alone or “Go.” Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left, unless a sign or arrow in light prohibits either such turn. Vehicular
traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
(B) Yellow alone or “Caution”, when appearing immediately after or coincidentally
with the green or “Go” signal. Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be
driven cautiously through the intersection.
(C) Red alone or “Stop.” Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated by a clearly
visible line and shall remain standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.
(D) Red with green arrow. Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter
the intersection, only to continue the movement in the direction indicated by such arrow, but
shall not interfere with other traffic.
(’75 Code, § 12-13) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.52 FLASHING SIGNALS.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by
vehicular traffic as follows:
(A) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles shall come to a complete stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at
an intersection or at a limit line when marked and shall proceed through the light only when they
can do so in safety.
(B) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal
only with caution.
(’75 Code, § 12-14) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.53 NO TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating that no right or left
or “U” turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign, and
when authorized markers, buttons or other indicators are placed within an intersection indicating
the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the directions of such indicators.
(’75 Code, § 12-15) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.54 NO PARKING, FIRE AND SAFETY ZONE MARKERS.
Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected or installed indicating no
parking zones, fire zones or safety zones, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the regulations in
connection therewith.
(’75 Code, § 12-16) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.55 DESIGNATION OF TRAFFIC ZONES AND THROUGHWAYS
GENERALLY; INSTALLATION OF DEVICES.
(A) The Chief of Police shall have the power to designate, lay off and indicate, with
the approval of the Board of Commissioners, by appropriate signs and markings: Parking spaces
and zones, no parking zones, two hour parking limits in the business section and other parking
zones, limited parking zones, zones in which vehicle shall be parked at an angle to the curb
loading zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones other than
the above, through streets, stop streets and intersection, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way
streets, streets to be laned for traffic, play street, bus stops and taxicab stands. He shall also have
the power to designate and indicate, with the approval of the Board of Commissioners,
intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic signals, intersections at which left
turns or right turns and “U” turns shall be prohibited and intersection at which markers, buttons
or other indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or
turning at such intersections.
(B) Whenever any designation is made in accord with this section, the Board of
Commissioners shall erect and install such signs, markings, lines, signals and other traffic control
devices as may be necessary to clearly indicate such designation and to put drivers of vehicles on
notice of the restriction, limitation or prohibition resulting from such designation.
(’75 Code, § 12-17)
RAILROADS AND RAILROAD CROSSINGS
§ 70.56 FLAGGING AND WARNING REQUIRED IN LIEU OF ELECTRIC
DEVICES.
When any train, locomotive or car shall be driven or propelled across any street crossing
in the town which is not protected by electric sound and light signals, it shall be the duty of the
person or persons in charge of such trains, locomotive or cars to provide for safe and adequate
flagging of such crossing and full and ample warning to be given of the approach of the train,
locomotive or cars and the passing thereof across such street crossing.
(’75 Code, § 12-18) (Ord. 78, passed 4-1-31) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.57 TIME LIMIT ON OBSTRUCTING STREET CROSSINGS.
It shall be unlawful for any train, locomotive or cars to obstruct any streets crossing in the
town for more than ten minutes at any one time.
(’75 Code, § 12-19) (Ord., passed 4-1-31) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.58 SPEED LIMITS FOR TRAINS OR LOCOMOTIVES.
It shall be unlawful for any train, locomotive or cars to be driven or propelled at any point
within the town at a speed greater than 45 miles per hour.
(’75 Code, § 12-20) (Ord. 78, passed 4-1-31; Am. Ord., passed 11-30-81) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 70.59 GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC STREETS.
(A) Authority to regulate. Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-300.6, the town is authorized to
require the registration of golf carts and to regulate their operation upon the public streets within
the corporate limits of the town.
(B) Definitions.
(1) Golf Cart. A vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf course
for sporting or recreational purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds
of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(2) Operate. To drive or otherwise use a golf cart. For the purposes of this
ordinance, a golf cart is not “operated” on a public street solely because it crosses
a public street at a designated crossing to get from one part of a golf course to
another.
(C) Operation on public streets. Golf carts may only be operated on the following
public streets within the town limits:
(1) Kerr Lake Road,
(2) Keowee Circle,
(3) Leesville Loop,
(4) Legacy Lakes Way,
(5) Mitchie Place,
(6) Moultrie Lane,
(7) Norman Circle,
(8) Tippecanoe Place, and
(9) Warren Lake Road
(D) Regulations. All golf carts operating on the public streets listed in subsection
70.59(C) must meet the following requirements:
(1) Golf carts may not be operated on a public street with a posted speed limit greater
than thirty-five (35) miles per hour;
(2) No person may operate a golf cart unless that person has a valid driver’s license
that authorizes him or her to drive upon the public streets, roads and highways of
North Carolina and then, only in accordance with the person’s driver’s license. A
golf cart operator must carry his or her driver's license on his or her person at all
times while operating a golf cart on public streets within the town limits;
(3) Only the number of people the golf cart is designed to seat may ride in a golf cart.
Passengers shall not be carried in or on the part of a golf cart designed to carry
golf bags;
(4) No golf cart may be operated at a speed greater than reasonable and prudent for
the existing conditions, and in no instance at a speed greater than twenty (20)
miles per hour;
(5) No golf cart may be operated in a careless or reckless manner;
(6) Golf carts must be operated to the extreme right of the roadway and must yield to
all vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(7) Golf carts may be operated only during daylight hours, with the exception of golf
carts meeting the requirements set forth below which may operate for one hour
before sunrise and one hour past sunset: Two lighted lamps, one on each side of
the front of the golf cart, or a front-mounted halogen light bar specifically
designed for cart use, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of at least 300 feet in front of the golf cart, and two red lamps on the rear,
one on each side, exhibiting a red light visible under like conditions from a
distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of the golf cart;
(8) Golf carts must be operated in accordance with all applicable state and local laws
and ordinances, including all laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to the
possession and use of alcoholic beverages;
(9) Golf carts must have the basic equipment supplied by the manufacturer, including
a vehicle identification or serial number. Rear view or side view mirrors are
required. Lights are required if the vehicle is to be operated at any time before
sunrise or after sunset, as provided in subsection (C)(8) above.
(10) A golf cart may not operate on town streets unless it displays current, valid
registration stickers, placed on the front and rear of the cart;
(11) Upon payment of the registration fee, the town shall issue two registration
stickers for a golf cart. This fee shall be paid annually on or before June 30th of
each year for each golf cart operated upon the public streets within the town
limits. The Town Manager or his or her designee is hereby authorized to develop
an application for registration stickers;
(12) Golf carts may not be used as a taxicab or bus or for the commercial
carrying of passengers or the hauling of freight;
(13) Golf carts may only be parked in the same manner and at the same places
designated for the parking of motor vehicles or in parking spaces specifically
dedicated to golf cart parking;
(14) Except on public streets and in accordance with this section, golf carts
shall not be operated on any public or private properties without the permission of
the property owner; and
(15) During an emergency situation or a special event, any police officer
supervising or controlling traffic may direct that golf carts be operated on or upon
other locations.
(E) Liability disclaimer. This section is adopted to address the interest of public
safety. Golf carts are not designed or manufactured to be used on public streets, and the town in
no way advocates or endorses their operation on public streets within the town limits. By
regulating this operation, the town is addressing obvious safety issues, and adoption of this
section is not to be relied upon as a determination that operation on public streets is safe or
advisable if done in accordance with this section. All persons who operate or ride upon golf
carts on public streets do so at their own risk and peril, and must be observant of and attentive to
the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists and
pedestrians. The town has no liability under any theory of liability and the town assumes no
liability for permitting golf carts to be operated on public streets within the town limits.
Section 2. An annual golf cart registration fee of Ten 00/100 Dollars ($10.00) is
hereby established. This fee shall be paid annually for each golf cart operated upon the public
streets of the town in accordance with Aberdeen Code of Ordinances § 70.59. No registration
fee shall be required for golf carts not operated on public streets.
Section 3. All provisions of any town ordinance or resolution in conflict with this
ordinance are repealed.
Section 4. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. (Ord. passed
8/12/13)
TRAFFIC CODE
PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 71.01 VEHICLES NOT TO STOP IN STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
No vehicle shall stop in any street, except for the purpose of parking as prescribed in this
chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by the approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of
a funeral or other procession which is given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public
conveyance, by the lowering of railway gates, by the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of
some other vehicle or pedestrian or by some emergency. In any cause covered by these
exceptions, such vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle, safety
zone, crossing or street intersection, is such can be avoided.
(’75 Code, § 12-40)
§ 71.02 VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT PASSAGE OF OTHER
VEHICLES.
No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with the passage of
public conveyances or other vehicles.
(’75 Code, § 12-41)
§ 71.03 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN
SPECIFIED PLACES.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device,
in any of the following places:
(A) On the sidewalk or on the space between the sidewalk and the curb.
(B) On a crosswalk.
(C) Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop light or traffic control signal located at
the side of a street or roadway.
(D) Within 15 feet in either direction of any fire hydrant.
(E) Alongside or opposite and street excavation or obstruction, when such stopping,
standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(F) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underpass structure.
(G) Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel, theatre, hospital,
sanitorium or any public building.
(H) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
(’75 Code, § 12-42)
§ 71.04 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN
PURPOSES.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street, public parking lot or other place
of public parking or vehicular traffic for the purpose of:
(A) Displaying it for sale.
(B) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
(C) Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons, when such storage is not
incident to the bona fide use and operation of such vehicle.
(D) Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been disconnected
or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another.
(’75 Code, § 12-43; Am. Ord., passed 4-12-93)
§ 71.05 STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED FOR PRIMARY
PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING.
No person shall stand or park any vehicle on any street for the primary purpose of
advertising.
(’75 Code, § 12-44)
§ 71.06 MOVING VEHICLES OWNED BY OTHER OPERATORS INTO
RESTRICTED AREAS.
No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any prohibited area or
sufficiently away from the curb to make such distance unlawful.
(’75 Code, § 12-45)
§ 71.07 PARKING IN DESIGNATED PLACES PROHIBITED AT ALL
TIMES.
When signs are placed which prohibit parking or when the curbing has been painted
yellow in lieu of such signs, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets so
marked and indicated on the official traffic maps of the town.
(’75 Code, § 12-46)
§ 71.08 PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS.
When signs are placed in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours of 6:00 am and 6:00 pm, except Sundays, upon any of the streets so marked
and indicated on the official traffic maps of the town.
(’75 Code, § 12-47)
§ 71.09 ON CERTAIN STREETS AT CERTAIN TIMES.
Upon those streets or portions of streets designated on the official traffic maps of the
town as streets where parking is limited to certain designated times, no person shall park a
vehicle except in conformity with such limitations when signs have been placed, erected or
installed and maintained on such streets giving notice of the applicable limitations.
(’75 Code, § 12-48)
§ 71.10 PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES LIMITED TO ONE HOUR;
EXCEPTIONS.
It shall be unlawful to park or stand a tractor (which is a truck with a cab and no body,
used for pulling large vehicles such as trailers), a tractor and trailer, tractor and semi-trailer, a
trailer, semi-trailer, van, oil tanker or other tanker, dump truck, recreational vehicle, or other
commercial vehicle on any street right-of-way in the Town at any time for a period longer than
one hour, except when such vehicle is actually being loaded or unloaded or when such vehicle is
incapacitated. An incapacitated vehicle must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours of
notification.
(’75 Code, § 12-49) (Am. Ord., passed 5-9-05, Am. Ord., passed 2-13-06)
§ 71.11 METHOD OF PARKING.
Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter, and where the street is not marked to show
how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel to the curb and not more than 12 inches
therefrom.
(’75 Code, § 12-50)
§ 71.12 VEHICLES NOT TO BE BACKED UP TO CURB.
In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to the curb, except when actually loading or
unloading.
(’75 Code, § 12-51)
§ 71.13 STOPPING VEHICLES WITH LEFT SIDE TO CURB;
EXCEPTIONS.
No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business district; except that on
one-way streets vehicles shall stop headed in the direction of traffic.
(’75 Code, § 12-52)
§ 71.14 PARKING WITHIN LINES.
On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces for cars, the
same shall be parked between such lines.
(’75 Code, § 12-53)
TRAFFIC CODE
VEHICLE LICENSING
§ 72.01 YEARLY REGISTRATION REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS; FEE.
(A) Every resident owner of a motor vehicle operated in the town, except motor
vehicles temporarily operated for a period of time not exceeding a total of 30 days during any
one year and except motor vehicles operated for display or exhibition purposes by manufactures
or dealers and displaying dealers’ license plates issued by the state, shall register such vehicle
with the Town Clerk. The period of registration shall include the 12 months beginning with
January 1 of the year of registration, namely from January 1 to December 31; provided, that it
shall be lawful to operate a vehicle within the town after the expiration of the registration period
between December 31 and February 15.
(B) The fee for registration shall be as per the fee schedule on file in the office of the
Town Clerk.
(’75 Code, § 12-55) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 72.02 ISSUANCE OF PLATES OR STICKERS; DUPLICATES.
For every motor vehicle registered with the Town Clerk, there shall be issued to the
person registering the same an appropriate number plate or sticker. Upon satisfactory evidence
that any such plate or sticker has been lost or destroyed, the town shall issue to the owner or
operator of such registered vehicle a duplicate thereof, at a cost as per the fee schedule on file in
the office of the Town Clerk.
(’75 Code, § 12-56)
§ 72.03 TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
A number plate or sticker shall not be transferred from one motor vehicle to another and
shall not be used by any person upon any motor vehicle except upon the one for which it was
issued; provided, that upon the sale or exchange of the vehicle for which the number plate or
sticker was issued, the owner thereof may transfer the number plate or sticker assigned to such
vehicle, by registering such transfer with the Town Clerk and by payment of a fee as per the fee
schedule on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(’75 Code, § 12-57) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 72.04 DISPLAY OF PLATE OR STICKER REQUIRED.
Every motor vehicle operated on the streets of the town for which registration is required
shall, throughout the current issue year, display the assigned town number plate or sticker in such
manner as to be visible at all times.
(’75 Code, § 12-58) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 72.05 EXEMPTION FOR NONRESIDENT STUDENTS.
Any full-time student who retains a domicile outside the town and who pays taxes to the
governmental unit of such domicile shall not be considered a resident for the purposes of this
chapter.
(’75 Code, § 12-59)
TRAFFIC CODE
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 73
SCHEDULE I: SPEED LIMITS.
Speed limits as indicated shall be in force in the following locations.
Street Location Speed Limit
(m.p.h.)
Ord. No. Passage Date
Sandhills Boulevard
(US 1-15-501, NC
211)
School zone. Beginning
500 feet north of the
north property line of
Aberdeen School to 500
feet south of the south
property line of such
school. Between 7:45 to
8:45 a.m. and 2:45 to
3:45 p.m. on school
days.
35 3-10-69
Sandhills Boulevard From a point 500 feet
south of Elm Street,
north to a point
approximately 500 feet
north of Montford
Street. (Except school
zone at Aberdeen
Middle School).
45 7 12-20-74
Sandhills Boulevard From its south
intersection with US 15-
501, NC 211, to a point
500 feet south of Elm
Street.
45 8 12-20-74
Sandhills Boulevard From a point
approximately 500 feet
north of Montford
Street, north to the
intersection of US 15-
501, NC 211 with US 1.
45 10-13-75
Main Street (SR
2083)
From US 1-15-501 to
Poplar Street
20 10-13-75
Main Street From Poplar Street to
Pine Street
20 10-13-75
Poplar Street (NC 5) From South Street north
to Main Street
20 8 12-20-74
Poplar Street (SR
2055)
From Main Street to
Maple Avenue
20 9 12-20-74
Raeford Rd. (NC 211) From US 15-501 to the 45 10-13-75
eastern corporate limit,
approximately 0.15 mile
east of Keyser Street
Sandhills Boulevard
(US 1)
From the north
intersection of US 15-
501, NC 211, north to
the corporate limit,
approximately 0.20 mile
north of Johnson Street
45 12-12-83
Saunders Boulevard Beginning at an
intersection with
Bethesda Road and
traveling westward to a
point where it crosses
the CSX Railroad rightof-
way
35 3-14-94
South Street (NC 5) From US 1-15-501, NC
211 east to Poplar Street
20 6 12-20-74
South Street (SR
2064)
From Poplar Street east
to a point 0.10 mile east
of Poplar Street
20 7 12-20-74
US 1 From the southern
corporate limit, at
Roseland Road (SR
1112), to US 15-501,
NC 211
45 11 12-20-74
US 15-501, NC 211 From Sandhills
Boulevard north to the
corporate limit,
approximately 0.28 mile
northwest of Johnson
Street
45 12-12-83
US 15-501, NC 211 From Raeford Road
north-west to US 1
45 9 12-20-74
US 15-501 From the southern
corporate limit,
approximately .01 mile
south of Raeford Road
to Raeford Road
45 10 12-20-74
Elm Street Beginning at eh western
intersection with US 1
and running west to the
intersectin with
Lakeshore Drive
25 8-14-95
Keyser Street Beginning at the
southern intersection
25 8-14-95
with NC 211 and
running south to the
corporate limits
Pine Street Beginning at the
northern intersection
with E. Main Street and
running north to the
intersection with Maple
Street
25 8-14-95
Maple Street Beginning at the eastern
intersection with
Sycamore Street and
running east to Blue
Street
25 8-14-95
NC 5 From the existing 55
MPH speed zone
approximately 400 feet
east of Anderson Street
and continuing westward
.9 miles
45 8-14-95
NC 5 From the existing 55
mph speed zone
approximately 400 feet
east of Anderson Street
and continuing westward
to the intersection with
Sandpit Road
45 7-10-95
Thomas Avenue From the intersection
with Lakeshore Drive
and extending to the
corporate limits
25 11-14-94
Arnold Avenue From the intersection
with Thomas Avenue
and extending to the
corporate limits
25 11-14-94
Bethesda Farm
Subdivision
Beginning at Devonshire
Trail and extending to
Garden Road, Midmar
Street, Cullen Street,
Hardister Street and
Glengary Road
25 6-8-98
Pecan Grove Drive From Wilder Avenue to
Woodgreen Drive
25 9-12-05
Woodgreen Drive From Shepherd Trail to
its end
25 9-12-05
Shepherd Trail From Woodgreen Drive 35 9-12-05
to Roseland Road
Pecan Lane From Pecan Grove Drive
to Woodgreen Drive
25 9-12-05
Brownwood Estates
Subdivision
All of Glendale Drive,
Wood Drive, Shelton
Drive, Canna Place, and
Tiree Place
25 9-12-05
Scotsdale Estates
Subdivision
All of Barnell Drive and
Alexander Drive
25 9-12-05
Forest Hills
Subdivision
All of Bion Butler Road,
Paul McCain Road, John
McQueen Road, Sun
Road, Wildwood Road,
Robinwood Road,
Thrushwood Road,
Longleaf Road, and N.
Chapin Road
25 9-12-05
Glen Laurel
Subdivision
All of Isleworth Place,
Pine Brae Lane,
Roddington Court,
Silverburn Place,
Newington Way,
Magnolia Drive,
Camberly Lane,
Lightwater Drive,
Lightwater Court, and
Stubhill Lane
25 9-12-05
Hidden Valley Estates
Subdivision
All of Michael Lane,
Vincent way, and
Kimberly Lane.
25 9-12-05
(Amended 9-12-05)
Penalty § 10.98
SCHEDULE II: WEIGHT LIMITS.
(A) No large or commercial trucks or busses with weight limitation in excess of ten
tons gross or two tons per axle shall be permitted on the following described locations, except
upon written permission of the town or its police.
Street Location Ord. No. Passage Date
E. Main Street Between Pine Street and Route 211 on
the east
E. South Street Between Pine Street and Route 211 on
the east
Pinehurst Street Between North Carolina Highway No. 5
at its intersection with Pinehurst Street
and Roseland Road
Poplar Street Between Maple Street on the south and
Johnson Street on the north
6-8-87
(B) This schedule shall in no way be construed to prohibit the use of school busses,
small home delivery trucks, any noncommercial vehicle or town utility vehicle or privately
owned “pickup” trucks.
(’75 Code, § 12-39) Penalty, see § 10.98
TRAFFIC CODE
PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 74
SCHEDULE I: HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.
Repealed on 8/13/01.
SCHEDULE II: THROUGH TRUCKS; LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
(A) No through trucks. It shall be unlawful to park any truck of more than threefourths
ton capacity or any tractor trailer upon any portion of the following described streets
except in authorized and designated loading and unloading zones, and then only to unload or
load merchandise, meat, dairy products, foodstuffs or automotive vehicles.
Street Location Ord. No. Passage Date
Main Street 9-10-62
Poplar Street Between South Street and Maple Street 9-10-62
South Street Between US 1 and Pine Street 9-10-62
Sycamore Street Between South Street and Maple Street 9-10-62
(’75 Code, § 12-54)
(B) Loading and unloading zones. It shall be unlawful to park any truck of more than
three-fourths ton capacity or any tractor-trailer upon any part of Main Street or South Street lying
between US 1 Highway and Pine Street or on any part of Poplar Street and Sycamore Street
lying between South Street and Maple Street, except in authorized and designated loading and
unloading zones and then only to unload or load merchandise, meat, dairy products, food stuffs
or automotive vehicles. The designated loading and unloading zones are located:
Street Location Ord. No. Passage Date
Main Street Northeast corner of Main Street and
Sycamore Street (beside the Aberdeen
Sundries)
Poplar Street 115 feet north of the intersection of
Knight Street and Poplar Street on the
east side of Poplar Street (behind the
Citizen News Record)
Sycamore Street Southwest corner of Knight Street and
Sycamore Street (in front of Davenport’s
Galaxy Food Store)
(’75 Code, § 12-15) Penalty, see § 10.98
GENERAL REGULATIONS
ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 90.01 ADMINISTRATION.
The Police Department and Zoning Department of the town shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. The Police Department shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public
streets and highways within the town and property owned by the town. The Zoning Department
shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of abandoned and nuisance
vehicles located on private property. The Town shall, on an annual basis, contract with private
tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned vehicles and
nuisance vehicles in compliance with this chapter and applicable state laws. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to limit the legal authority to powers of officers of the Town Police
Department in enforcing any other laws or otherwise carrying out their duties.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED VEHICLE. An abandoned motor vehicle is one that is:
(1) Left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance
prohibiting parking;
(2) Left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days;
(3) Left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than 24 hours;
or
(4) Left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or
lessee thereof for longer than two hours.
AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The Chief of Police or Zoning Administrator are
designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.
MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. A machine designed or intended to travel over land
by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
NUISANCE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance and unlawful,
including a vehicle found to be:
(1) A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects or a breeding ground
or harbor for rates or other pests;
(2) A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight inches in
height;
(3) A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
(4) A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil and other flammable or
explosive materials as evidenced by odor;
(5) One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from the inside
such as trunks, hoods and the like;
(6) One which presents a substantial risk of injury to minors or other persons because
of broken glass, jagged edges or protrusions;
(7) So situated or located that there is a danger of its falling or turning over; or
(8) Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a public
nuisance by the Town Board.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.03 ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL
AUTHORIZED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to possession of a
vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned as the term is defined in § 90.02.
(B) Upon investigation, proper officials or the town may determine that a vehicle is an
abandoned vehicle as defined in § 90.02 and order the vehicle removed.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93) Penalty, see § 10.99.
§ 90.04 NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the registered owner of a motor vehicle or for the owner,
lessee or occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the
vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
(B) Upon investigation, proper officials of the Zoning Department may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as defined in § 90.02 and
order the vehicle removed.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.05 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR NUISANCE VEHICLES;
PRETOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Except as set forth in § 90.06, a vehicle to be towed or otherwise removed
because it has been abandoned, as defined in § 90.02, or declared to be a nuisance vehicle shall
be towed only after notice to the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In such
instances, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on
the vehicle, a notice indication that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date,
no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or
legal possessor prior to this time.
(B) With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property and nuisance vehicles, if
the owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the
determination that the vehicle is abandoned or a nuisance vehicle, such appeal shall be made to
the Town Board in writing and heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board and
further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.06 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The requirement that notice be affixed to an abandoned or nuisance vehicle at
least seven days prior to removal may, as determined by the authorizing officer, be omitted in
those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic
obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare.
(B) For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, such circumstances include,
and the Town Board hereby determines that immediate removal of such vehicles is warranted
when they are:
(1) Obstructing traffic;
(2) Parked in a no-stopping or no-standing zone;
(3) Parked in loading zones; or
(4) Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions.
(C) With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property
other than on streets and highways and on private property, such vehicles may be removed
without giving the minimum seven days proper notice only in those circumstances where the
authorizing official finds, and enters such findings in appropriate daily records, a special need for
prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of
illustration but not limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing
ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to
pose a traffic hazard and vehicles causing damage to public or private property.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.07 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE
REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Any vehicle which has been determined to be an abandoned or a nuisance vehicle
may be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business
contracting to perform such services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the
authorizing town official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle,
such notice to include the following:
(1) The description of the removed vehicle;
(2) The location where the vehicle is stored;
(3) The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
(4) The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
(5) The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause hearing
on the removal.
(B) This notice shall, if feasible, be given by telephone; however, whether or not the
owner is reached by telephone, written notice, including the information set forth in divisions
(A)(1) through (5) above, shall, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or
his agent, also be mailed to the owner’s last known address.
(C) If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be given within two working
days. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be given to the registered owner
within three working days from the removal of the vehicle.
(D) Whenever an abandoned or nuisance vehicle is removed and such vehicle has no
valid registration or registration plat, the authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts,
including checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last-known registered
owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information as set forth in divisions (A)(1) through
(5) above.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.08 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR
FINAL DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE.
After the removal of an abandoned vehicle or vehicle declared to be a nuisance vehicle,
the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of
determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be
filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to receive
such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the
request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-
219.11, as amended.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.09 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDING.
At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause hearing, the owner
may obtain possession of the vehicle by paying the towing fee or posting a bond for double the
amount of the towing fee to the private tow truck operator or towing business having custody of
the removed vehicle.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.10 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
Any vehicle declared to be an abandoned or a nuisance vehicle under this chapter which
is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the
private tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such
a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in accordance with U.S. Chapter
44A, Article 1.
(Ord, passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.11 CONDITIONS OF REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private property if the
owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable
state law procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the town from private property
without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle
is declared a nuisance vehicle. The town may require any person requesting the removal of an
abandoned or nuisance vehicle from private property to indemnify the town against any loss,
expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.12 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
No person shall be held to answer to any civil or criminal action to any owner or other
person legally entitled to the possession of any abandoned or nuisance vehicle for disposing of
such vehicle as provided in this chapter.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.13 EXCEPTIONS.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle in an enclosed building or any vehicle
on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner if the
vehicle is necessary to the operation of the enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage
place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93)
§ 90.14 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any storage
facility designated be the town which has been impounded pursuant to the provisions of this
code, unless and until all towing and impoundment fees, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been
paid.
(Ord., passed 8-9-93) Penalty, see § 10.99
GENERAL REGULATIONS
ANIMALS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 KEEPING SWINE PROHIBITED.
No person shall keep any swine within the corporate limits other than at abattoirs.
(’75 Code, § 3-1) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.02 BIRD SANCTUARY CREATED.
The area embraced within the corporate limits of the town and all lands owned or leased
by the town outside the corporate limits are hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
(’75 Code, § 3-2)
§ 91.03 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
No person shall willfully abuse or cruelly treat, abandon, neglect, overwork, overdrive,
torture, torment or cruelly drive or work when unfit for labor any horse, mule, draught animal,
beast of burden or any other animal.
(’75 Code § 3-3, Am. Ord., passed 4-13-98) Penalty, see § 10.98
Cross-reference:
Cruelty to animals or police dog owned by town, see § 130.10
DOGS
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the owner or a
member of his immediate family or some responsible person either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
DOG. Both male and female dogs.
OWNER. Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
§ 91.11 RUNNING AT LARGE.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog, either his own or under his
control to run at large within the corporate limits.
(B) No dog shall be permitted on the streets of the town unless with the owner or
person having control of it, and then such dog shall be under leash.
(C) The owner or custodian of any dog shall be responsible for repairing damage
caused by said dog, including the cleaning up of dog droppings, deposited on sidewalks or
walkways in the Commercial District or on any other sidewalk, street, walkway or park in the
town. In addition, the owner of custodian of any dog shall prevent said dog from trespassing on
private property and shall not allow said dog to deposit droppings or otherwise damage private
property without permission. Dog owners shall be responsible for clean-up or repair to private
property due to droppings or damage caused by trespassing dogs.
(’75 Code, § 3-5)(Am. Ord., passed 12-11-95) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 91.12 TAGS TO BE WORN.
Dog tags showing proper rabies vaccination required by the state and issued by a
veterinarian and proper owner identification shall be attached to a collar of every dog and worn
at all times by such dog.
(’75 Code, § 3-7)
§ 91.13 BARKING DOGS.
No dog that habitually or repeatedly barks in such manner or to such extent that it is a
public nuisance or creates a disturbance shall be kept, maintained, harbored or cared for within
the municipal limits of the town.
(’75 Code, § 3-8) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 91.14 IMPOUNDING.
It shall be the duty of every Police Officer, the Animal Control Officer and the County
Dog Warden to apprehend any dog found running at large in violation of this chapter and to
impound such dog in the County Pound or a suitable place. The Animal Control Officer (or
some designated official) upon receiving any dog shall make a complete record, entering breed,
color, sex, approximate height and weight of such dog and whether licensed. If licensed, the
officer shall enter the name and address of owner and the license number. If the owner of the
dog is known before it is impounded, it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to notify
the owner of the dog in writing that they are in violation of Town Code § 91.11 if they let their
dog run at large, and § 91.13 if they keep barking dogs. As to known owners, if this section
continues to be violated after notice has been given and within 90 days after the giving of said
notice, it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or a Police Officer to issue a citation to
the owner of any dog found running at large or a dog that habitually or repeatedly barks in such
manner or to such extent that it is a public nuisance or creates a disturbance. The citation shall
be paid at the Police Department. The citation must be paid within five days after issued.
(’75 Code, § 3-9)(Ord., passed 12-10-62; Am. Ord., passed 6-13-83)
§ 91.15 NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION.
If a dog is impounded it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer of a Police
Officer to contact the owner by one of the following manners: By written notice delivered to the
owner personally; by leaving the said written notice with a responsible adult person at the
residence of the owner; or by certified mail with return receipt requested. The notice shall
inform the owner that his or her dog has been impounded by the Police Department and is being
held by the Police Department or the Human Society. If the owner of such dog is not found
within ten days, the dog shall be disposed of according to law. If the owner is located he or she
may claim such dog upon payment of the license fees, if unpaid, and all costs and charges
incurred by the town for impounding and maintenance of such dog as per the fee schedule on file
in the office of the Town Clerk.
(’75 Code, § 3-10)(Ord., passed 12-10-62; Am. Ord. passed 6-13-83)
§ 91.16 UNKNOWN OWNER.
In the case where a dog is impounded and the owner is unknown, it shall be the duty of
the Animal Control Officer to post information about the dog at the Police Department and the
Town Hall.
(’75 Code, § 3-11)(Ord., passed 12-10-63; Am. Ord., passed 6-13-83)
LIVESTOCK
§ 91.17 LIVESTOCK.
(A) Livestock and domestic fowl of all descriptions are hereby prohibited in any area
of the town except those areas zoned for agricultural purposes by the zoning ordinance.
Furthermore, it shall be unlawful, regardless of zoning for any person to maintain, keep, house,
or stable any horse, mule, pony, cow, sheep, goat, chicken or other domestic fowl or livestock in
the town within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of a neighboring dwelling, school, church,
business, commercial or professional establishment and 200 feet from any front property line.
Not more than a total of three (3) horses, mules, ponies, cows, sheep, goats or other such animals
shall be maintained on one (1) lot and such lot must contain no less than one acre for each such
animal maintained. No more than a total of four chickens or other domestic fowl shall be
maintained on one lot and such lot must contain no less than one acre for each four or fewer
chickens or other domestic fowl maintained.
(B) All proposed stables shall require site plan review and approval prior to
construction or habitation by livestock. In all cases, the structure shall be located so as to give
the least possible offense to the occupants or residents of adjoining lots. All such stables shall be
cleaned and disinfected once each day and kept free of noxious odors.
(C) Non-household animals shall be contained on the property with a fence or other
acceptable means. The fence surrounding the property shall be of an appropriate height to
protect the non-household animal as well as the neighboring property.
(D) Properties keeping or housing livestock regulated by this section as of the date of
adoption of this ordinance shall be allowed to keep said livestock without being forced to comply
with the provisions stated herein so long as the keeping of such livestock is not discontinued for
a period of 180 days or longer.
(Ord., passed 10-9-95)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
EMERGENCIES
§ 92.01 WHEN STATE OF EMERGENCY DEEMED TO EXIST.
A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during the times of great public
crisis, disaster, rioting, civil disturbance, catastrophe or for any other reason, municipal public
safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives,
safety, health, welfare or property.
(’75 Code, § 6-1)
§ 92.02 EMERGENCY AND CURFEW; PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR
AND PROCLAMATION OF END.
(A) In the event of a state of emergency threatening or endangering the lives, safety,
health and welfare of the people within the town or threatening damage to or destruction of
property, the Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation
declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency and, in order more effectively
to protect the lives, safety and property of people within the town, to define and impose a curfew
applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the town.
(B) The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit the application of such a
curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the jurisdiction of the town and
to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from the curfew policemen, firemen, doctors,
nurses and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order
and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the
town.
(C) The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency and curfew as soon
as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the Board of Commissioners.
(D) The Board of Commissioners shall be called into session within 24 hours after a
state of emergency has been proclaimed by the Mayor.
(’75 Code, § 6-2)
§ 92.03 RESTRICTIONS DURING CURFEW.
During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, when a curfew has been defined
and imposed, it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to curfew:
(A) To be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon public property,
unless such travel is necessary to obtain medical assistance.
(B) To possess off his own premises, buy, sell, give away or otherwise transfer or
dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind.
(C) To sell beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind or to possess or consume
the same off his own premises.
(D) To sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or any other combustible
or inflammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of the curfew
imposed.
(’75 Code, § 6-3) Penalty, see § 10.99
GENERAL REGULATIONS
FAIR HOUSING
§ 93.01 HOUSING COMMITTEE CREATED.
The town shall establish a Housing Committee composed of members of the Town
Board of Commissioners and an advisory membership consisting of three persons who reside
within the planning jurisdiction of the town.
(Ord., passed 3-14-88)
§ 93.02 DUTIES OF COMMITTEE.
(A) The Housing Committee, with the assistance of the Mayor, shall receive and
review any and all grievances concerning discrimination in the provision of housing with the
town.
(B) The Committee, with the assistance of the Mayor, shall seek to identify all
housing resources within the area and provide the residents any information concerning the
availability of assistance, financial or otherwise.
(C) The Committee will encourage all local realtors, homeowners and contractors to
provide for non-discrimination in the provision of housing within the town.
(D) The Committee will develop other goals and objectives consistent with the
purpose and intent of this chapter.
(Ord., passed 3-14-88)
§ 93.03 DUTY OF TOWN.
The town shall notify the Equal Opportunity Housing area office and the North Carolina
Department of Natural Resources and Community Development of all action taken under this
chapter.
(Ord., passed 3-14-88)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
FIRE PREVENTION
FIRE LIMITS
§ 94.01 FIRE LIMITS DESIGNATED.
(A) By virtue of the authority granted by G.S. §§ 160A-435 through 160A-438, the
downtown area of the Town of Aberdeen is hereby designated as the primary fire limits of the
town. The area is more specifically described as follows:
Beginning at a point 150 feet west of where the south side of Maple Street intersects with
US 1 Highway; 150 feet west of said US 1 Highway and parallel therewith, in a southerly
direction, crossing South Street and continuing 300 feet therefrom; then running in an easterly
direction parallel to South Street, crossing Sycamore Street and the Seaboard Coastline Railroad
tracks, to a point 175 feet west of the centerline of Pine Street; then running in a northerly
direction and parallel to Pine Street, crossing South Street and East Main Street to a point 308½
feet south of Maple Street; then running in a westerly direction crossing the S.A.L. Railway
tracks and Sycamore Street to a point 170 feet from the west edge of Sycamore Street; then
following the property lines of E.E. Vuncannon and Larry Boles in a northerly direction to a
point on the south of Maple Street.
(B) The Town Fire Chief, or such other person as designated by the Town Manager,
shall maintain a map of the primary fire limits that shall be available to the public for review
during the normal business hours of the Town government.
(’75 Code, § 4-6) (Ord., passed 3-10-75) (Amended 6/13/11)
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 94.10 CODE ADOPTED.
There is herby adopted by the Board of Commissioners for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that
certain code known as the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the American Insurance
Association, being the current edition and updated amendments, of which code not less than
three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Town Clerk and the same are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. The provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the town.
(’75 Code, § 8-1)
§ 94.11 ENFORCEMENT.
The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(’75 Code, § 8-2)
§ 94.12 DEFINITION.
Whenever the word “municipality” is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it shall be held to
mean the town.
(’75 Code, § 8-3)
§ 94.13 MODIFICATIONS.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the
Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by an owner or lessee, or his duly authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code;
provided, that the spirit of the Fire Prevention Code shall be observed, public safety secured and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the
Department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
(’75 Code, § 8-4)
§ 94.14 APPEALS OF DECISION OF FIRE CHIEF.
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or refuse to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code
do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the
Board of Commissioners within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
(’75 Code, § 8-5)
§ 94.15 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
(A) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code or
fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder,
or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal
has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by a court
of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the
time fixed herein, shall, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be
guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such person shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within the reasonable time.
(B) When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(C) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
(’75 Code, § 8-6) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.16 KEY BOXES.
Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secure openings
or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the Code
Official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in a accessible location. An approved
lock shall also be installed on gates or similar barriers when required by code official.
a.) The key box shall be of an approved type and shall contain keys to gain access
as required by the code official.
(Ord. Adopted 3-12-07)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 94.20 BULK TANKS PROHIBITED IN FIRE ZONE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or have erected any bulk tanks in the fire zone
of the town.
(’75 Code, § 8-8) (Ord., passed 4-5-48)
§ 94.21 PARKING OF GASOLINE TRANSPORT TRUCKS PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any gasoline transport truck to park or stop on any street in the
fire zone and, in addition to this, anywhere on South Street from the corner of Pine Street west to
where South Street crosses the Aberdeen Creek.
(’75 Code, § 8-9) (Ord. 86, passed 10-5-38)
§ 94.22 WOODEN AND FRAME BUILDINGS AND COMBUSTIBLE
ROOFS PROHIBITED.
Any person who shall build or erect, or cause to be built or erected, any wooden or frame
building or cover any brick or other building with a shingle or other combustible roof within the
fire limits of the town shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(’75 Code, § 8-10) (Ord. 19, passed 4-1-31) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.23 REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSPORTING COMBUSTIBLE
LIQUIDS ACROSS RAILROADS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to transport over any grade crossing or any
railroad track in the town by motor truck, motor propelled vehicle or combination of motor truck
and trailer, 600 or more gallons of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or other explosive, inflammable
or combustible liquids, in bulk, whether the same be contained in one or more compartments,
chambers, tanks or other containers, unless the driver of such truck, motor propelled vehicle or
combination of motor truck and trailer shall first come to a full stop at a point within 25 to 50
feet of such grade crossing, and after having brought such vehicle to a full stop, diligently and
cautiously look and listen, in all directions, for any approaching engine, train or railroad cars.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any truck, motor propelled vehicle, or
combination of motor truck and trailer, transporting gasoline, kerosene or naphtha or other
explosive, in flammable or combustible liquids, to proceed across any railway grade crossing
within the corporate limits of the town, notwithstanding that he has brought such vehicle to a full
stop, as mentioned in division (A) above, if there is any engine, train or railway car in motion,
approaching such grade crossing within 200 yards thereof, regardless of whether or not any
signals, bells, lights or other warnings are in evidence.
(C) Any person violating the terms of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(’75 Code, § 8-11) (Ord. 93, passed 11-4-40) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.24 DRIVING NEAR FIRE ENGINE IN SERVICE; PARKING NEAR
FIRE.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within 500 feet, either in front, beside or
behind a fire engine while it is no its way to a fire, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park
his automobile or other motor vehicle within one-half block of the fire.
(’75 Code, § 8-12) (Ord. 81, passed 11-6-33) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.25 DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive over, with motor or other vehicle, a fire hose,
either when inflated or otherwise.
(’75 Code, § 8-12) (Ord. 19, passed 11-6-33) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.26 INTERFERING WITH FIRE TRUCK PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person not a member of the Fire Department to get on or
interfere with the fire truck unless called to duty by the Chief of the Fire Department.
(’75 Code, § 8-14) (Ord. 72, passed 4-1-31) Penalty, see § 10.99
OPEN BURNING
§ 94.35 APPLICABILITY.
This subchapter shall apply to all operations involving open burning except those
specifically exempted by § 94.38.
(’75 Code, § 8-15)
§ 94.36 PURPOSE FOR OPNE BURNING REGULATIONS.
The purposes of this subchapter are to prevent, abate and control air pollution resulting
from air contaminants released in the open burning of refuse or other combustible materials.
(’75 Code, § 8-16)
§ 94.37 WHEN PROHIBITED.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or other
combustible material except as may be allowed in compliance with § 94.38 or except those
covered by a permit issued by the board of Water and Air Resources, North Carolina Department
of Water and Air Resources under section 143-215 1(c) of the North Carolina Water and Air
Resources Act.
(’75 Code, § 8-17) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.38 PREMISSIBLE BURNING.
(A) The following types of open burning are permissible as specified if burning is not
prohibited by other ordinances, laws and regulations of governmental entities having jurisdiction.
(1) Fires purposely set for the instruction and training of public and industrial
fire-fighting personnel.
(2) Fires purposely set to agricultural land for disease and pest control and
other accepted agricultural or wildlife management practices acceptable to the North Carolina
Board of Water and Air Resources.
(3) Fires purposely set to forest lands for forest management practices
acceptable to the Division of Forestry and the North Carolina Board of Water and Air Resources.
(4) Fires purposely set in rural areas for right-of-way maintenance only in
instances where there are no other practicable or feasible methods of disposal and under
conditions acceptable to the North Carolina Board of Water and Air Resources.
(5) Camp fires and fires used solely for outdoor cooking and other
recreational purposes or for ceremonial occasions or for human warmth and comfort.
(6) Open burning of leaves, tree branches or yard trimmings originating on the
premises of private residences and burned on those premises in areas where no public pickup
facilities are available and such burning is done between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and does not
create a nuisance.
(7) Open burning in other than predominantly residential areas for the purpose
of land clearing or right-of-way maintenance.
(a) Prevailing winds at the time of burning must be away from the
town or a built-up area, the ambient air of which may be significantly affected by smoke, fly-ash
or other air contaminants from the burning.
(b) The location of the burning must be at least 1,000 feet from any
dwelling located in a predominantly residential area other than a dwelling or structure located on
the property on which the burning is conducted.
(c) The amount of dirt on the material being burned must be minimal.
(d) Heavy oils, asphalt materials, items containing natural or synthetic
rubber or any materials other than plant growth may not be burned.
(e) Initial burning may generally be commenced only between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., and no combustible material may be added to the fire between
3:00 p.m. of one day and 9:00 a.m. of the following day; except, that under favorable
meteorological conditions deviations from the above state hours of burning may be granted by
the air pollution control agency having jurisdiction. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or
operator of the open burning operation to obtain written approval for burning during periods
other than those specified above.
(8) Fires for the disposal of dangerous materials where there are no alternative
methods of disposal and burning is conducted in accordance with procedures acceptable to the
state Board of Water and Air Resources.
(B) Permission granted by the town under this section shall be subject to continued
review and may be withdrawn at any time.
(’75 Code, § 8-18) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.39 WHEN LIABILITY NOT EXCUSED.
The authority to conduct open burning under the provisions of § 94.38 does not exempt
or excuse any person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result from such
conduct, nor does it excuse or exempt any person from complying with all applicable laws,
ordinances, regulations and orders of the governmental entities having jurisdiction even though
the open burning is conducted in compliance with such section.
(’75 Code, § 8-19)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
NOISE
§ 95.01 DEFINITIONS.
EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purposes of preventing or
alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an exiting or imminent
peril.
(Am. Ord., passed 7-11-94)
§ 95.02 NOISES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.
(A) Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. Operating,
playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum,
musical instrument or similar device which produces or reproduces sound between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to create excessive and unnecessary noise across a
residential real property line or within a noise sensitive area.
(B) Loading and unloading. Loading and unloading, opening, closing or other
handling of boxes, crates, containers, equipment, building materials, garbage cans or similar
objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. on weekends or holidays in or within fifty (50) yards of a residential area or noise sensitive
zone.
(C) Construction and demolition. Operating or causing the operation of any tools
used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays or between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends or holidays in
or within fifty (50) yards of any residential area or noise sensitive zone, except for emergency
work by public service utilities or by special permit issued by the chief of police. This section
shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools.
(D) Emergency signaling devices. The intentional sounding or permitting the
sounding outdoors of any fire, burglary or civil defense alarm, fire whistle or similar stationary
emergency signaling device, except for emergency shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00
p.m. and any testing shall use the minimum cycle test time appropriate for such devices, in no
case to exceed sixty (60) seconds. Testing of the complete emergency signaling system,
including the functioning of this signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling
device shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall occur only on
weekdays and not before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. and shall be exempt from the time limit
specified herein. The sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm
or any motor vehicle burglar alarm, unless such alarm is automatically terminated within fifteen
(15) minutes of activation, shall be prohibited.
(E) Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically
powered saw, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool or similar tool between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
on weekdays or 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays unless such equipment is
operated inside a building or other structure so that the sound there from does not travel across
any residential real property line or noise sensitive zone.
(F) Multi-family dwellings. Any excessive noise generated at a volume beyond what
is necessary for customary activities or any excessive noise after 10:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m.
such that nearby residents of dwellings are disturbed.
(G) Refuse collection vehicles. No person shall collect refuse with a refuse collection
vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
on weekends and holidays within a residential area or noise sensitive zone.
(H) Unnecessary noise. Subject to the provisions of this article, the creation of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 p.m. within one hundred (100) yards of a dwelling unit house, trailer or other building
ordinarily occupied by another person, when such person who owns or is in control of such
building has not given prior consent or within twenty-five (25) yards of a publicly maintained
road or public vehicular area, is prohibited.
(I) Detrimental noise. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be
detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited within the town, no matter what
the distance of the source of such noise is to any dwelling unit, house, trailer or building
occupied by such other person, unless the person in control of such unit, house, trailer or
building has given specific consent for such noise to continue.
(J) Schools. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning or court while the same is in session or within 150 feet of any hospital or
medical institution, which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution; provided,
that conspicuous signs are displayed in every such street indicating that the same is a school,
court or hospital.
(K) Sundays. The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street adjacent
to any church; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in every such street adjacent to a
church indicating that the same is a church street.
(Am. Ord., passed 7-11-94)
§ 95.03 PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(A) Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except as a danger signal, so as to create any unreasonably loud
or harsh sound or the sound of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(B) Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph or musical
instrument in such manner, or with such volume, as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling unit, house, trailer, building or other type of
residence.
(C) Pets. The keeping of any animal or bird, which by causing frequent or long
continued noise, shall unreasonably disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity.
(D) Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so loaded or
operated in such manner as to create an unreasonably loud or unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
(E) Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary
boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger.
(Am. Ord., passed 7-11-94)
§ 95.04 MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle unless the exhaust
system of such vehicle is:
(A) Free from defects which affect sound reduction;
(B) Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device; and
(C) Not equipped with any cut-out, bypass or similar device.
(Am. Ord., passed 7-11-94)
§ 95.05 BARKING DOGS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit a dog, under his or her exercise or
control, to bark, bay, cry, howl or make any other noise continuously and/or excessively for a
period of ten (10) minutes or more, or who barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise
intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time.
(B) It shall not be a violation of this section if at the time the dog is barking, baying,
crying, howling or making any other noise a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon
private property in or upon which the dog is situated or for any legitimate cause which teased or
provoked the dog.
(C) Any resident, owner, occupant or tenant of property upon which the dog is
situated shall be deemed a person in charge or otherwise exercising control over said dog.
(Am. Ord., passed 7-11-94)
§ 95.06 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY FOR CONTROL OF
EXCESS NOISE.
(A) The chief of police of the Town of Aberdeen shall have primary enforcement
responsibility for this chapter as it relates to stationary sources and as it relates to motor vehicle
sources. Violation shall be subject to the enforcement provisions prescribed by section 10/98 of
the Code of Ordinances.
(B) Powers of arrest or citation. Any police officer shall issue a citation for any
violation under this article, except they may arrest for instances when:
(1) The alleged violator refuses to provide the officer such person’s name and
address and any proof thereof as may be reasonably available to the alleged violator; or
(2) The alleged violator refuses to cease such illegal activity after being issued
a citation.
(Am. Ord., passed 7-11-94)
§ 95.07 NOISE FROM RADIOS, TAPE PLAYERS, LOUDSPEAKERS,
SOUND AMPLIFIERS.
(A) No person shall play, use or operate or permit to be played, used or operated, any
radio, tape recorder, cassette player or other machine or device for reproducing sound as follows:
(1) Any portable unit described above in or on any public property, including
any public street, highway, building, sidewalk, park, thoroughfare or public or private parking
lot; or
(2) Any unit described above which is installed in a motor vehicle and
operated on a public street, highway, public space or within the motor vehicular area of any
public or private parking lot or park;
if at the same time the sound generated is audible at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the radio,
tape recorder, cassette player or other machine or device that is producing the sound.
(B) Possession by a person or person of any radio, tape recorder, cassette player or
other machine or device for reproducing sound as enumerated in subsection (a) above shall be
prima facie evidence that such person operates, or those person operate, the radio, tape recorder,
cassette player or other machine or device for reproducing sound.
(Am. Ord., passed 7-11-94)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
PICKETS, PARADES, PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES, AND SPECIAL EVENTS
Article I. Pickets, Parades and Public Assemblies
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms or phrases, when used in this Article, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this Section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(a.) Appeals Official means the Town manager of his designee.
(b.) Athletic Event means any event involving the conduct of exercises, sports or
games.
(c.) Business Days means those days in which Town’s offices are open for conducting
Town business.
(d.) Chief of Police means the Chief of Police of the Town of Aberdeen, of his
designee.
(e.) Festival means a concert, fair, exhibition, promotion, community event, block
party, or similar event.
(f.) Parade means any athletic event, ceremony, pageant, march, picket, procession,
motorcade or other similar activity consisting of persons, animals, vehicles or
things, or a combination thereof proceeding along any sidewalk or along the
traveled portion of any street within the Town in such a manner as to interfere
with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon such sidewalk or
street, and which activity is intended, in whole or in part to exercise freedom
protection under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. A
procession in which individuals move single-file along a sidewalk shall not be
regarded as interfering with the normal flow of pedestrian traffic along such
sidewalk.
(g.) Parade/assembly permit means a permit as required by this Article in order to
conduct a parade or public street or sidewalk assembly regulated by this Article.
(h.) Picket or picketing means the stationing of one or more persons by standing,
walking, lying, sitting, kneeling, bending, or in any other similar manner, at a
particular place within the Town with the purpose of persuading or otherwise
influencing another person’s actions or conduct or of apprising the public of any
opinion of message, excluding purely casual, random, or other everyday forms of
communication or conduct.
(i.) Public Assembly means (i) any festival held generally in one location upon any
sidewalk or upon the traveled portion of any street within the Town in such a
manner as to interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon
such sidewalk or street, and which activity is intended, in whole or in part to
exercise freedom protected under the First Amendment of the United States
Constitution or (ii) any organized company or persons, or a picket, for a common
purpose as a result of prior planning that is collected together generally in one
location upon any sidewalk or upon the traveled portion of any street within the
Town in such a manner as to interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic upon such sidewalk or street, and which activity is intended, in
whole or in part, to exercise freedom protected under the First Amendment of the
United States Constitution. For purposes of this definition the phrase “held
generally in one location” or “collected together generally in one location” means
that such festival or activity is conducted generally in a fixed area as opposed to
proceeding along the street or sidewalk in such a manner as to constitute a parade.
A festival or other organized company of persons or a picket in which the
participants do not obstruct or occupy more then one-half of a sidewalk, such that
other pedestrians may use the sidewalk for its intended purposes, shall not be
regarded as interfering with the normal flow of pedestrian traffic along such
sidewalk.
(j.) Sidewalk means that portion of the street right-of-way that is designed for the use
of pedestrians and that is paved.
(k.) Street means any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes
of vehicular traffic, including and curb, berm, shoulder, right-of-way, or median
strip, but not including the sidewalk.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.02 Regulations for Pickets and Picketing
(a) For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
(i) Private residence means a single-family dwelling, duplex, or
multi-family dwelling within the Town;
(ii) Directed, focused, or targeted at means that a particular private
residence is being made the sole object of picketing, and the
picketing takes place solely on that portion of the street or
sidewalk that abuts on the property upon which the target
residence is located or solely on that portion of any street or
sidewalk that abuts on property within fifty feet(measured from
that lot line) of the property upon which the particular private
residence is located, except the sidewalk on the opposite side of
the street from the targeted residence.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing that is directed,
focused, targeted at a particular private residence.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any picket to carry or
possess any staff or pole for purposes of displaying any sign, poster, flag,
banner, plague or notice unless the staff or pole (i) is made of corrugated
material, plastic, or wood (and not made of metal or metal alloy); (ii) is
less than 41 inches in length; (iii) is one-fourth inch (1/4”) or less in
thickness and two inches (2”) or less in width, or if not generally
rectangular in shape, does not exceed three-fourths inch (3/4”) in its
thickest dimension: and (iv) is blunt at both ends.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any picket to carry or
possess any sign, poster, flag, banner, plaque or notice, whether or not
mounted on a length of material as specified in paragraph (c) of this
Section, unless such sign, poster, flag, banner, plaque, or notice is
constructed or made of a cloth, paper, cardboard, rubber, or plastic
material.
(e) Picketers, pickets, and picketing shall be subject to all other applicable
local, state and federal laws.
(f) Picketers, pickets, and picketing shall not take place in any street or road
used by vehicular traffic, any highway road or street median, or any
“safety zone” as defined in N.C. Gen. Stat. § 20-4.01 (39), unless a parade
or public assembly permit has been obtained under section 96.03 below.
(g) A picket or picketing that is not prohibited by this Section and that
otherwise fits the definition of a parade or public assembly shall be subject
to the regulations for parades and public assemblies in Sections 96.03
through 96.15 of this Chapter.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.03 Permit Required for Parades and Public Assemblies.
(a) No parade or public assembly is permitted unless a permit has been first obtained
from the Chief of Police allowing the parade or public assembly pursuant to this
Article.
(b) A person seeking to obtain a parade/assembly permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police on forms provided by such official.
(c) A person seeking to obtain a parade/assembly permit which requires a street
closing or otherwise requires police officers to stop or reroute vehicle traffic upon
any street because the participant will not comply with normal traffic regulations
or controls shall file an application with the Chief of Police at least 72 hours
before the time for which the parade or public assembly is proposed to
commence. A person seeking to obtain a permit for any other parade or public
assembly shall file an application with the Chief of Police at least 48 hours before
the time for which the parade or public assembly is proposed to commence.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Chief of Police shall consider an
application for a parade/assembly permit which is filed within any shorter timeframes
from those prescribed above where the purpose of the parade or public
assembly is a spontaneous response to a current event, or where other good and
compelling causes are shown.
(d) The application for a parade/assembly permit shall include the following:
(1) The name, address, telephone number (and pager number, facsimile
number, email address, if available) of the person seeking to conduct the
parade or public assembly, and the name, address, and telephone number
(and facsimile number and email address, if available) of the organization
with which the person is affiliated or on whose behalf the person is
applying to conduct the parade or public assembly (collectively
“Applicant”);
(2) The name. address, and telephone number (and pager number, facsimile
number, and email address, if available) for an individual who shall be
designated as the “responsible planner and on-site manager” of the parade
or public assembly;
(3) The requested date, time, place, and route (from starting point to ending
point) of the parade or public assembly, including the location where and
time when the parade or public assembly will assemble and disband, and
any requested sidewalk or street closing;
(4) The anticipated number of persons, vehicles, and things that will constitute
the parade or public assembly (including the basis on which this estimate
is made), and a description of the vehicles and things that will be part of
the parade or public assembly;
(5) A list of the number and type of animals that will be part of the parade or
public assembly;
(6) A description of the extent to which the parade or public assembly will
occupy all of a portion of any street or sidewalk;
(7) A general description of any activities planned during the parade or public
assembly, including whether any alcoholic beverages will be sold or
consumed;
(8) A general description of any recording equipment and sound amplification
equipment, along with general description of the size and composition of
any banners, signs, flags or other attention-getting devices to be used In
connection with the parade or public assembly;
(9) Arrangements for additional police protection, and/or additional
emergency medical services, and/or liability insurance, if required under
Section 96.04;
(10) The approximate number of anticipated spectators of the parade or public
assembly; and
(11) Any additional information, attachments and submissions that are
requested on the application form.
(e) A parade/assembly permit issued under this Chapter shall include the information
set out in paragraph (d) of this Section, which information shall constitute
conditions of the permit to the extent such information sets out the time, place and
manner of the parade or public assembly.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.04 Police Protection.
(a) The Chief of Police shall determine whether and to what extent additional police
protection (including additional emergency medical services) may reasonably be
necessary for the parade or public assembly for traffic control and public health
and safety, The Chief of Police shall make this determination based on an
objective consideration of the following factors (and in no case upon the speech
content of the proposed parade or public assembly or any anticipated public
reaction to such speech content);
(1) the size, location, duration, time and date, composition, format,
configuration, and number of anticipated participants in and anticipated
spectators of the proposed parade or public assembly;
(2) the expected sale of good or services at the proposed parade of public
assembly, including alcoholic beverages if applicable;
(3) the extent to which the parade or public assembly requires the closing of
any street or sidewalk or portion thereof, taking into account the general
traffic conditions in the area and existing traffic control devices;
(4) the need to detour, reroute, or otherwise preempt normal vehicular or
pedestrian traffic upon any street or sidewalk or portion thereof to
accommodate the proposed parade or public assembly;
(5) the anticipation weather conditions at the time of the proposed parade or
public assembly; and
(6) the extent to which the proposed parade or public assembly is reasonably
likely to require emergency medical services or police protection or public
assembly.
(b) Regularly scheduled on duty- police officers of the Town will police the parade or
public assembly if the use of these resources would not impair or disrupt ordinary
police services throughout the Town or otherwise compromise the public’s health
or safety. However, if additional police officers or additional emergency medical
services are deemed necessary by the Chief of Police for the proposed parade or
public assembly in light of his/her objective assessment of the factors in
paragraph (a) of this Section, the Chief of Police shall inform the applicant for the
parade/assembly permit of (i) the number of additional police officers and/or
additional emergency medical personnel needed for the event, (ii) the time-period
when those services will be needed, and (iii) the specific reason for why the
additional police protection and/or emergency medical services are deemed
necessary. The applicant then shell have the duty to hire and pay for the additional
police protection and/or additional emergency medical services, or the obligation
to reimburse the Town shall become part of the conditions of the parade/assembly
permit.
(c) Persons engaging in parades or public assemblies conducted solely and entirely
for the purpose of freedoms protected under the First Amendment are not required
to pay for the additional police protection or additional emergency medical
services set out in paragraph (b) of this Section, or to provide the insurance set out
in paragraph (e) of this Section.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town may provide the additional police
and/or emergency medical services required by paragraph (b) of this Section at no
cost, or at a reduced cost, to the applicant should the Town desire to provide such
support to the parade or public assembly.
(e) The applicant for any parade or public assembly that required the hiring of and
paying for additional police protection and/or additional emergency medical
services under paragraph (b) of this Section shall, as part of the condition of the
parade/assembly permit:
(1) obtain a comprehensive general liability insurance policy or comparable liability
insurance policy that names the Town as an additional insured and that has
property damage coverage of at least $50,00 for each occurrence and bodily
injury or death coverage or at least $100,000 for each person and of at least
$300,000 for each occurrence;
(2) agree to indemnify the Town against any additional or uncovered third-party
claims against the Town arising out of the event; and
(3) agree to reimburse the Town for any damage to Town property.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.05 Permitting Criteria.
(a) The Chief of Police shall issue a parade/public assembly permit when,
from a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, he/she makes all of the following findings:
(1) The conduction of the parade or public assembly will not
substantially unnecessarily interfere with the safe and orderly
movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to
its route or location; and, if such interference is likely to occur,
that there are available at the time of the parade or public
assembly sufficient police resources to mitigate the interference;
(2) There will be available at the time of the parade or public
assembly a sufficient number of police officers and traffic
control aids to police and protect participants and nonparticipants
at the parade or public assembly and in areas
contiguous to the event from the Town at the time of the
proposed parade or public assembly;
(3) The concentration of persons, animals, vehicles, or things at the
parade or public assembly will not prevent proper fire and police
protection or emergency medical services at the event or in areas
contiguous to the parade or public assembly;
(4) The parade or public assembly will not interfere with the use of a
sidewalk or street request by another applicant to whom a valid
parade/assembly permit application has already been granted or
has been received and will be granted;
(5) The applicant has secured the additional police protection and/or
additional emergency medical services and/or insurance required
under Section 96.04(b) and (e);
(6) No parade/public assembly permit application for the same time
but at a different location has already been granted or has been
received and will be granted, and the police resources required
for the prior parade or public assembly are not so great that, in
combination with the subsequent proposed application, the
resulting deployment of police services would have an
immediate and adverse effect upon the health or safety of
persons or property;
(7) No other public event is scheduled elsewhere in the Town where
the police resources for that event are so great that the
deployment of police services for the proposed parade or public
assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the
health or safety of persons or property; and
(8) The application is fully and completed and executed;
(9) The application contains no material falsehood or
misrepresentation.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.06 Non-Discrimination.
Applications for parade/assembly permits shall be processed and decided upon a first-intime
basis, and the Chief of Police shall consider each application upon its merits and shall not
discriminate in granting or denying any permit based upon political, religious, ethnic, race,
disability, sexual orientation or gender related grounds, or upon the content of any speech
protection by the First Amendment or upon any anticipated public reaction to such speech
content.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.07 Notice of Decision on Application.
(a) The Chief of Police shall make his/her written decision granting or denying a
fully completed and executed parade/assembly permit application (or granting an
alternative permit under Section 96.08) within three business days after the
application has been received by him/her, but in no event less than 24 hours
before the time for which the parade or public assembly is proposed to
commence. If the application under Section 96.03 is filed within any shorter timeframes
than those prescribed in Section 96.03, then the Chief of Police shall make
a decision on the application before the time for which the parade or public
assembly is proposed to commence.
(b) As soon as practicable after the written decision on the permit application has
been made, the Chief of Police shall notify the applicant of the decision (i) by the
most expeditious means practicable (i.e., by telephone, facsimile, or email), and
(ii) by mailing a copy of the decision to the applicant by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, which mailing shall be posted no later that the first
business day after the decision has been made. If the decision is to deny the
application or grant an alteration permit, the notification to the application shall
include the written reasons for the denial of the permit or for the grant of an
alternative permit.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.08 Alternative Permit.
(a) If the Chief of Police denies an application for a parade/assembly permit because
he/she decides against one or more of the required findings in subparagraphs
(a)(1) through (7) of Section 96.05, the Chief of Police shall authorize the conduct
of a parade or public assembly on a date, at a time, at a location or over a different
route from that named by the applicant. This alternative permit shall, to the extent
practicable, authorize a parade or public assembly that will have comparable
public visibility and a similar date, time, location, or route to that of the proposed
event. An application desiring to accept an alternative parade/assembly permit
shall, within at least 24 hours before the time for which the alternative parade or
public assembly will commence, file a written notice of acceptance with the Chief
of Police.
(b) An alternative parade/assembly permit shall contain the information called for in
paragraph (d) of Section 96.03, which information shall constitute conditions of
the alternative parade/assembly permit to the extent such information sets out the
time, place, and manner of the alternative parade or public assembly.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.09 Sale and Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages.
(a) No alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed except at an athletic event or
festival event for which a parade/assembly permit has been issued under this
Article, and if the Chief of Police determines that such sale or consumption will
not pose an unreasonable adverse risk to the public health, safety, and welfare.
(b) For any such event where alcoholic beverages will be sold and consumed, the
responsible planner and on-site manager for the event shall ensure that an area
within the event area is designated for the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages. The perimeters of the area shall be clearly marked, and the entrance to
the area shall be constructed so as to allow ready control of patrons, including the
viewing of identification to prevent underage persons from being permitted into
the area.
(c) Any area designated for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages as a part
of such event shall be located at least 150 feet from any church, mosque,
synagogue or other place of worship.
(d) No alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed as a part of such event outside
of the designated area.
(e) Prior to the beginning of such event, the responsible planner and on-site manager
shall ensure that all necessary State or other permits relating to the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages have been secured.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.10 Appeal Procedure.
(a) An application may appeal the denial of a parade/assembly permit in writing to
the Town Manager’s office within ten business day after notice of the denial has
been received by the applicant. Within five business day (or such longer period of
time agreed to by the applicant) after the Town has received the written appeal,
the appeals official shall hold a quasi-judicial hearing in whether to issue the
permit of uphold the denial. The applicant shall have the right to present evidence
at the hearing. The decision to issue the permit or uphold the denial shall be based
solely on the approval criteria set forth in Section 96.05, and the burden of proof
to uphold the denial shall be on the Chief of Police by a preponderance of the
evidence. The appeals official shall render a written decision on the appeal within
five business days after the date of the hearing. Where the purpose of the
proposed parade or public assembly is a spontaneous response to a current event,
or where other good and compelling causes are shown, the appeals official shall
reasonably attempt to conduct the hearing and render a decision on the appeal as
expeditiously as is practicable.
(b) The decision of the appeals official is subject to review in the Superior Court of
Moore County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for writ of
certiorari for review shall be filed with the clerk of superior court within 30 days
after the applicant has received notice of the decision of the appeals official.
Unless good cause exists to contest a petition for writ of certiorari, the Town shall
stipulate to certiorari no later than five business days after the petition requests
such stipulations. The Town shall transmit the record to the court no later than
five business days after receiving the order allowing certiorari. Notwithstanding
the provisions of any local rule of the reviewing court that allows for a longer
time period, the Town shall serve its brief upon the petitioners within 15 days
after it is served with the petitioner’s brief. If the petitioner serves his or her brief
by mail, the Town shall add three days to this time limit, in accordance with N.C.
Gen. Stat. 1A-1, Rule 5. If the local rule is subsequently amended to provide for a
shorter time period for serving any brief, then the shorter time shall control.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.11 Duties of Applicant and Responsible Planner and On-Site Manager.
(a) The applicant and responsible planner and on-site manager of the parade or public
assembly shall comply with all conditions of the parade/public assembly permit
issued pursuant to this Article and with all other applicable local, state, and
federal laws.
(b) The individual designated as the responsible planner and on-site manager of the
parade or public assembly shall carry the parade/assembly permit upon his person
during the conduct of the parade or public assembly.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.12 Prohibitions.
The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and public assemblies:
(a) It shall be lawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any parade or public
assembly without first having obtained a permit under this Article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or public assembly
for which the person knows a permit has not been granted.
(c) It shall be lawful for any participant in a parade or public assembly to knowingly
fail to comply with any conditions of the parade/assembly permit.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any parade or public assembly
to carry or possess any staff or pole for purposes of displaying any sign, poster,
flag, banner, plaque or notice unless the staff or pole (i) is made of corrugated
material. Plastic, or wood (and not made of metal or metal allow); (ii) is less that
41 inches in length; (iii) is one-fourth inch (1/4”) or less in thickness and two
inches (2”) or less in width, or if not generally rectangular in shape, does not
exceed three-fourths inch (3/4”) in its thickest dimension; and (iv) is blunt at both
ends.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any parade or public assembly
to carry or possess any sign, poster, flag, banner, plaque, or notice, whether or not
mounted on a length of material as specified in paragraph (d) of this Section,
unless such sign, poster, flag, banner, plaque, or notice is constructed or made of a
cloth, paper, cardboard, rubber, or plastic material.
(f) It shall be unlawful to assign or sell any parade/assembly permit granted under
this article.
(g) All participants in any parade or public assembly shall be subject to all other
applicable local, state and federal laws.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.13 Public Conduct During Parades or Public Assemblies.
(a) No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle, animal, or thing
participating or used in a parade or public assembly.
(b) The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to
prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of the
route of a parade or public assembly. The Chief of Police shall post signs to that
effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any
vehicle in violation of such signs.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.14 Revocation of Permit.
(a) The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public assembly
permit instantly upon violation of any conditions of the permit or when a public
emergency arises where the police resources required for that emergency are so
great that deployment of police services for the parade or public assembly would
have an immediate and adverse effect upon the health or safety of persons or
property.
(b) After a permit is revoked under paragraph (a) this Section, the Chief of Police
shall notify the applicant of the reasons for the revocation in writing by mailing a
copy of the revocation to the applicant by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, which mailing shall be posted no later than first business day
after the revocation.
§ 96.15 Penalties.
A violation of any section or subsection of this Article shall be subject to a civil penalty
of $500.00 to be recovered in the nature of a debt or by a misdemeanor punishment by up to a
$500.00 fine as provided in Section 14-4 of the N.C. General Statutes.
Article II
Special Events
§ 96.16 Activities Covered.
(a) This article applies to all street fairs, festivals, athletic events, carnivals, parades,
marches, rallies, or other similar activities or public events not intended in whole
or in part to exercise freedom protection under the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, or that require the temporary closing or obstruction of a street,
sidewalk, or other public right-of-way or any segment thereof or that otherwise
substantially hinder or prevent the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic
along any street or other public right-of-way. Any such activity covered by this
article shall hereafter be referred to as a “special event.”
(b) This article shall not apply to:
(1) An activity occurring entirely on property owned by Moore County or
another unit of government;
(2) Funeral processions;
(3) Student going to and from school or participating in an educational
activity where such activity is under the immediate supervision and
direction of proper school authorities; or
(4) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its function.
(c) In addition to the requirements of this ordinance, all Special Events shall comply
with the requirements and procedures detailed in the Aberdeen Parks and
Recreation Department Outdoor Special Event Guide. In the event that the
ordinance and guide conflict, this ordinance shall control.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.17 Permit Required.
No person may run, operate, or sponsor any special event in any public street or right-ofway
without a permit obtained from the Director of Parks and Recreation in accordance with this
Article.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.18
(a) A person seeking to obtain a special events permit shall file an application with
the Director of Parks and Recreation on a form provided by the Parks and
Recreation Department no less than 30 days before the date the special event
activity will commence, except that if the event requires the temporary closure of
one or more streets, the application shall be filed no less than 60 days before the
event date. The following information shall be contained in the application:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number (and email address, if available)
of the person seeking to conduct the special event, and the name, address,
telephone number (and email address, if available), of the organization
with which the person is affiliated or on whose behalf the person is
applying to conduct the special event (collectively “Applicant”);
(2) The name, address, and telephone number (and email address, if available)
for an individual who shall be designated as the “person in charge” or
“responsible planner and on-site manager” of the special event;
(3) The request date, time, place, and route (from starting point to ending
point)of the special event, including the location where and time when the
special event will assemble and disband, and any requested sidewalk or
street closings;
(4) The anticipated number of persons, vehicles, and other elements that will
constitute the special event (including the basis on which this estimate is
made), and a description of the vehicles and other elements that will be
part of the special event;
(5) A list of the number and type of animals that will be a part of the special
event, and their intended use;
(6) Any barrier or traffic control devices that will be erected; and the location
of fire hydrants and electrical hook-ups, as well as the location of
proposed concession stands, booths, platforms, benches, or bleacher, toilet
facilities and garbage facilities;
(7) A description of the extent to which the special event will occupy all of a
portion of any street or sidewalk;
(8) A general description of the activities planned during the special event,
including whether any alcoholic beverages will be sold or consumed, and
a sketch map of where such beverages will be sold and consumed;
(9) A general description of any recording equipment and sound amplification
equipment, along with a general description of the size and composition of
any banners, signs, flags, or other attention-getting devices to be used in
connection with the special event;
(10) Arrangements for additional police protection, and/or additional
emergency medical services and/or liability insurance, if required under
Section 96.16 and 96.24;
(11) The approximate number of anticipated spectators of the special event;
(12) Any additional information, attachments and submissions that are
requested on the application form.
(b) A special event permit issued under this article shall include the information set
out in paragraph (a) of the Section, which information shall constitute conditions
of the permit to the extent such information sets out the time, place, manner and
conditions of the special event.
(c) The sponsor of a special event that consists of a series of activities spread over
more than on day shall be required to obtain only one permit, which will cover the
entire duration of the special event. This subsection applies only to special event
activities lasting four months or less.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.19 Fees; Costs Incurred by the Town.
(a) If the Town is required to provide additional police protection and/or additional
emergency medical services or any other extraordinary services or equipment or if
the Chief of Police or Fire Chief otherwise determines that such additional
police/emergency medical services or other extraordinary services or equipment
should be provided for reasons related to public health or safety, the staff person
making such determination shall take whatever action is necessary under the
Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act to make available the necessary
funds for the provisions of such services or equipment.
(b) The Chief of Police or Fire Chief may require the sponsor to pay the Town a fee
sufficient to reimburse the Town for providing additional police/emergency
medical services or for providing the costs of any extraordinary services or
equipment provided by the Town.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.20 Staff Review.
Upon receipt of the permit application and applicable fees, the Director of Parks and
Recreation shall circulate it to all appropriate department heads of the Town for their comment.
The Director of Parks and Recreation may arrange to have a conference on the application with
the sponsor and/or applicant and one or more of the department heads of the Town.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.21
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Revoked and Reserved 6-29-15)
§ 96.22 Standard for Issuance of Permit.
(a) The Director of Parks and Recreation shall issue the permit authorizing the
request special event activity unless it finds that:
(1) The conducts of the activity will require the assignment of so many police
officers that the remainder of the Town cannot adequately be protected; or
(2) The activity will interfere with the movement of emergency vehicles to
such an extent that adequate police, fire, or other emergency services
cannot be adequately provided throughout the Town; or
(3) Allowing the activity to be held would constitute a clear and present
danger to the public health or safety; or
(4) The activity, if held at the time or location proposed, will cause an
unreasonable and unwarranted disruption to vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
or
(5) The activity will work a severe hardship on property owners or property
occupants near the special event location as a result of the denial of access
to their properties or for other substantial reasons; or
(6) The person in charge and/or the sponsor of the activity has failed to obtain
or does not intend to obtain any and all necessary permits or licenses,
including but not limited to building permits, and alcohol permit, or the
application is otherwise in violation of any provisions of the Aberdeen
Code of Ordinances or other applicable law; or
(7) If permitted, the activity will conflict with any other activity previously
permitted under this chapter by covering any part of substantially the same
area or route during substantially the same time frame as allotted to the
previously permitted activity.
(b) The Director of Parks and Recreation may attach any reasonable conditions to the
issuance of a permit; and any special event conducted pursuant to a permit issued
under this Article shall be conducted strictly in accordance with the terms of the
permit, including any conditions attached to the permit.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.23 Modification: Alteration Permit.
(a) If the Director of Parks and Recreation finds that it cannot issue the permit for any
reason specified in section 96.22 of this Article, it may request that the applicant
modify its application to remove said objection(s) to the issuance of the permit,
and the applicant may do so without further notice.
(c) If the Director of Parks and Recreation finds that it cannot issue the permit for
any reason specified in section 96.22 of Article and if modification of the permit
does not appear possible, the Director may, in his or her discretion, issue a permit
specifying an alterative, location, route or time for special event activity.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.24 Insurance.
The Director of Parks and Recreation may require as a condition to the issuance of a
permit that the sponsor obtain a comprehensive general liability insurance policy or comparable
liability insurance coverage that includes the entire area or route of the special event activity. If
such policy is required, the Town shall name as an additional insured on the policy. The limits of
such policy shall not be less than the following, and the Director may require higher limits if he
or she finds that the risks associated with the activity such higher limits:
Personal Injury $500,000 for each person;
Personal Injury for Aggregate Liability $1,000,000
Property Damage $500,000 for each occurrence.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.25 Town Indemnified.
Any sponsor obtaining a permit pursuant to this article agrees as a condition of the permit
to indemnify the Town and hold the Town harmless from any expenses, including but not limited
to attorney’s fees, litigation costs and judgments, incurred as a result of claims made for damages
arising out of the permitted activity.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.26 Street Closings
(a) No such resolution shall be passed affecting streets that are part of the State
Highway System without the approval of the North Carolina Department of
Transportation.
(b) A resolution passed pursuant to subsection (a) shall identify the street or portion
thereof and shall indicate the date and time when the street or portion thereof is to
be closed or access is to be limited in some way. The resolution shall also direct
the Town staff to have appropriate traffic control devices installed to give notice
of the temporary traffic restrictions.
(c) No person may operate any vehicle contrary to the traffic control devices installed
in accordance with this section.
(d) At least seven (7) days prior to the start of any special event activity, the Director
of Parks and Recreation shall cause written notice to be provided to the occupants,
or if they are unavailable the owners, of each property abutting the street(s) to be
closed pursuant to a resolution passed under this section. For activities that are
scheduled to occur less than seven (7) days after the permit application has been
submitted, the Director need only provide such notice as is reasonably possible.
(Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.27 Person in Charge/Responsible Planner and on-site Manager.
(a) The person in charge shall be the person primarily responsible for complying with
the requirements of this Article; for obtaining all required permits and/or
approvals prior to the start of the special event activity, and for setting up,
conducting and cleaning up after the activity.
(b) The person in charge shall have the permit issued pursuant to this article, as well
as any other required permits or approvals necessary for the activity, available at
all times for inspection by Town staff during the special events activity.
(c) The person in charge shall be responsible for cleaning up any litter caused by the
special event activity; removing any temporary signs or structures erected by the
sponsor of other individuals or organizations participating in the activity; and in
returning the area where the activity takes place to the condition that existed prior
to the activity.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.28 Special Events Involving the Sale and Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages.
(a) For any special event where alcoholic beverages will be sold and consumed, the
person in charge of the event shall ensure that an area within the special event area is
designated for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. The perimeters of the
area shall be clearly marked, and entrance to the area shall be constructed so as to
allow ready control of patrons, including the viewing of identification to issue
wristbands to those persons 21 years of age or older.
(b) Any area designated for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages as a part of
a special event shall be located at least 50 feet from any church, mosque, synagogue
or other place of worship, or as required by the NC Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission regulations.
(c) No alcoholic beverages may be sold or consumed as a part of a special event outside
of the designated area for such sale or consumption.
(d) Prior to the beginning of the special event, the person in charge shall ensure that all
necessary state or other permits relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages have been secured. Copies of such permits shall be provided to the Director
of Parks and Recreation.
(e) Nothing in this article shall prevent the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, or their
designee(s) from prohibiting the sale and /or consumption of alcoholic beverages at
any special event if he or she determines that such sale or consumption is not in the
best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the Town.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.29 Prohibitions.
The following prohibitions shall apply to all special events:
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any special event
without first having obtained a permit under this Article.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a special event for which the
person knows a permit has not been granted.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any participant in a special event to knowingly fail to
comply with any conditions of the special events permit.
(d) It shall be unlawful to assign or sell any special event permit granted under this
Article.
(e) All participants in any special event shall be subject to all other applicable local,
state and federal laws.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.30 Public Conduct During Special Events.
(a) No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
person, vehicle, animal, or thing participating or used in any special event.
(b) The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to
prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of the
route of a special event. The Chief of Police shall post signs to that effect, and
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of such signs.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
§ 96.31 Revocation of Permit.
(a) The Director of Parks and Recreation or the Chief of Police shall have the
authority to revoke a special permit upon a violation of any conditions of the
permit or when a public emergency arises where the police resources required for
that emergency are so great that deployment of police services for the special
event would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the health or safety of
persons or property.
(b) After a permit is revoked under paragraph (a) this Section, the Chief of Police
shall notify the applicant of the reasons for the revocation in writing by mailing a
copy of the revocation to the applicant by registered of certified mail, return
receipt requested, which mailing shall be posted no later that the first business day
after the revocation.
(Adopted: 11-13-06; Amended 6-29-15)
§ 96.32 Penalties.
A violation of any section or subsection of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$500.00 to be recovered in the nature of a dept or by a misdemeanor punishable by up to a
$500.00 fine as provided in Section 14-4 of the N.C. General Statutes.
(Adopted: 11-13-06)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (D.B.H.). The diameter of the trunk of a tree 4.5 feet
above average grade.
PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks
having individual names and all areas owned by the town or to which the public has free access
to a park.
REGULATED TREE. Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a D.B.H.
of two inches or more and usually has one main stem or trunk. It may appear to have several
stems or trunks as in some species of trees, but must have one defined main stem (trunk) of a
D.B.H. of two inches.
REMOVE (including removing and removal). The cutting down of any regulated tree
and all other acts which cause the actual removal or the effective removal through damaging,
poisoning or other direct or indirect actions resulting in the death of a tree.
STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying
between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the town.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91; Am. Ord., passed 10-9-95)
§ 98.02 AUTHORITY OF TOWN TO PLANT, MAINTAIN OR REMOVE.
(A) The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants
and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as
may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds.
(B) The Tree Board may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which may be reason of its nature be injurious to
sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected
with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91)
§ 98.03 OFFICIAL STREET TREE SPECIES.
(A) The Tree Board is responsible for establishing a special list of street tree species.
The following is a list of the official street trees species as established by the Tree Board:
(1) Small trees: Dogwood, Carolina Cherry Laurel, Crepe Myrtle, Redbud,
Bartlet Pear, Kousa Dogwood, Flowering Crabapple and Flowering Peach.
(2) Medium trees: Japanese Maple, Holly American and Yaupon.
(3) Large trees: Pin Oak, Red Oak, Red maple, Sugar Maple, River Birch,
White Pine, Poplar, Willow Oak, White Oak and Longleaf Pine.
(B) The list may be reviewed periodically to add or delete certain species.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91)
§ 98.04 SPACING.
The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species-size classes list in
§ 98.03 and may not be planted closer together than the following: for small trees, 25 feet; for
medium trees, 40 feet; and for large trees, 50 feet; except with respect to special plantings
designed to approved by a landscape architect or the town’s Beautification Director.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.05 PLANTING NEAR STREET CORNER OR FIRE HYDRANT.
No street tree shall be planted closer than 25 feet from any street corner, measured from
the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street trees shall be planted closer than 10
feet from any hydrant.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.06 UTILITY LINES OR WIRES.
No street tree other than those species listed as small trees in § 98.03 may be planted
under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five lateral feet of
any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.07 TREE TOPPING.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or town department to top
any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. TOPPING is defined as the severe
cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to such
a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by
storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other
pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the
Tree Board.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.08 PRUNING.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the town shall
prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or
obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet
above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Such owners shall remove all dad, diseased or
dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public.
The town shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes
with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with the visibility
of any traffic-control device or sign.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.09 DEAD OR DISEASED TREES.
The town shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on
private property within the town when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property or
harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the town. The
Tree Board will notify, in writing, the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by the
owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service to notice. If owners fail to
comply with such provisions, the town shall have the authority to remove the trees and charge
the cost of removal on the owner’s property tax notice.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91)
State law reference:
Authority to abate public health nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193
§ 98.10 STUMPS.
All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so
that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 98.11 RETENTION AND PROTECTION OF LARGE TREES.
(A) Every development shall retain all existing trees twelve inches in diameter or
more and no tree twelve inches in diameter or greater shall be removed from the public right-ofway
unless the retention of such trees would, in the opinion of the staff, unreasonably burden the
development, landowner or maintenance of utilities.
(B) No excavation or other subsurface disturbance may be undertaken within four feet
of any tree twelve inches in diameter or more, and no impervious surface (including, but not
limited to, paving or buildings) may be located within four feet of any tree twelve inches in
diameter (measured at a height of 4.5 feet above ground level) or more unless compliance with
this subsection would unreasonably burden the development.
(C) The retention or protection of trees twelve inches in diameter or more as provided
in subsections (A) and (B) unreasonably burdens a development if, to accomplish such retention
or protection, the desired location of improvements on a lot or the proposed activities on a lot
would have to be substantially altered and such alteration would work an unreasonable hardship
upon the developer or landowner.
(D) If space that would otherwise be devoted to parking cannot be so used because of
the requirements of subsections (A) and (B), and, as a result, the parking requirements set forth
in § 155.120 cannot be satisfied, the number of required spaces may be reduced by the number of
spaces “lost” because of the provisions of subsections (A) and (B), up to a maximum of 15% of
the required spaces.
(Ord., passed 10-9-95)
§ 98.12 CLEARING OF PROPERTY.
Property cleared for development or timber purposes shall normally retain a thirty foot
buffer of existing vegetation in an undisturbed state until such time as the property is proposed
for development and a site development plan has been approved. Once property is proposed for
development a site plan review shall be prepared and submitted and the area and extent of the
buffer may be modified based on zoning, landscaping, setback or other considerations.
(Ord., passed 10-9-95)
TREE BOARD
§ 98.25 CREATION; ORGANIZATION.
(A) There is hereby created and established a Tree Board which shall consist of the
members of the Town Appearance Commission.
(B) The term of office of persons appointed as members of the Tree Board shall be
the same as the terms of the members of the Appearance Commission.
(C) Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.
(D) The Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations
and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the member shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91)
§ 98.26 POWERS AND DUTIES.
It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate, counsel, develop
and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in
other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the Town Commissioners and upon
its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive town tree plan for the
town. The Tree Board, when requested by the Town Commissioners, shall consider, investigate,
make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or questions coming within the
scope of its work.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91)
§ 98.27 AUTHORITY OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS TO REVIEW
TREE BOARD DECISIONS.
The Town Board of Commissioners shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Tree Board
to the Town Board of Commissioners who may hear the matter and make final decision.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91)
§ 98.28 INTERFERENCE WITH TREE BOARD OR ITS AGENTS
PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Board or
any of its agents while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning,
spraying or removing of any such street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds as authorized
by this chapter.
(Ord., passed 5-13-91) Penalty, see § 10.99
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SALES OF MERCHANDISE ON RESIDENTIAL PREMISES
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an
individual or members of his residence and acquired in a normal course of living in or
maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or
obtained on consignment; nor does it include items made specifically for sale. (Example: No
yard sale will be allowed for selling of crafts only.)
YARD SALES. Any sale open to the public conducted on residential premises only for
the purpose of disposing of personal property and shall include all sales entitled garage, lawn,
yard, attic, porch, room, back yard, patio or rummage sales.
(Ord., passed 7-14-86)
§ 99.02 APPLICATION.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect persons selling goods pursuant
to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction or persons acting in accordance with their powers
and duties as public officials.
(Ord., passed 7-14-86)
§ 99.03 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall conduct any yard sale or garage sale without first obtaining a permit
therefore from the town. All such sales shall be subject to the following rules and regulations:
(A) Permit Required. No sale shall be conducted until a permit has been obtained
from the Town Clerk. Prior to issuance of any permit, the individual desiring to conduct the sale
shall file a written application with the Town Clerk at least five days before the sale, setting forth
the following information:
(1) Full name and address of applicant;
(2) The location of residence where the sale will be held;
(3) The dates of the sale, whether one or two days;
(4) The dates of any other sales within the current calendar year; and
(5) An affirmative statement that the property to be sold is owned by the
applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired not consigned for the purpose of
resale.
(B) Fee. There shall be an administrative process fee of $5 for the issuance of the
permit. No more than tow permits shall be issued to one residence or family household during
the calendar year. If members of more than one residence join in for a sale, each separate
residence must obtain a permit.
(C) Hours of operation; time of sale. The time of the sale will be limited to daylight
hours of two consecutive days. If the sale is not held because of inclement weather the Town
Clerk may issue another permit to be used on a specified date within 30 days of the original date.
In this case no additional permit fee will be charged.
(D) Display of permit. The permit shall be posted on the premises where the sale is
authorized, where it can be seen from the street by the public.
(E) Advertising and signs. No sign shall be exhibited for more than two days before
the sale. No signs shall be on utility poles or other private property. All signs must be removed
each day at the close of the sale, regardless of where located. No more than two signs may be
used on the site of sale. All signs must comply with town ordinances. (See §§ 155.135 through
155.145.)
(F) Revocation of refusal of permit. Any permit issued may be revoked or any
application may be refused by the Town Clerk, if the application submitted contains any false,
fraudulent or misleading statements. If any individual is convicted of an offense under this
chapter, the Town Clerk may not issue that individual another sale permit for a period of tow
years from the date of conviction. (Ord., passed 7-14-86) Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.04 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
No permit holder shall allow loud or boisterous conduct or allow vehicles to impede the
passage of normal traffic. All individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of the Police
Department in order to maintain the Public Health Safety and Welfare.
(Ord., passed 7-14-86) Penalty, see § 99.99
§ 99.05 RIGHT OF INSPECTION; VIOLATION.
A police officer shall have ht right of entry to any premises showing evidences of a sale
for the purpose of enforcement or inspection. The officer may stop the sale and take steps as are
necessary against any individual who violates the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord., passed 7-14-86)
§ 99.06 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) Any sale conducted by a duly licensed merchant or other business establishment
from or at a place of business, wherein such sale will be permitted by the zoning regulations of
the town.
(B) Any bona fide charitable or educational organization where the proceeds from the
sale are used directly for the organization’s charitable purposes.
(Ord., passed 7-14-86)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
(A) The violation of any provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days,
as provided by law.
(B) Each day a sale is conducted in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
distinct offense.
(Ord., passed 7-14-86)
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 100:
FIRE, SMOKE, BUGLARY, AND ROBBERY SYSTEMS REGULATIONS.
§ 100.01 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is the establish regulations governing fire, smoke, burglary,
and robbery alarm systems requiring response thereto by the Town Police Department and Fire
Department. The terms of this chapter shall in no way prohibit alarm companies from providing
service by private source to other offices with or outside the town.
(Adopted: 5-1-07)
§ 100.02 Definitions.
Alarm Business. The business by any individual, partnership, or corporation servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm system, or causing to be sold,
leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in
or on any building, structure, or facility, and shall not include any other activity of the business.
Alarm Installation. Any alarm device or combination of devices installed for one or
more buildings.
Alarm Systems. Any electronic or mechanical device which emits any signal
(electronic, visible, audible, silent, recorded, or otherwise) which is designed, intended, or used
to detect a fire, smoke, unauthorized entry into a building, structure, or premises, to signal an
attempted robbery or holdup, or to alert others of a fire, smoke, or commission of unlawful act in
or around a building, structure, or premises.
Alarm User. Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental or
educational entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained for the protection of the premises.
Automatic Dialing Service. Any type of device which automatically sends signals over
regular telephone lines as opposed to dedication premises.
Chief of Police. The Chief of Police of the Town of Aberdeen Police Department or
his/her designee.
Dedicated Alarm Line. A special leased telephone line circuit maintained for the sole
purpose of transmitting alarm signals.
Digital Alarm. An alarm system which automatically send signals over regular
telephone lines connected to a digital receiving consol, as opposed to a telephone hand set.
Digital Connecting Alarm. An alarm utilizing dedicated alarm lines to connect to a
remote console.
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief of the Town of Aberdeen Fire Department or his/her
designee.
Local Alarm. An alarm or device which produces a signal not connecting in any way to
any alarm monitoring centers, such as store or home burglar alarms actuating bell devices.
Tape Dialer Alarm. An alarm system which automatically send a signal over regu;ar
telephone lines and plays a pre-recorded message.
(Adopted: 5-1-07)
§ 100.03 General Regulations.
A. The alarm user shall be responsible for knowing the contents of this chapter.
B. Alarm system may be connecting directly to a private alarm control center, or may be a
local alarm.
C. All automatic dialing devices shall conform with Section 100.5 of this chapter.
D. Local alarms shall be of a type that sounds for no more that 15 minutes.
E. Any alarm existing as of the effective date of this chapter shall also be governed by the
regulations of this chapter.
F. Each local alarm user shall furnish to the Town Police Department the name(s) and
telephone number(s) of at least one, but not more that three persons authorized and able
to deactivate the alarm system.
G. After the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to connect a local alarm
without first notifying the Town Police Department of the name(s) and telephone
number(s) of person(s) authorized and able to deactivate the alarm system. Any changes
in the name(s) or telephone number(s) of person(s) authorized and able to deactivate the
alarm system must be communicated to the Town Police Department immediately.
H. Alarm systems installed within the Town shall be equipped with an automatic bell time
cut-off module to prevent continuous alarm sounding when the user is unavailable to
manually silence the alarm.
I. Alarm systems installed after the effective date of this chapter will be required to have
reset capabilities, and to reset within 15 minutes. An alarm cut-off shall be installed to
override all malfunctioning alarms. Users whose alarm systems were installed prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall have one year form the effective date of this chapter to
convert their systems to comply with the provisions herein.
(Adopted: 5-1-07)
§ 100.04 Automatic Dialing Devices:
Interconnection to Police Department.
A. No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to any telephone numbers of the
Town of Aberdeen Police Department after the effective date of this chapter.
B. Within six months of the effective date of this chapter, all automatic dialing devices
interconnected to any telephone numbers of the Town of Aberdeen Police Department
shall be disconnected. The user of each such device shall be responsible for having the
device disconnected upon notification of the Chief of Police.
C. Each violation of this section shall be deemed a separate offense subject to penalties as
provided for in Section 10.98 of the Town Code of Ordinances.
(Adopted: 5-1-07)
§ 100.05 Alarm Responses.
A. If, within any 12-month period, beginning with the first response, the Town of Aberdeen
Police Department of the Town of Aberdeen Fire Department responds to three alarms at
the same premises or location where no evidence indicates that a fire occurred, smoke
was present, or an unauthorized entry, robbery, or other crime was committed of
attempted, the Chief of Police or Fire Chief shall send a letter to the alarm user informing
him/her of the alarm activations and responses encouraging the review or repair of the
alarm system.
B. If, within any 12-month period, beginning with the first response, the Town of Aberdeen
Police Department responds to a fourth or subsequent alarm at the same premises of
location where no evidence indicates that an unauthorized entry, robbery, or other crime
was committed or attempted, the alarm user shall reimburse the Town for the cost of
responding, at a flat rate of $50 for each response over four (4).
C. If within any 12-month period, beginning with the first response, the Town of Aberdeen
Fire Department responds to a fourth or subsequent alarm at the same premises or
location where no evidence indicated that a fire occurred or smoke is present, the alarm
user shall reimburse the Town for the cost of responding, at a flat rate of $50 for each
response over four (4).
D. The alarm user of his representative shall reset an alarm system when notified by the
Town of Aberdeen Police Department that the alarm has activated. When an alarm
sounds continuously for a period of sixty (60) minutes from the time officers or
firefighters respond to the alarm, due to failure of the alarm user or hi/her representative
to reset the alarm, every subsequent sixty (60) minute period or portion thereof that the
alarm continues to sound shall be deemed a separate alarm.
E. It is the intent of this chapter that the date of the first response to an alarm user shall
become the anniversary date for any 12-month period calculated herein, and upon each
anniversary date that alarm user’s number of responses shall be reduce to zero.
(Adopted: 5-1-07)
§ 100.06 Exclusions.
A. For the purpose of computing the number of responses in Section 100.05, an alarm shall
not include an alarm which is determined to have been activated by adverse weather
conditions, a failure in the electrical power to the alarm, or any other condition beyond
the control of the alarm user.
B. A local alarm activated during the alarm testing procedure shall not be considered al
alarm for the purpose of computing alarm responses, if the alarm user first notifies the
Town of Aberdeen Police Department.
(Adopted: 5-1-07)
§ 100.07 Authority to Waive Reimbursement
A. The Town of Aberdeen Manager or hi/her designee shall have the power to waive any fee
charged to an alarm user when the alarm user submits to the Manager or his/her designee
evidence that an alarm to which an officer responded was not the result of negligence or
evidence that indicates an unauthorized entry, robbery, or other crime was committed or
attempted.
(Adopted: 5-1-07)
§ 100.08 Prohibited Acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to activate a fire, smoke, burglary, or robbery alarm
for the purpose of summoning the Police when no burglary or robbery, or other crime
dangerous to life, is being committed or attempted on the premises; or otherwise to cause
a false alarm.
B. It shall be unlawful for an alarm user to fail to reimburse the Town of Aberdeen, in
accordance with Section 100.05, for alarm response(s) by the Town of Aberdeen Police
Department or Town of Aberdeen Fire Department.
C. Violations of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty as provided for in Section
10.98 of the Town Code of Ordinances.
(Adopted: 5-1-07)
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AGENT. The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or distributor.
BUSINESS. Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any
kind, subject by the provisions of this chapter, to a license tax.
ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS. Engaged in the business as owner or operator.
FISCAL YEAR. The period beginning on July 1 and ending June 30 next following.
QUARTER. Any three consecutive months beginning with July 1 of a give fiscal year
and ending June 30 of that fiscal year.
(’75 Code, § 11-1)
§ 110.02 LICSNSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or servant to engage in or carry on a
business in the town for which there is required a license, without first having paid the license
tax required by this chapter and obtained the license. For the purpose of this section, the opening
of a place of business or offering to sell followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing
in furtherance of the business shall be construed to be engaging in or carrying on such business.
(’75 Code, § 11-1) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.03 LICENSE TAX REQUIRED FOR EACH BUSINESS.
The payment of any particular tax imposed by this chapter shall not relieve the person
paying the same from the payment of any other tax imposed by this chapter for any other
business he may carry on, unless so provided by the section imposing such tax. License taxes
prescribed by various sections of this chapter applicable to any business shall be cumulative
except where otherwise specifically provided.
(’75 Code, § 11-3)
§ 110.04 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business shall be valid only for the
business conducted at the place and by the licensee named therein. Every person doing business
in more than one factory, mill, warehouse, store, stall, stand or other place of business shall
secure a separate license for each such place of business, unless such places of business are
contiguous, communicate directly with and open into each other and are operated as a unit. If
the business is moved or if the licensee sells to another, then a new license shall be required,
unless a special permit to continue business under the original license is obtained from the Board
of Commissioners.
(’75 Code, § 11-4)
§ 110.05 OPERATION OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISE WITHOUT FRANCHISE
PROHIBITED.
No person shall operate an enterprise as designated by G.S. § 160A-311 within the town
without first obtaining a franchise from the town, nor shall any person continue to operate such
enterprise after the expiration of such franchise, except as provided by law.
(’75 Code, § 11-1) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.06 TAX LEVIED; LICENSES GRANTED SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS
OF CODE.
(A) In addition to the tax on property there is hereby levied and collected annually, or
more often where provided for, a privilege license tax on trades, professions, agencies, business
operations, exhibitions, circuses and all subjects authorized to be licensed, as set out in this
chapter.
(B) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the Board of
Commissioners from imposing, from time to time as they may see fit, such license taxes as are
not specifically herein defined or from increasing or decreasing the amount of any special license
tax or from prohibiting or regulating the business or acts licensed.
(C) All licenses granted shall be subject to the provisions of this Code, existing
ordinances or those thereafter enacted.
(’75 Code, § 11-1)
§ 110.07 TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a personal privilege and shall not be
transferable.
(’75 Code, § 11-6)
§ 110.08 TERM OF LICENSE.
All taxes and licenses provided for and fixed in this chapter shall be for the 12 months of
a given fiscal year, unless otherwise specified.
(’75 Code, § 11-7)
§ 110.09 DISPLAY REQUIRED.
Every license shall be prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee or, if
the licensee has no fixed place of business, such license shall be kept wherever such business is
being operated and where it can be inspected at any time by the proper town official.
(’75 Code, § 11-8) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.10 REBATE AND REFUNDS.
No license tax shall be abated nor shall any refund of any part thereof be made in any
case where the licensee discontinues his business before the end of the period for which such
license was issued.
(’75 Code, § 11-9)
§ 110.11 SCHEDULE OF TAXES.
(A) The amount of the license tax levied on each trade, profession, agency, business
or other subject shall be as is determined by the Board of Commissioners and the regulations of
the “N.C. City and County Privilege License Taxes” as published by the N.C. Institute of
Government.
(B) Any such schedule of license taxes shall be maintained on file in the office of the
Town Clerk where they shall be available for public inspection during the regular office hours of
the Town Clerk.
(’75 Code, § 11-10)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 111.01 CONSUMPTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume beer, wine or any other
intoxicating beverage on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park or any other public property
within the corporate limits of the town whether in a vehicle or on foot, except during an event at
the Aberdeen Lake Recreation Station or as part of a special event, as that term is defined in
section 96.16. Events held at the Aberdeen Lake Recreation Station shall be held in accordance
with the rules and policies established by the town. Special events permits shall be issued in
accordance with sections 96.16 through 96.31.
(Ord., passed 6-9-2008; Amended 6-29-15) Penalty, see § 10.99
GENERAL PROVISIONS
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
GAME ROOMS
§ 112.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
(A) GAME ROOM. Any place of business that principally operates mechanical
games or pay devices or tables for which charge is made directly or indirectly.
(B) Examples of game rooms are, but not limited to, poolrooms, bowling alleys,
billiard halls, amusement centers, miniature golf courses and the like.
(Ord., passed 7-11-83)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) Every operator of a game room shall be required to pay a privilege license tax in
accordance with the privilege license ordinance of the town.
(B) Every operator of a game room shall apply for and obtain a license from the Town
Clerk, with an investigation made by the Police Department to operate a game room. Application
for such a license shall be made upon forms provided by the Town Clerk.
(C) It shall be unlawful to operate a game room within the town without a license.
(Ord., passed 7-11-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.03 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
The Town Board shall not issue a license to any applicant who:
(A) Has been convicted of unlawfully selling intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs.
(B) Is a habitual user of alcoholic beverages or narcotics drugs.
(Ord., passed 7-11-83)
§ 112.04 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
Licensees under this chapter shall not, and neither shall their employees:
(A) Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become disorderly; or permit any
profane, obscene or indecent language thereon.
(B) Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any time; nor the sale
or use of any racing, football or any parlay cards or gambling boards or devices.
(C) Employ in carrying on the business any person who has been convicted of
unlawfully selling alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs.
(Ord., passed 7-11-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.05 RULES FOR OPERATION.
The following rules shall be observed by all operators of game rooms within the town:
(A) All game rooms shall be closed form 12:00 midnight Saturday night until 1:00
p.m. Sunday.
(B) No play on any game shall be allowed during the times when game rooms are
required by this chapter to be closed.
(C) No loud noises shall be allowed to emanate beyond the licensed premises.
(D) No beer, wine or liquor shall be possessed or consumed upon the premises where
any game room regulated under this subchapter is operated.
(E) No permit and license shall be issued for a game room where any part of the
property upon which the business is to be operated is within 150 feet of the property line of any
established church.
(F) It shall be unlawful for the owner of a game room to knowingly allow a person
under the age of eighteen to enter or remain on such premises when the manager or owner of
such premises has been notified in writing by the parents or guardian of such persons not to
allow such person to enter or remain on such premises.
(G) A copy of divisions (A) through (F) of this section will be posted in the business
so that it is visible to all people who patronize the business.
(Ord., passed 7-11-83) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.06 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
After giving the owner of a game room adequate notice and an opportunity to be heard,
the Town Board may revoke the license of any game room owner who:
(A) Violates the provisions of this chapter; or
(B) Is convicted of unlawfully selling or giving of alcoholic beverages or narcotic
drugs.
(Ord., passed 7-11-83)
POOLROOMS
§ 112.15 SALE OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES;
GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
(A) No beer or wine shall be sold and no beer, wine or whiskey shall be consumed
upon the premises where any business regulated under this chapter is operated.
(B) No gambling in any form shall be permitted on any such premises.
(’75 Code, § 21-2) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.16 PROXIMITY TO CHURCHES.
No permit and license shall be issued for the operation of any billiard or pool tables for
any establishment where any part of the property upon which the business is to be operated is
within 150 feet of the property line of any established church.
(’75 Code, § 21-3)
§ 112.17 PRESENCE OF MINORS.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a poolroom or parlor or place where pool is played
to knowingly allow a person under 18 years of age to enter or remain on such premises when the
manager or owner of such premises has been notified in writing by the parents or guardian of
such person not to allow such person to enter or remain in such premises.
(’75 Code, § 21-4) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.18 POSTING OF REGULATIONS.
A copy of §112.17 shall be posted in an appropriate place in any establishment affected
thereby.
(’75 Code, § 21-6) Penalty, see § 10.99
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
PAWNBROKERS
§ 113.01 LICENSE, BOND REQUIRED.
(A) No person, partnership, corporation or association shall operate a pawnshop
unless such person, partnership, corporation or association shall have first applied for a received
a privilege license from the Town Clerk. A separate license shall be required for each location,
place or premises used for the conduct of a pawnshop and each license shall designate the
location, place or premises to which it applies. In addition, each business shall not be carried on
or conducted in any other place than that designated in or by such license.
(B) Every person, firm or corporation licensed under this chapter shall, at the time of
receiving the license, file with the Town Clerk a bond payable to the town in the sum of $5,000
to be executed by the licensee and by two responsible sureties or a surety company licensed to do
such business in this state, to be approved by the town, which shall be for eth faithful
performance of the requirements and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed. The
town may sue for forfeiture of the bond upon a breach thereof. Any person who obtains a
judgment against a pawnbroker and upon which judgment execution is returned unsatisfied may
maintain an action in his own name upon the bond, to satisfy the judgment. (G.S. § 91A-14)
(Ord., passed 5-25-81) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.02 EMPLOYEES TO REGISTER WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Every employee of a pawnshop shall, within five days of being employed, register his
name and address with the Police Department and have his thumbprints, fingerprints and
photograph taken by the Police Department. Such employee shall be issued by the Police
Department a certificate of compliance with this section upon payment of the amount due a per
the fee schedule on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord., passed 5-25-81) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE.
(A) Any person applying to the Town Clerk for a license to conduct the business of a
pawn shop shall pay a fee as is on file in the office of the Town Clerk to the town to compensate
the town for the cost of investigatingthe applicant’s criminal record and character. The applicant
shall report to the Police Department and furnish his full name, address, physical description,
age, North Carolina driver’s license (if applicable) and social security number. In addition, the
applicant shall be photographed and fingerprinted in order to facilitate the investigation.
(B) In the event the applicant is a partnership or association, all persons owning or
having an interest therein shall pay to the town the investigation fee as is on file in the office of
the Town Clerk and comply with provisions of division (A) above.
(C) In the case of a corporate applicant, each stockholder owning 10% or more of the
corporation’s common stock shall pay to the town the investigation fee as is on file in the office
of the Town Clerk and comply with the provisions of division (A) above.
(Ord., passed 5-25-81)
§ 113.04 QUALIFICATIONS FOR LICENSE.
In order to qualify for a pawnbroker license a person must be a resident of Moore County
and have been a resident for 12 months.
(Ord., passed 5-25-81)
§ 113.05 COOPERATION WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
Any and all pawnshop operators shall totally cooperate with and assist the Police
Department and the County Sheriff’s Office at all times.
(Ord., passed 5-25-81) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.06 STOLEN GOODS.
(A) If at any time a pawnshop operator has any reason to believe that he has received
stolen goods he is required to notify the Police Department immediately.
(B) In the event an item which is believed stolen is located in a pawnshop and this
item is required as evidence, the pawnbroker shall release to the police, upon their request, said
item.
(Ord., passed 5-25-81) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.07 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Violation of any one of these ordinances shall be grounds for revocation of the
pawnbroker license.
(Ord., passed 5-25-81)
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
REGULARLY ESTABLISHED PLACE OF BUSINESS. A place of business open to
the public at least two days a week for not less than four hours daily and having one or more
persons in charge thereof, at which place the same person has the intent to continue in business
for at least six consecutive months.
(’75 Code, § 18-1)
§ 114.02 TELEPHONE SOLICITATION.
(A) No solicitor, peddler, promoter, vendor or any other person in the town shall use
any telephone in the town for the purpose of contacting another person in the town to offer for
sale or sell products or services or to promote by any plan, scheme, device or means, any
commercial or business plan, project or venture without having been requested or invited to do
so by the person called or without the existence, prior to the enactment of this section, of a
current business or commercial relationship between the person making such use of a telephone
and the person to whom the call is placed.
(B) The actions prohibited by this section are hereby declared to be a nuisance and
may be abated as such.
(’75 Code, § 18-2) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 114.03 SOLICITATION OF PRIVATE RESIDENCES.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of going in and upon any
private residence in the municipality by solicitors, agents, representatives, peddlers, hawkers,
itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited to
do so by the owners or occupants of such private residence for the purpose of soliciting orders
for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or
hawking the same or soliciting orders for goods or services or for future completion or
continuation.
(’75 Code, § 18-2.1)(Ord., passed 10-13-75) Penalty, see § 10.98
ITINERANT PHOTOGRAPHERS
§ 114.10 LICENSE REQUIRED.
Every person engaged in the practice of photography, but having no regularly established
place of business located in this or another state, and who personally or through officers,
employees, agents or servants goes from town to town or from place to place within this
municipality soliciting the making of photographic pictures or reproductions with a view to
selling same, shall apply for and obtain from the Town Clerk a license for the privilege of
engaging in such business in the town, for each individual photographer, agent, servant,
representative or employee so engaged.
(’75 Code, § 18-3) Penalty, see 10.98
§ 114.11 APPLICABILITY OF LICENSE TAX.
The license tax imposed by this subchapter shall apply to every person who practices the
profession or occupation of an itinerant photographer in this town, whether as principal, officer,
employee, agent or servant, and whether engaged in soliciting or in one or more of the operations
involved in the making of photographic pictures or reproductions.
(’75 Code, § 18-4)
§ 114.12 STATE LICENSE REQUIRED.
The Town Clerk shall issue a license only to such persons who have been issued similar
licenses by the state Department of Revenue.
(’75 Code, § 18-5)
BOOK OR MAGAZINE SALES
§ 114.20 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall go from house to house or from place to place within the town and sell or
solicit orders for books, magazines or periodicals of any kind or subscriptions thereto, with out
first having obtained a permit to do so as provided in this subchapter.
(’75 Code, § 18-6) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 144.21 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ISSUANCE.
(A) Any person desiring to engage in the business described in § 114.20 shall, before
engaging in such business, file an application for a permit to do so with the Town Clerk.
(B) The application shall state the applicant’s name, age, sex, race, business and
residence addresses and the name and address of the applicant’s employer and shall furnish at
least three references, satisfactory to the Town Clerk, as to the applicant’s character.
(C) The application shall state the length of time for which the permit is requested,
shall be in writing and shall be sworn to.
(D) After investigation of the application by the Town Clerk, if the same is approved,
the Town Clerk shall issue to the applicant a permit, which shall be signed by the Town Clerk,
authorizing the applicant to engage in the business described in § 114.20 for the period of time
therein stated.
(’75 Code, § 18-7)
CHARITABLE SOLICITATION
§ 114.30 PERMIT REQUIRED.
Before any person directly or indirectly solicits money, donations or money, property or
financial assistance of any kind, or sells or offers for sale any article, tag, service emblem,
publication, ticket, advertisement, subscription or anything of value on the plea or representation
that such sale or solicitation or the proceeds thereof is for a charitable, religious, patriotic,
educational or philanthropic purpose on the streets in any office or business building, by houseto-
house canvas or in any other private or public place by telephone, personal solicitation, by
mail or in any other way in the city, such person shall first apply for and obtain a permit to
engage in such solicitation in the manner and under the provisions set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 114.31 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Application for a permit to solicit for any cause whatever as provided in § 114.30 shall be
sworn to and addressed to the town and filed with the Town Clerk who shall have authority to
require any or all of the following information:
(A) Name of the organization applying for a permit to solicit and the address of its
headquarters.
(B) Names and addresses of the organization’s principal officers and management.
(C) The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made and the use or disposition to
be made of any receipts therefrom.
(D) The name of the persons by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be
disbursed.
(E) The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting
the solicitations.
(F) An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitations.
(G) The time when solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the
beginning and ending of such solicitations.
(H) The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be
expended or paid to anyone in connection with such solicitation, together with the manner in
which such wages, fees, expenses, commissions or emoluments are to be expended, to whom to
be paid and the amount thereof.
(I) A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for
the purposes set out in § 114.30, by the persons seeking a permit for such solicitations; the
statement giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it and the final
distribution thereof.
(J) A full statement of the character and extent of the patriotic, charitable,
educational, religious or philanthropic work being done by the applicant or person within the
town.
(K) Such other information as may be required by the Town Clerk in order for the
Town Clerk to determine fully the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and whether
such solicitation is in the interest of, or inimical, to the public welfare.
(L) A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted it will not be used or
represented in ay way as an endorsement by the town.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76)
§ 114.32 INVESTIGATION; INSURANCE; TERM; TRANSFER.
Upon receipt of the written and sworn-to application as provided in § 114.31, the Town
Clerk shall make or cause to be made, such investigation as shall be deemed necessary in regard
thereto, and if satisfied that such solicitation is to be for a bona fide charitable, religious,
patriotic, education or philanthropic purpose, that such solicitation is prompted solely by a desire
to finance the cause in question, that the organization for which solicitation is to be conducted is
under the control and supervision of responsible and reliable persons, tehat the cost of raising the
funds shall be reasonable, and that such solicitation will not be detrimental to the general welfare
of the community, then the Town Clerk shall issue such permit. Such permit shall be
nontransferable and shall not run for more than the period stated in the certificate issued by the
Town Clerk.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76)
§ 114.33 EXTENSION OF TERM OF PERMIT.
The Town Clerk upon receipt of an application in writing for extension stating the
grounds thereof, may extend a permit issued under this subchapter for such reasonable additional
period as, in the judgment of the Town Clerk may be necessary for the proper conduct of such
solicitation.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76)
§ 114.34 REPORTS AND INFORMATION REQUIRED FROM
PERMITTEES.
The Town Clerk may require from the holder of a permit issued under this subchapter
any reports or information at such times and intervals, as in the discretion of the Town Clerk,
shall be necessary for the proper administration of this subchapter and the public welfare of the
town.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76)
§ 114.35 COPY OF PERMIT TO BE PROVIDED OT POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
The Town Clerk shall furnish to the Police Department, within 48 hours after the
issuance thereof, a copy of each permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76)
§ 114.36 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
The Town Clerk may revoke in accordance with this section, any permit that may have
been granted as provided in this subchapter. If, upon the receipt of written information or upon
his own investigation, the Town Clerk shall find that any agent or representative of the permittee
is misrepresenting or making untrue statements with regard to the solicitations or the purposes
thereof, or has made untrue statements in the application, or that in any other way the solicitation
has been conducted or is being conducted in violation of any part of this subchapter or in a
manner inimical or detrimental to the public welfare of the community, the Town Clerk shall
give the permit holder 12 hours notice in writing that a hearing is to be had upon the question of
revoking the permit. At such hearing the Town Clerk shall ascertain the facts. If the Town Clerk
shall find that any of the provisions of this subchapter have been or are being violated, that any
agent or representative of the permittee is or has been making misrepresentations with regard to
the solicitations or the purposes thereof, that untrue statements are made in the application, or
that the solicitation is being conducted or has been conducted in violation of this subchapter or in
such way or manner as to be inimical or detrimental to the public welfare of the community, the
permittee in question and his agents, employees and representative shall, from that time, have no
authority or right to make any further solicitations under the permit and the permit shall be null
and void. The permittee shall have the right to appeal from the action of the Town Clerk within
the time and in the manner set forth in § 114.37.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76)
§ 114.37 APPEAL FROM DECISIONS OF TOWN CLERK.
Any applicant or permittee under this subchapter may appeal to the Town Board of
Commissioners from any final decision or final action of the Town Clerk; provided notice of
such appeal is duly filed in writing by such appellant with the Town Clerk within ten days after
notice by the appellant of such decision or action from which an appeal is desired. Such notice
of appeal shall be signed by the appellant or his attorney and shall contain a clear and concise
statement of the grounds upon which such appeal is based. Failure to prefect such appeal within
the time and in the manner provided for in this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to
appeal. Upon any such appeal’s being duly filed in property time in writing as provided in this
section, the Town Clerk shall bring the appeal to the attention of the Town Board at its next
regular meeting which may be held after the receipt of the notice of appeal by the Town Clerk, at
which time the Town Board shall pass upon the appeal and may reverse, affirm or modify the
decision of the Town Clerk appealed from, may remand the case to the Town Clerk for further
proceedings, or may refer the entire matter to a committee of the Town Board before taking final
action upon the appeal, all as in the proper judicial discretion of the Town Board may appear to
be just, fair and reasonable according to the facts and circumstances involved on the appeal.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76)
§ 114.38 USE OF PERMIT AS ENDORSEMENT UNLAWFUL.
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit issued under this subchapter of for
any agent, member or representative thereof, to advertise, represent of hold out in any manner
that the permit is an endorsement of the holder by the Town Clerk or by the town; provided, that
it shall be lawful for a permit holder to use, advertise and hold out the fact of its permit in the
following words and no other: “Ordinance Requiring Permits for Solicitation: Permit No.___”
including the serial number of its permit.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 114.39 EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS.
The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:
(A) Solicitations of any established church within the town, society, association or
corporation where the solicitation of such organization shall be conducted exclusively among the
members thereof by other members or officers thereof voluntary and without remuneration for
such solicitations, or where such solicitations may be had in the form of collections or
contributions at the regular meetings, exercises or services of such organization or branch
thereof.
(B) Magazines, newspapers and periodicals published and sold by any educational
institutions located within the county.
(C) Any organization which may be a participating agency of the United Fund at the
time of such solicitation.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76)
§ 114.40 VIOLATIONS.
Any person or any agent or representative thereof, violating any of the provisions of this
subchapter or knowingly filing or causing to be filed, a false affidavit in connection with the
application provided in § 114.31, or representing in ay way that any permit granted hereunder is
an endorsement of such solicitation shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord., passed 2-9-76) Penalty, see § 10.98
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SECONDHAND ARTICLE. An article which has been used or which has been
previously traded or sold by a retailer. For purposes of this chapter, the term SECONDHAND
ARTICLE shall not include any coin or any gold or silver ingot or bar.
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL BUSINESS. Any person, firm, corporation or
association engaged in the business of purchasing, trading for or otherwise taking in ay
secondhand article made, in whole or in part, of gold silver or platinum.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person, partnership, corporation or association shall operate a secondhand precious
metal business as defined in § 115.01 unless such person, partnership, corporation or association
shall have first applied for and received a privilege license from the Town Clerk. A separate
license shall be required for each location, place or premises used for the conduct of a
secondhand precious metal business and each license shall designate the location, place or
premises to which it applies. In addition, such business shall not be carried on or conducted in
any other place than that designated in or by such license.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.03 EMPLOYEES TO REGISTER WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT.
Every employee of a secondhand precious metal business shall, within five days of being
employed, register his name and address with the Police Department and have his thumbprints,
fingerprints and photograph taken by the Police Department. Such employee shall be issued by
the Police Department a certificate of Compliance with this section upon his payment of the fee
as per the fee schedule on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80) Penalty, see §10.99
§ 115.04 BOND.
Before a license shall be issued to a secondhand precious metal business, the applicant
shall file with the Town Clerk a bond payable to the town in the sum of $10,000 to be executed
by the applicant and by two responsible sureties, or a surety company licensed to do business in
the state, to be approved by such Town Clerk, which said bond should be for the faithful
performance of the requirements and obligations set forth in this chapter. The Town Board of
Commissioners shall have full power and authority to revoke such license and sue for forfeiture
of the bond upon a breach of any provision of this chapter. Any person who obtains a judgment
against a secondhand precious metal business and upon which judgment execution is retuned
unsatisfied, may maintain an action in his own name upon the said bond of secondhand precious
metal business in any court having jurisdiction of the amount demanded, to satisfy said
judgment.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80)
§ 115.05 INVESTIGATION FEE.
(A) Any person applying to the Town Clerk for a license to conduct the business of a
secondhand precious metal dealer shall pay a fee as per the fee schedule on file in the office of
the Town Clerk to the Town to compensate the town for the cost of investigating the applicant’s
criminal record and character. The applicant shall report to the Police Department and furnish
his full name, address, physical description, age, North Carolina driver’s license (if applicable)
and social security number. In addition, the applicant shall be photographed and fingerprinted in
order to facilitate the investigation.
(B) In the event the applicant is a partnership or association, all persons owning or
having interest therein shall pay to the town the investigation fee and comply with the provisions
of division (A) above.
(C) In the case of a corporate applicant, each stockholder owning 10% or more of the
corporation’s common stock shall pay to the town the investigation fee and comply with the
provisions of division (A) above.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80)
§ 115.06 DENIAL OF LICENSE; REVOCATION.
(A) No privilege license shall be issued to any applicant if any of the persons required
to be investigated under § 115.05 above has been convicted of any felony or a crime involving
fraud, theft or receiving or possession of stolen property in the five years immediately preceding
the date of the license application.
(B) The conviction of any person required to be investigated under § 115.05 above,
for any felony or for any crime involving fraud, theft or receiving or possession of stolen
property or for any violation of this chapter shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation by
the Town Board of Commissioners of the privilege license issued to such secondhand precious
metal business.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80)
§ 115.07 RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS TO BE KEPT.
(A) Every secondhand precious metal business shall deep a tightly bound book or
books, no looseleaf, with pages numbered in sequence, in which there shall be legibly written at
the time of any transaction with a local non-licensee involving the purchasing of, trading for or
taking in of any secondhand article made, in whole or in part, of gold, silver or platinum, the
following information:
(1) An account and description of the item(s), article(s) or thing(s) purchased,
traded for or taken in, including, if applicable, the manufacturer’s name, the model, the model
number, the serial number and any engraved number(s), initial(s) or marking(s);
(2) The amount of money involved in the transaction or any item offered in
trade;
(3) The date of the transaction;
(4) The name and residence of the person involved in the transaction with the
secondhand precious metal business, along with the person’s date of birth and general physical
description, including their hair color and approximate height and weight; and
(5) A mutation whether the item(s), article(s) or thing(s) are stored on the
licensed premises or elsewhere.
(B) No transaction involving purchasing, trading for or taking in a secondhand article
made, in whole or in part, of gold, silver or platinum shall be completed by any secondhand
precious metal business or an agent or employee thereof until the person involved in the
transaction presents two forms of positive identification, at least one of which is a photographic
representation imprinted thereon. This identification information shall be recorded next to the
person’s name and residence in the books required to be kept pursuant to division (A) above.
(C) The book(s) required by this section shall be a permanent record to be kept at all
times on the premises of the secondhand precious metal business. Such book(s) shall be made
available during regular business hours to any law enforcement officer. A full and accurate copy
of the records required to be kept by this section shall be filed with the Police Department within
48 hours of the transaction.
(D) The book(s) must be kept for a period of one year by the licensee.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.08 INSPECTION OF ARTICLES BY LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES.
Every secondhand precious metal business must keep all secondhand articles made, in
whole or in part, of gold, silver or platinum, open to inspection by any law enforcement officer at
reasonable times for a period of seven days within the territorial jurisdiction of the town. During
this period, the appearance of such articles shall not be altered in any way. A secondhand
precious metal business is not prohibited from selling or arranging to sell or trade such articles
during the seven day period as long as such articles remain in its possession as required by this
chapter.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.09 PURCHASE FROM MINORS.
No secondhand precious metal business or employee or agent thereof shall purchase from
any person under 18 years of age any secondhand article made, in whole or in part, of gold,
silver or platinum without the written consent of that person’s parent or guardian.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.10 BUSINESS TO BE CONDUCTED ONLY ON LICENSED
PREMISES.
No secondhand precious metal business shall make use of any property or premises not
included within the premises designated in or by the license required by this chapter, for the
display of any secondhand article, made in whole or in part, of gold, silver or platinum, or the for
the conduct of a secondhand precious metal business. This chapter does not prohibit the storage
or safekeeping of any such secondhand article off of the licensed premises, but it does prohibit
the sale, exchange or purchase of any secondhand precious metals out of any mobile home,
moveable business on wheels, motel room, apartment or dwelling place.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.11 ADVERTISEMENTS OT CONTAIN LICENSE NUMBER;
LICENSE FEE.
Any secondhand precious metal business approved for the conduct of its business
pursuant to this chapter shall set forth in all of its advertisements the license number given to it
by the town. The cost of the privilege license shall be such as is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk, and no portion thereof shall be prorated.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.12 VIOLATIONS.
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any person shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
(Ord., passed 12-23-80) Penalty, see § 10.99
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 116.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) No person shall operate or drive any vehicle for hire or taxicab carrying
passengers for hire from place to place within the town, unless that person shall have first
applied for and secured a permit for the operation of such vehicle for hire or taxicab.
(B) This section shall apply to an operator picking up a fare in town for the purpose of
transporting such fare to any place outside of the town.
(’75 Code, § 23-1) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 116.02 APPLICATION FOR AN ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; PRIVILEGE
LICENSE ALSO REQUIRED.
(A) Any person desiring to operate any vehicle for hire or taxicab carrying passengers
for hire within the town shall file a written application with the Town Clerk for a permit or
license for such business.
(1) After receiving such permit, such person shall file an additional
application for every additional motor vehicle or taxicab proposed to be used in connection with
such business on forms approved by the Town Clerk.
(2) The Town Clerk shall submit such application to the Chief of Police for
investigation.
(’75 Code, § 23-2)
(B) Upon issuance of a permit with approval of the Police Department, such person
shall also apply for a privilege license as required in Chapter 110 of this Code.
§ 116.03 INFORMATION TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION.
Each applicant for a permit to operate a motor vehicle under the provisions of this chapter
shall file with his application a record of his state chauffeur’s license and such other information
as the Board of Commissioners may require.
(’75 Code, § 23-3)
§ 116.04 REFUSAL OF ISSUE PERMIT; REVOCATION.
(A) The Chief of Police may refuse to issue any permit required in this chapter to any
person who has been convicted within five years prior to the date of the application, of any
alcohol or drug offense, of a felony, a violation of any prohibition, narcotic drugs or prostitution
laws or ordinances, or to any person who is a habitual user of intoxicating beverages or narcotic
drugs, or to any person who is a habitual violator of traffic laws or ordinances.
(B) The Chief of Police may revoke any driver’s permit, if the person to whom it was
issued is convicted of the violation of any such laws, and shall submit a report of such revocation
to the next meeting of the Board of Commissioners for action.
(’75 Code, § 23-4)
§ 116.05 DUTY OF OWNER TO REQUIRE LICENSING.
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or taxicab for hire shall require all drivers to
be properly licensed and to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(’75 Code, § 23-5) Penalty, see § 10.98
§ 116.06 INSURANCE.
The owner or operator of any motor vehicle or taxicab for hire shall furnish to the Town
Clerk evidence that he has in force such liability insurance as is required by state law.
(’75 Code, § 23-6)
§ 116.07 OBTAINING SERVICES FRAUDULENTLY.
Every person requesting a taxicab operator or driver to take him to a designated terminus
and refusing to pay the applicable fare or legitimate charge for carrying baggage, shall be
presumed to have fraudulently obtained such services with the intent to cheat the operator or
driver of his just charges and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(’75 Code, § 23-7) Penalty, see § 10.98
LOCATION OF SEXUALLY
EXPLICIT MATERIAL
§ 117.01 PURPOSE.
It is declared to be the intent and purpose of this chapter to regulate the direct commercial
distribution of sexually explicit materials to minors in order to aid parents and guardians in
supervising and controlling the access of minors to such material. The Board of Commissioners
finds that whatever social value such material may have for minors can adequately be served by
its availability to young persons through their parents or guardians. It is also the purpose of this
chapter to limit the public display of sexually explicit materials, particularly for the protection of
minors.
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
BUSINESS. Any commercial establishment.
KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the general content, nature and character of
material for sale, but not necessarily the knowledge that specific materials are sexually explicit.
MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, handbill, or similar printed or
written matter; or any drawing, picture, illustration, transparency, photograph, motion picture,
film negative, film positive, videotape, DVD, other digital media or similar representation or
reproduction.
MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
NUDITY. The showing, in the context of sexual or erotic conduct or arousal, of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area, or anal area, with less than full opaque covering, or
the showing of the female breasts with less than full opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the areola, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
PUBLIC DISPLAY. To place or make available materials in any place to which the
public is invited.
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL. Any material which:
(1) The average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find,
when considered in the whole context in which it is used or presented, appeals to the prurient
interest of minors;
(2) Depicts or describes: (i) ultimate sex acts, actual or explicitly simulated; (ii)
masturbation, excretory functions, or direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals or anal
area; (iii) nudity, as defined in this section; or, (iv) acts of apparent or actual sexual stimulation
or gratification; and
(3) When considered as a whole and in the context in which it is used or presented,
lacks serious artistic, literary, political, educational, or scientific value to minors.
Material may be found to be sexually explicit if the externally visible covers thereof meet the
standard of this definition or if the contents thereof meet the standard of this definition.
§ 117.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF THE BUSINESS.
(A) No person shall knowingly place sexually explicit material upon public display on
the premises of any business through which minors pass or to which they are invited as members
of the general public, except that sexually explicit material may be displayed as provided in
subsection (B) of this section.
(B) A business may place sexually explicit material on public display in an area open
to the public through which minors pass or to which they are invited as members of the general
public, if the following conditions are met:
(1) The sexually explicit material is placed in racks, shelves or display cases
separate from racks, shelves or other display cases for material that is not sexually explicit;
(2) The racks, shelves or display cases for sexually explicit material are
constructed with a full opaque or solid barrier that fully screens from view the sexually explicit
portions of all materials. These racks, shelves or display cases may, however, be designed to
display those portions of materials that are not sexually explicit, such as magazine titles, and the
racks, shelves or display cases may be designed so that sexually explicit materials may be
conveniently removed and perused or inspected by persons not minors;
(3) All racks, shelves and display cases that contain sexually explicit material
shall be clearly and continuously visible without obstruction from the cash register or other
purchase location by the proprietor or an employee, either directly or by means of mirrors or
closed circuit monitors; and
(4) The cash register or other purchase location shall be tended by a person
who shall be under an affirmative duty to ascertain that minors do not peruse, inspect, or leaf
through sexually explicit materials.
(C) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any other lawful method of preventing
minors from perusing, inspecting, or leafing through sexually explicit materials, provided that
such methods fully screen sexually explicit material from view in a manner similar to the method
described in subdivision (B)(2) of this section. For example, sexually explicit materials may be
kept on shelves behind an opaque or solid barrier behind the cash register or other purchase
location and under the exclusive control of the person tending the register until the completion of
a sale of the sexually explicit materials to a person other than a minor.
§ 117.04 DEFENSE TO VIOLATION.
It shall be a defense to the charge of a violation of this chapter that:
(1) A minor possessing or handling sexually explicit materials is at that time under
parental or parentally-approved adult supervision; or
(2) That the proprietor or other employee of the business made a bona fide, good faith
effort to determine the minor's age and had reasonable grounds to believe the minor was eighteen
(18) years of age or older.
§ 117.05 VIOLATIONS DEEMED SEPARATE; ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Each instance of public display on the premises of a business of an item of
sexually explicit material shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter, but possession of
multiple copies of a particular item of sexually explicit material shall only constitute a single
violation of such sections.
(B) This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Code of Ordinances §
10.98, “General Penalty.”
Section 2. All provisions of any town ordinance in conflict with this ordinance are
repealed.
Section 3. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption.
(Ord., passed 09-10-07)
GENERAL OFFENSES
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) No minor under the age of 16 shall loiter, wander, stroll, loaf or play in or upon
the streets, roads, alleys or other public places within the town, or in any vehicle placed or
parked thereon between the hours of 11:00 pm and daylight of the following day, unless
accompanied by the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of
the minor.
(’75 Code, § 15-4)
(B) No parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or control of any
minor under the age of 16 years shall permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of
division (A).
(’75 Code, § 15-5)
(1) Whenever any law enforcement officer discovers or has his attention
called to the fact that a minor is violating any of the provisions of division (A), the duty officer
shall make an immediate investigation of the violation.
(2) If the investigation reveals that division (A) is being violated by the minor,
the officer shall take the minor in to custody and cause him to be taken or delivered to his home
or place of residence and placed in the care and control of the parent, guardian or other person
having control of the minor.
(’75 Code, § 15-6)
(C) Any parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or control of any
minor who, after delivery of such minor to his custody under the provisions of division (C) shall
permit such minor to again violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and punished as provided by state law.
(’75 Code, § 15-7)
§ 130.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be guilty of disorderly
conduct:
(A) Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another,
whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health.
(B) Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another,
whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed
or damaged.
(C) Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or
threats of bodily harm.
(D) Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous
conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property.
(E) Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and cause,
provoke or engage in any fight or brawl.
(F) Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful
activities.
(G) Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and engage
or attempt to engage in gaming.
(H) Any person who shall frequent any public place and obtain money from another
by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick artifice or device, or attempt to do so.
(I) Any person who assembles with another or others and engages in any fraudulent
scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person, or attempts
to do so.
(J) Any person who utters, in a public place or any place open to the public any
obscene words or epithets.
(K) Any person who frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or
possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or
tolerated.
(L) Any person who shall use “fighting words” directed towards any person who
becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil.
(M) Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others and do
bodily harm to another.
(N) Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another’s pursuit of a
lawful occupation.
(O) Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way
so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear such public way when
ordered to do so by a police officer or other person having authority.
(P) Any person who damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of
another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition.
(’75 Code, § 15-8)
§ 130.03 FALSE ALARMS.
No person shall make or circulate or cause to be made or circulated a false alarm of fire
or false call to any emergency vehicle.
(’75 Code, § 15-9)
§ 130.04 DISCHARGING OR PERMITTING CHILD TO DISCHARGE
WEAPONS; POSSESSION OF WEAPONS ON TOWN PROPERTY.
a) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge an air rifle, air pistol, air gun, slingshot or
any like instrument used to eject a pellet or projectile, to discharge a pistol, rifle, shotgun
or other firearm within the corporate limits, except in the following circumstances:
1. By a police officer acting in the performance of his or her duties;
2. With the permission of a police officer acting in the performance of his or her official
duties;
3. In self-defense;
4. As a part of any use authorized by the Aberdeen Unified Development Ordinance.
(Amended 06-22-15)
b) Except as provided in subsection (1) below, all persons are prohibited from possessing
weapons as defined in GS §14-269 and firearms as defined in §14-409.39 during and on
the premises of any Town sponsored Fourth of July holiday festival.
1. This section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel acting within the scope of
their duties and to those persons lawfully permitted to possess and carry a concealed
handgun pursuant to G.S. § 14-269.
(’75 Code, § 15-12) (Amended 06-22-15)
ANIMALS OWNED BY TOWN
§ 130.10 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS OR POLICE DOG OWNED BY TOWN.
It shall be unlawful to willfully torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure,
disable or otherwise mistreat a dog or other animal owned by the town or willfully by any action
whatsoever interfere with the lawful performance of such dog or animal.
(Ord., passed 1-10-94)
Cross-reference:
Cruelty to animals generally, see § 91.03
GENERAL OFFENSES
OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY
§ 131.01 REMOVING OR DESTROYING BARRICADES.
No person, other than an employee of the town, shall remove, tear down or destroy any
barricade which has been erected by the town.
(’75 Code, § 15-2)
§ 131.02 TOBACCO AND E-CIGARETTE USE PROHIBITED ON TOWN
PARKS AND RECREATION PROPERTY.
(A) Definitions: For purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) Tobacco Product: A cigarette, cigar, or any other product that contains
tobacco and is intended for inhalation or oral use.
(2) E-Cigarette: Any electronic oral device, such as one composed of heating
elements, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor or nicotine or any other
substances, and the use of inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any
such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, epipe,
or under any other product name or descriptor.
(B) Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to use any tobacco product or ecigarette
in or on any park, recreation building, indoor or outdoor athletic facility, greenway or
trail, or any other indoor or outdoor recreation facility, or any portion thereof, that is owned,
leased, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the Town.
(C) Violation:
(1) Smoking Tobacco Products. In accordance with G.S. 130A498, the
smoking of tobacco products in violation of this section shall be an infraction and may be
punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50,00).
(2) Other Violations. In accordance with G.S. 14-4, all other violations of this
section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed
fifty dollars ($50.00).
(Amended 06-22-15)
LAND USAGE
BUILDING CODE;
THE OFFICE OF THE TOWN BUILDING INSPECTOR;
STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS
BUILDING CODE; THE OFFICE OF THE TOWN BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 150.01 Building Inspector; office created.
§ 150.02 Duties of the Building Inspector.
§ 150.03 Compliance with the North Carolina State Building Code Required.
§ 150.04 Permits Required
§ 150.05 Application for Permits.
§ 150.06 Permit Fees and Copy of the North Carolina State Building Code.
§ 150.07 Enforcement.
§ 150.08 Alternate Enforcement Method for Buildings and Structures; Repair, Closing
and/or Demolition Authorized.
§ 150.09 through 150.24 Reserved.
STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS
§ 150.25 Naming New Streets.
§ 150.26 Renaming Existing Streets.
§ 150.27 Addressing.
§ 150.28 Enforcement.
BUILDING CODE; THE OFFICE OF THE TOWN BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 150.01 BUILDING INSPECTOR; OFFICE CREATED.
There is hereby created the office of Town Building Inspector. The Chief Building
Inspector and any other building inspector employed by the Town shall have the powers and
duties set forth in this chapter.
(’75 Code, § 4-1; Am. Ord. GP#2008248, passed 1/12/09)
§ 150.02 DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
The Building Inspector shall have the following duties:
(A) Building Code. The Building Inspector shall enforce the provisions of the North
Carolina State Building Code (hereafter the “Code” or “Building Code”), as most recently
adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as provided for in that Code, the
North Carolina General Statutes and this chapter. The Building Inspector shall also issue
building permits and certificates of occupancy in accordance with the Building Code, other State
law, and this chapter;
(B) Minimum Housing Code. The Building Inspector shall enforce the provisions of
the Town of Aberdeen Minimum Housing Code within the corporate limits and the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town;
(C) Zoning and Subdivisions. The Building Inspector is authorized to enforce the
provisions of the zoning and subdivision ordinances of the Town within the corporate limits and
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town; and
(D) Other. The Building Inspector shall carry out all other duties required of him or
her by State law, the ordinances of the Town, or order of the Town Board or Town Manager.
(’75 Code, § 4-2)(Am. Ord., passed 5-13-02; Am. Ord., passed 4/14/08; Am. Ord. GP#2008248,
passed 1/12/09)
§ 150.03 COMPLIANCE WITH THE NORTH CAROLINA STATE
BUILDING CODE REQUIRED.
All buildings and structures, including but not limited to swimming pools, within the corporate
limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town that are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, renovated, demolished or otherwise altered or moved shall conform to
the requirements, minimum standards, and other provisions of the Building Code.
(’75 Code, § 4-3; Am. Ord. GP#2008248, passed 1/12/09)
§ 150.04 PERMITS REQUIRED.
Building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical permits, and any other permit required by
the Building Code shall be obtained from the Building Inspector prior to beginning any
construction, reconstruction, repair, renovation, demolition or alteration of a building or
structure, as required by the Building Code. Permits shall be also obtained from the Building
Inspector prior to moving any building or structure, as required by the Building Code.
(’75 Code, § 4-4; Am. Ord. GP#2008248, passed 1/12/09)
§ 150.05 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
Applications for building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits shall be made to
the Building Inspector, who shall issue such permits upon payment of the appropriate fees and
proof of compliance with applicable statutes, regulations and ordinances by the applicant.
(’75 Code, § 4-5; Am. Ord. GP#2008248, passed 1/12/09)
§ 150.06 PERMIT FEES AND COPY OF THE NORTH CAROLINA STATE
BUILDING CODE.
The fees to be paid for a permit required by Section 150.04, above, shall be as determined
by the Board of Commissioners from time to time. A schedule of such fees, shall be maintained
on file in the office of the Town Clerk where it shall be available for public inspection during the
normal office hours of the Town Clerk.
An official copy of the North Carolina State Building Code shall be kept on file in the
office of the Building Inspector and shall be available for inspection during the normal office
hours of the Building Inspector.
(Am. Ord. GP#2008248, passed 1/12/09)
§ 150.07 ENFORCEMENT.
The Building Inspector may enforce the Building Code using any one or combination of
those powers enumerated in G.S. Chpt. 160A, Art. 19, Part 5, “Building Inspections,” including
the following:
(A) Conducting inspections of work in progress, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-420;
(B) Issuing stop work orders, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-421;
(C) Revoking permits, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-422;
(D) Conducting periodic inspections, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-424;
(E) Ordering defects in buildings to be corrected, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-425;
(F) Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-426, declaring those buildings to be unsafe that appear to
the Building Inspector to be especially dangerous to life because of their liability to fire or
because of bad condition of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay, unsafe
wiring or heating system, inadequate means of egress, or other causes. In these cases, the
Building Inspector shall affix a notice of the dangerous character of the structure to a
conspicuous place on the exterior wall of the building;
(G) Issuing an order to take corrective action, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-428 and 160A-
429;
(H) Pursuant to directions from the Town Board, taking any one or combination of
enforcement actions authorized by G.S. § 160A-432;
(I) Enforcing the Building Code using the alternative method established in G.S.
160A-439 and section 150.08 of this Code of Ordinances; and
(J) Levying civil penalties for failure to comply with an order issued by the Building
Inspector. All civil penalties levied shall be in accordance with Section 10.98 of the Code of
Ordinances. The imposition of civil penalties shall not limit the use of any other lawful remedies
available to the Town for the enforcement of any ordinances adopted pursuant to this section;
and
(Am. Ord. GP#2008248, passed 1/12/09)
§ 150.08 ALTERNATE ENFORCEMENT METHOD FOR
NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; REPAIR,
CLOSING AND/OR DEMOLITION AUTHORIZED.
(A) Purpose.
Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-439, the purpose of this section is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare by providing alternative enforcement methods for nonresidential buildings or
structures that fail to meet the minimum standards of the Building Code for maintenance,
sanitation, and/or safety and are otherwise dangerous and injurious to public health, safety, and
welfare. The Building Inspector may, in his or her discretion, choose whether to initiate an
enforcement action pursuant to either or both this section or other sections of this chapter.
(B) Jurisdiction.
This section may be applied only to those buildings or structures within the corporate
limits of the Town; this section may not be applied to buildings or structures located within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town.
(C) Definitions.
As used in this section, the following shall be defined as follows:
(1) Parties in interest: all individuals, associations, and corporations who have
interests of record in a nonresidential building or structure and any who are in possession thereof.
(2) Vacant manufacturing facility: any building or structure previously used for the
lawful production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been used for that purpose for at
least one year and has not been converted to another use.
(3) Vacant industrial warehouse: any building or structure designed for the storage of
goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes, which has not been used for
that purpose for at least one year and has not been converted to another use.
(D) Powers of the Building Inspector
In addition to the powers set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the Building Inspector shall
have the following powers to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this section:
(1) To investigate nonresidential buildings and structures in the Town to determine
whether they have been properly maintained in compliance with the minimum standards so that
the safety or health of the occupants or members of the general public are not jeopardized;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises pursuant to subsection (E)(1) of this section for the
purpose of making examinations in a manner that will do the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents, and employees necessary to carry
out the purposes of the ordinances adopted by the Town Board; and
(5) To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this section to other
Town officers and agents, provided that such agents are appropriately certified as North Carolina
Building Inspectors.
(E) Enforcement Process.
(1) Investigation. Whenever it appears to the Building Inspector that any
nonresidential building or structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health
of its occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized for failure of the property to
meet minimum standards of the Building Code, the Building Inspector shall undertake a
preliminary investigation. If entry upon the premises for purposes of investigation is necessary,
such entry shall be made pursuant to a duly issued administrative search warrant in accordance
with G.S. § 15-27.2 or with permission of the owner, the owner’s agent, a tenant, or other person
legally in possession of the premises.
(2) Complaint and Hearing. If the preliminary investigation discloses evidence of a
violation or violations of the Building Code, the Building Inspector shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in the nonresidential building or structure a
complaint. The complaint shall state the charges and contain a notice that includes the following
information:
(a) That a hearing will be held before the Building Inspector (or his or her designated
agent) at the Town Hall or at the building or structure, scheduled not less than ten (10) days nor
more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint
(b) That the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to answer the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed
in the complaint; and
(c) That the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling during the hearing.
(3) Order. If, after notice and hearing, the Building Inspector determines that the
nonresidential building or structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health
of its occupants or members of the general public is jeopardized for failure of the property to
meet the minimum standards of the Building Code, the Building Inspector shall state in writing
findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order. The order may require the owner to take remedial action, within a
reasonable time specified, subject to the procedures and limitations of this section.
(4) Limitations on Orders.
(a) An order may require the owner to repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential
building or structure in order to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards of the
Building Code or to vacate and close the nonresidential building or structure for any use.
(b) (1) An order may require the owner to remove or demolish the nonresidential
building or structure if the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or structure
would exceed fifty percent (50%) of its then current value. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, if the nonresidential building or structure is designated as a local historic landmark, listed
in the National Register of Historic Places, or located in a locally designated historic district or in
a historic district listed in the National Register of Historic Places and the Town Board
determines, after a public hearing as provided in subsection (E)(4)(b)(2), below, that the
nonresidential building or structure is of individual significance or contributes to maintaining the
character of the district, and the nonresidential building or structure has not been condemned as
unsafe, the order may require that the nonresidential building or structure be vacated and closed
until it is brought into compliance with the minimum standards of the North Caroling State
Building Code.
(b) (2) Public hearings conducted pursuant to subsection (E)(4)(b)(1), above, shall be
held only after written notice of the hearing is provided to the owner and parties in interest in the
building or structure at issue, not less than ten (10) nor more than (30) days prior to the hearing.
Such notice shall be served in accordance with subsection (E)(7), below.
(c) An order may not require repairs, alterations, or improvements to be made to vacant
manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse facilities to preserve the original use.
The order may require such building or structure to be vacated and closed, but repairs may be
required only when necessary to maintain structural integrity or to abate a health or safety hazard
that cannot be remedied by ordering the building or structure closed for any use.
(5) Action by Town Board Upon Failure to Comply With Order.
(a) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and
close the nonresidential building or structure, the Town Board may adopt an ordinance ordering
the Building Inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this section with respect to the
particular property or properties that the Building Inspector found to be jeopardizing the health
or safety of its occupants or members of the general public. The property or properties shall be
described in the ordinance. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Moore County
Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner or owners in the
grantor index. Following adoption of an ordinance, the Building Inspector may cause the
building or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed. The
Building Inspector may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any nonresidential building or
structure so closed a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for any use; the
use or occupation of this building for any purpose is prohibited and unlawful.” Any person who
occupies or knowingly allows the occupancy of a building or structure so posted shall be guilty
of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(b) If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the nonresidential
building or structure, the Town Board may adopt an ordinance ordering the Building Inspector to
proceed to effectuate the purpose of this section with respect to the particular property or
properties that the Building Inspector found to be jeopardizing the health or safety of its
occupants or members of the general public. No ordinance shall be adopted to require
demolition of a nonresidential building or structure until the owner has first been given a
reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the minimum standards established by the
Building Code. The property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. The ordinance
shall be recorded in the office of the Moore County Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the
name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index. Following adoption of an ordinance,
the Building Inspector may cause the building or structure to be removed or demolished.
(6) Action by Town Board Upon Abandonment of Intent to Repair.
If the Town Board has adopted an ordinance or the Building Inspector has issued an order
requiring the building or structure to be repaired or vacated and closed and the building or
structure has been vacated and closed for a period of two years pursuant to the ordinance or
order, the Town Board may make findings that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose
to repair, alter, or improve the building or structure and that the continuation of the building or
structure in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and welfare of
the municipality in that it would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire or safety hazard,
would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, or
would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area. Upon
such findings, the Town Board may, after the expiration of the two-year period, enact an
ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following:
(a) If the cost to repair the nonresidential building or structure to bring it into
compliance with the minimum standards of the Building Code is less than or equal to fifty
percent (50%) of its then current value, the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or
demolish and remove the building or structure within ninety (90) days; or
(b) If the cost to repair the nonresidential building or structure to bring it into
compliance with the minimum standards of the Building Code exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its
then current value, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the building or
structure within ninety (90) days.
The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in Moore County
and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to
comply with the ordinance, the Building Inspector shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance.
In the case of vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse facilities, the
building or structure must have been vacated and closed pursuant to an order or ordinance for a
period of five (5) years before the governing body may take action under this subsection.
(7) Service of Complaints and Orders.
(a) Complaints or orders issued by the Building Inspector pursuant to an ordinance
adopted under this section shall be served upon owners and parties in interest either personally or
by registered or certified mail so long as the means used are reasonably designed to achieve
actual notice. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or
order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or
certified mail is refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten (10)
days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.
(b) If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot
be ascertained by the Building Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Building
Inspector makes an affidavit to that effect, the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners
or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the
city at least once no later than the time that personal service would be required under this section.
When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected.
(8) Liens.
(a) The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and
closing, or removal or demolition by the Building Inspector shall be a lien against the real
property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and
be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in G.S. Chpt. 160A, Art. 10.
(b) The amount of the costs is also a lien on any other real property of the owner
located within the Town of Aberdeen except for the owner’s primary residence. The additional
lien provided in this subdivision is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money
judgment.
(c) If the nonresidential building or structure is removed or demolished by the
Building Inspector, he or she shall offer for sale the recoverable materials of the building or
structure and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the
building or structure and shall credit the proceeds of the sale, if any, against the cost of the
removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the
Building Inspector, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by
the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Town Board to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings
or otherwise.
(9) Ejectment.
If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a nonresidential building or
structure, the Building Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the Town of Aberdeen to
remove the occupant. The action to vacate shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall
be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying the
nonresidential building or structure. The Moore County Clerk of Superior Court shall issue a
summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date, and place
not to exceed ten (10) days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The
summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be
returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served and if at
the hearing the Building Inspector produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the
Town Board pursuant to subsection (E)(5) of this section to vacate the occupied nonresidential
building or structure, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated
and all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the nonresidential building or structure
be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered
under G.S. § 42-30.
An appeal from any judgment entered under this subsection by the magistrate may be
taken as provided in G.S. § 7A-228, and the execution of the judgment may be stayed as
provided in G.S. § 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a nonresidential building or
structure who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment
proceeding pursuant to this subsection unless the occupant was served with notice, at least thirty
(30) days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding and the Town Board has
ordered the Building Inspector to proceed to exercise his duties under subsection (E)(5) of this
section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the nonresidential building or structure.
(10) Civil Penalty.
The Town Board may impose civil penalties against any person or entity that fails to
comply with an order entered pursuant to this section. All civil penalties levied shall be in
accordance with section 10.98 of this Code of Ordinances. The imposition of civil penalties
shall not limit the use of any other lawful remedies available to the Town for the enforcement of
any ordinances adopted pursuant to this section.
(11) Powers Supplemental.
(a) The powers conferred by this section are supplemental to the powers conferred by
any other law.
(12) Appeals.
Appeals may be taken from any decision or order of the Building Inspector to the Board
of Adjustment. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the Building Inspector shall have
the remedies provided in G.S. § 160A-446.
(13) Funding.
The Town Board is authorized to make appropriations from its revenues necessary to
carry out the purposes of this section and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist in
carrying out the provisions of this section.
(14) No Effect on Just Compensation for Taking by Eminent Domain.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any
property from receiving just compensation for the taking of property by the power of eminent
domain under the laws of this State, nor as permitting any property to be condemned or
destroyed except in accordance with the police power of the State.
(Am. Ord. GP#2008248, passed 1/12/09)
§ 150.09 through 150.24 Reserved.
STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERS
§ 150.25 NAMING NEW STREETS.
(A) Street names shall be assigned to new streets by the developer of the street, subject
to the approval of the permit issuing authority.
(B) No new street shall be given a name that duplicates the name of an existing street
within Moore County or the corporate limits of any municipality located in Moore County. No
new street shall be phonetically similar to an existing street name located within Moore County
or the corporate limits of any municipality located in Moore County, regardless of the use of
different suffixes such as those set forth in subsection 150.25(C).
(C) Street names shall include a suffix such as the following:
(1) Circle: A short street that returns to itself;
(2) Court or Place: A cul-de-sac or dead-end street;
(3) Loop: A street that begins at the intersection with one street and circles back to end at
another intersection with the same street; and
(4) Street: All public streets not designated by another suffix.
The developer may also use other suffixes as the developer deems appropriate.
(D) Developers seeking to create new streets shall pay the Town for the actual cost of
purchasing and installing signs that meet the standards of the North Carolina Department of
Transportation.
(E) Whenever any new street is located partially in an unincorporated part of Moore
County (including the area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town) and partially
within the Town limits, the new street name must be approved by both the Moore County Board
of Commissioners and the Town Board of Commissioners. The names of new streets located
entirely within unincorporated parts of Moore County shall be approved solely by the Moore
County Board of Commissioners.
§ 150.26 RENAMING EXISTING STREETS.
(A) Persons desiring to have the name of an existing street changed must petition the
Town Board of Commissioners. Said petition shall be submitted to the Town Planning
Department. The Town Board of Commissioners, on its own initiative, may also change the
name of an existing street. Name changes initiated by the Town Board need not comply with the
petition requirements of subsection 150.26(B).
(B) The petition shall include the following:
(1) A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee,
(2) The existing street name,
(3) The proposed street name, and
(4) A statement signed by 100% of the owners of property adjacent to the street that
indicates the owners consent to the proposed name change.
(C) A proposed new name for an existing street shall meet the requirements of
subsection 150.25(B).
(D) In the event that the Town Board approves the petition, the petitioners shall
reimburse the Town for the cost of purchasing and installing new street signs.
§ 150.27 ADDRESSING.
(A) All residential, commercial and industrial structures, and, where applicable,
accessory buildings thereto shall have a street number assigned by the Town Planning
Department.
(B) A numbering system assigning addresses every ten feet (10’) along roadways shall
be used.
(C) All residential, commercial, industrial and accessory structures assigned addresses
shall prominently display and maintain the assigned number on the structure on the side nearest
the street and at the point where the driveway meets the street. The driveway address display
shall either be on a mailbox or a post. The numbers on the driveway display shall be no less than
three inches (3”) in height and have a night reflective surface.
(D) The Planning Director shall have right to authorize and approve alternate methods
of displaying address numbers so long as
(1) The alternate method reasonably meets the intent of this section, and
(2) Strict adherence to these standards cannot be reasonably met.
(E) The Planning Director, in his or her discretion, may change an existing address for
just cause. Examples of just cause include the following:
(1) An area where no addresses were left for vacant lot(s),
(2) An address must be changed in response to a street name changed approved by
the Town Board,
(3) A person unknowingly displays the wrong address, and
(4) The street address number series presently in use is incorrect and/or is nonsequential.
§ 150.28 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The provisions of this section shall be supplemental and in addition to the
enforcement provisions provided for in Code of Ordinances Sec. 10.98.
(B) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued until an official address has been
assigned for a residential, commercial, or industrial structure, or, where applicable, accessory
buildings thereto and the number has been properly displayed.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other entity to remove,
destroy or deface any street name sign. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, or other entity to erect a street name sign contrary to the provisions of this ordinance
and/or without the appropriate approval as provided by this ordinance.
(Am. Ord. GP#2008248, Chapter 150 passed 1/12/09)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 FINDING; PURPOSE.
(A) Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby declared that there exist within the
jurisdiction of the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation;
defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, and other calamities; lack of ventilation, light,
and sanitary facilities and other conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or unsanitary,
dangerous, and detrimental to the health, safety, and morals, and otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the town.
(B) In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents within the
jurisdiction of the town as authorized by G.S. Chapter l60A, Article 19, Part 6, it is the purpose
of this chapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy
of all buildings used for human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-444.
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BASEMENT. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly underground, having
direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of the adjoining ground.
BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector of the town or any Building
Inspector for whose services the town has contracted or any authorized agent of the Inspector.
CELLAR. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly or wholly underground having
an inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level of
the adjoining ground.
DETERIORATED. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation but can be repaired,
altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this chapter at a
cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as determined by the finding or findings of the Inspector.
DILAPIDATED. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and cannot be repaired,
altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards established by this chapter
except at a cost In excess of 50% of its value, as determined by the finding or findings of the
Inspector.
DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home, or mobile home or part
thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and including any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does
not include any manufactured or mobile home as defined in G.S. § 143-145(7), which is used
solely for a seasonal vacation purpose. The term shall include within its meaning the terms
rooming house and rooming unit, as hereinafter defined.
DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming
a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking, and eating.
EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by
removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the Inspector.
GARBAGE. The organic waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments,
laundries, heater rooms, foyers, or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or
other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or welfare of the
occupants or the public.
MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
NOXIOUS GROWTH. Any growth of weeds, grasses, or other plants or bushes that
become or threaten to become a fire hazard or a harboring place for rats, mice, snakes, or other
vermin or otherwise pose a danger to the public health or safety. Uncontrolled plant growth (i.e.
plants not intentionally planted in a garden, shrub bed, flower bed or similar area) that is at least
eight (8) inches tall and remains so for a period of twenty-one (21) days shall also constitute
noxious growth.
OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or
having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit.
OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof
in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER. Any person who alone, jointly, or severally with others:
(A) Shall have title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(B) Shall be a mortgagee of record for any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit;
or
(C) Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit, as owner or agent of the actual owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the actual owner.
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions
of this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he
were the owner.
PARTY OR PARTIES IN INTEREST. All persons who have interests of record in a
dwelling, dwelling unit, or rooming unit and any persons who are in possession thereof.
PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, or
other legal entity.
PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipe, gas
burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units (mechanical sink grinders),
sewage disposal pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower
baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any
department or branch of the government of the town or of the county or the state relating to
health, fire, building regulations, or other activities concerning dwellings in the town.
ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more
rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are
not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or brother of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH. Nonorganic waste materials. The term shall include paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, and dust.
SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the control of, the owner or
operator.
UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. That conditions exist in a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house, or room unit which violate or do not comply with one or more of the
minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the requirements established by this chapter.
WASTES. All useless, unwanted, or discarded materials and products, resulting from
domestic, industrial, commercial or community activities.
YARD WASTES. Organic materials commonly consisting of leaves, pine straw, wheat
straw, grass clippings, hedge clippings, dirt, rocks, yard and garden waste, branches, logs, twigs,
and all vegetable matter resulting from landscaping or land clearing activities (i.e. stumps, trees,
etc.)
Whenever the words “DWELLING,” “DWELLING UNIT,” “ROOMING HOUSE,”
“ROOMING UNIT,” and “PREMISES” are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words “OR ANY PART THEREOF.”
(Amended 09-04-07; 03-08-2010).
§ 151.03 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
(A) Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units
shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas
of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(B) Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean
and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he
occupies and controls.
(C) Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish and
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the supplied storage facilities. In all
cases, the owner shall be responsible for the availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.
(D) Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable
care In the proper use and operation of same.
(E) Care of facilities, equipment, and structure. No occupant shall willfully destroy,
deface, or impair any of the facilities or equipment, or any part of the structure of a dwelling or
dwelling unit.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNIT
§ 151.15 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
(A) Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held out for use
as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human
habitation and all of the requirements of this subchapter.
(B) No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy or use
as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with all of the
minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of this
subchapter.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.16 STRUCTURAL CONDITIONS.
The following standards shall constitute the minimum standards for structural condition
of a dwelling or dwelling unit:
(A) Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists, rafters, or other structural
members shall not list, lean, or buckle, and shall not be rotted, deteriorated, or damaged, and
shall not have holes or cracks which might admit rodents.
(B) Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(C) Foundations, foundation walls, piers, or other foundation supports shall not be
deteriorated or damaged.
(D) Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts or appurtenances shall be
maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse.
(E) Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be provided.
(F) Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets, and hallways shall be finished of
suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable household methods, promote sanitation and
cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain
reasonable privacy between various spaces.
(G) The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors, and all doors and
windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so as to be weather and
watertight.
(H) There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective, deteriorated, or
in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as to constitute a fire hazard.
(I) There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors on the ground.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.17 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
(A) Plumbing system.
(1) Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and to a
public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.
(2) Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub,
or shower, water closet, and adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall
be supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
(3) All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the most current edition
of the State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good
working order.
(4) All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit
and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located
in a room or rooms affording privacy to the user.
(B) Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities for
providing heat in accordance with the following:
(1) Central and electrical heating systems. Every central or electric heating
system shall be of sufficient capacity to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet
compartments in every dwelling unit to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of
70° measured at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.
(2) Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating system is not
provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys,
fires, gas vents, or other facilities to which heating appliances may be connected to heat all
habitable rooms with a minimum temperature of 70° measured three feet above the floor during
ordinary winter conditions.
(C) Electrical system.
(1) Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electrical lights and
convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two floor or wall-type
electric convenience receptacles, connected in such manner as determined by the most current
edition of the State Electrical Code. There shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet
room, laundry room, and furnace room at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light
fixture. In the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then
each such habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall-type electric convenience
receptacles.
(2) Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural daylight is not sufficient.
(3) All fixtures, receptacles, equipment, and wiring shall be maintained in a
state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in accordance with the most
current edition of the State Electrical Code.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.18 VENTILATION.
(A) General. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every
habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of
structures face a window or any room and such light-obstructing structures are located less than
five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as
contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room
is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall
equal at least 15% of the total floor area of such room.
(B) Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room.
The total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the
minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size as required, or shall have
other approved, equivalent ventilation.
(C) Bathrooms and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except
that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet
rooms equipped with an approved ventilation system.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.19 SPACE, USE, AND LOCATION.
(A) Room sizes.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in each
habitable room as required by the most current edition of the State Residential Building Code.
(2) Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor
area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of additional habitable area for each of the
next three occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each
additional occupant.
(3) In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square
feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor
area for each occupant under 12 years of age.
(B) Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall
have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and six inches.
(C) Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable
room area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling unit may count for not more
than 10% of the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any room where the
ceiling height is less than four and one-half feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area
for the purpose of determining maximum permissible occupancy.
(D) Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
(E) Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
(1) The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
(2) The total window area, total openable window area, and ceiling height are
equal to those required for habitable rooms; and
(3) The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely
above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the window or windows face a
stairwell, window well, or accessway.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.20 SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
(A) Exterior foundation, walls, and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior wall, and
exterior roof shall be substantially weather tight and rodent proof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; shall be capable of affording privacy; and shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load which normal use would cause to be placed thereon. Every
exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the entrance or
penetration of moisture or the weather.
(B) Interior floors, walls, and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling shall be
substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to
use and capable of supporting the load which normal use would cause to be placed thereon.
(C) Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement, or cellar door and
hatchway shall be substantially weather tight, watertight, and rodent proof and shall be kept in
sound working condition and good repair.
(D) Stairs, porches, and appurtenances. Every outside and inside stair, porch, and any
appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
would cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(E) Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet compartment
floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so that it will be reasonably impervious to
water and will permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(F) Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is
required under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and
effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
(G) Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded in order to obtain thorough
drainage and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
(H) Noxious growth. Every yard and all exterior property areas shall be kept free of
noxious growth.
(I) Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of egress as
required by the State Residential Building Code.
(Amended 09-04-07; 03-08-2010).
§ 151.21 CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS, AND INFESTATIONS.
(A) Screens. In every dwelling unit, for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and
other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall be
equipped with screens and a self-closing device. Every window or other device with openings to
outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be equipped with
screens.
(B) Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents,
shall be equipped with screens or such other approved device as will effectively prevent their
entrance.
(C) Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall
be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises;
and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall
be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof
or reasonable insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared
or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
(D) Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be
supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as required by town
ordinances, and the owner, operator, or agent in control of such dwelling or dwelling unit shall
be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
(E) Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be
supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate mechanical
garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit, or an approved outside
garbage can as required by town ordinances.
(F) Waste Disposal. Except as provided in subsection (G), no owner or occupant may
cause, suffer, or permit wastes, including rubbish and garbage, to accumulate on the premises,
including yards and exterior property areas, provided that occupants shall be liable under this
section only for those parts of the premises under their control.
(G) Yard Wastes. Yard waste may be allowed to accumulate or remain in yards and
exterior property areas for uses such as landscaping and composting, provided that these
materials do not become or threaten to become a fire hazard or a harboring place for rats, mice,
snakes or other vermin or otherwise pose a danger to the public health and safety. This provision
does not authorize the commercial storage of landscaping materials on a residential property;
commercial storage is permitted only in accordance with the Aberdeen Zoning Ordinance.
(Amended 09-04-07; 03-08-2010).
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ROOMING HOUSES
§ 151.35 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
All of the provisions of this chapter, and all of the minimum standards and requirements of
this chapter, shall be applicable to rooming houses, and to every person who operates a rooming
house, or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy and any rooming unit in any rooming
house, except as provided in the following section of this subchapter.
§ 151.36 WATER CLOSET, HAND LAVATORY AND BATH FACILITIES.
At least one water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an
approved water and sewer systems and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each
four rooms within a rooming house wherever these facilities are shared. All such facilities shall
be located within the residence building served and shall be directly accessible from a common
hall or passageway and shall be not more than one story removed from any of the persons
sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot
and cold water at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.37 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant
shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and
at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.38 SANITARY CONDITIONS AND FACILITIES.
(A) Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for
the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of
every other part of the rooming house. He shall be further responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the
rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
(B) Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin, and bathtub or
shower required by § 152.36 shall be located within the rooming house and within a room or
rooms which afford privacy, are separate from the habitable rooms, are accessible from a
common hall, and are accessible without going outside the rooming house or through any other
room therein.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.50 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to exercise the duties and powers herein prescribed. The Building Inspector is
authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purpose and provisions of this chapter. The Building Inspector shall have the following
powers and duties:
(A) To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings and dwelling
units located in the town and in the two-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town, in order to
determine which dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose
of carrying out the objectives of this chapter with respect to the repair, closing, or demolition of
such dwellings and dwelling units;
(B) To take such action, together with other appropriate departments and agencies,
public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated;
(C) To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this chapter and an
inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum standards of fitness herein
prescribed;
(D) To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence;
(E) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections;
provided, such entries shall be made in accordance with § 152.51 and State law, and shall be
made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
and
(F) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein or by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 151.51 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
(A) For the purpose of making inspections, the Building Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming houses, rooming units, and the premises associated therewith. The owner or occupant
of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit or the person in charge thereof
shall give the Building Inspector free access to such dwelling and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purposes of such inspection, examination, and survey.
(B) Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, or rooming unit shall
give the owner thereof or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling
unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 151.52 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
(A) Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is filed with the
Building Inspector by a public authority or by at least five residents of the Town or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, charging that any dwelling, dwelling unit or the premises thereof is
unfit for habitation, or whenever it appears to the Inspector, upon inspection, that any dwelling,
dwelling unit or the premises thereof is unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of
and parties in interest in such dwelling, dwelling unit or premises thereof a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector at
a place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have a right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed
in the complaint. Notice of such hearing shall also be given to at least one (1) of the persons
signing a petition relating to such dwelling or premises thereof. Any person desiring to do so
may attend such hearing and give evidence. Rules of evidence prevailing in courts or law or
equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Inspector.
(B) Procedure after hearing.
(1) After such notice and hearing, the Inspector shall state in writing his
determination as to whether the dwelling, dwelling unit or the premises thereof are unfit for
human habitation, and if so, whether the dwelling or dwelling unit is deteriorated or dilapidated.
(2) If the Inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is
deteriorated, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination, and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the
owner to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this chapter within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90
days. Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and close such dwelling or
dwelling unit until such repairs, alterations, and improvements have been made. The order may
require that the property be vacated and closed only if continued occupancy during the time
allowed for repair will present a significant threat of bodily harm, taking into account the nature
of the necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements; the current state of the property; and any
additional risks due to the presence and capacity of minors under the age of 18 or occupants with
physical or mental disabilities. The order shall state that the failure to make timely repairs as
directed in the order shall make the dwelling subject to the issuance of an unfit order under §
151.52(C)(2).
(3) If the Inspector determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is
dilapidated, he shall state in writing his findings of fact to support such determination, and shall
issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the owner
either to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this chapter, or else to vacate and remove or demolish the
same within a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days. If the order permits the owner to
repair the dwelling, the order may require that the property be vacated and closed only if
continued occupancy during the time allowed for repair will present a significant threat of bodily
harm, taking into account the nature of the necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements; the
current state of the property; and any additional risks due to the presence and capacity of minors
under the age of 18 or occupants with physical or mental disabilities. If repairs are allowed, the
order shall state that the failure to make timely repairs as directed in the order shall make the
dwelling subject to the issuance of an unfit order under § 151.52(C)(2).
(4) If the dwelling is located in a historic district of the town and the Historic
District Commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by ordinance, that the
dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the historic
district, and the dwelling has not been condemned as unsafe, an order issued pursuant to §
151.52(B)(3) may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with G.S. § 160A-
400.14(a).
(5) If the Board of Commissioners shall have adopted an ordinance pursuant
to § 151.52(C)(2), or the Inspector shall have issued an order, ordering a dwelling to be repaired
or vacated and closed, as § 151.52(B)(2), and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling
and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one year pursuant to the ordinance or
order, then if the Board of Commissioners shall find that the owner has abandoned the intent and
purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and
that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the
health, safety, morals and welfare of the town in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate,
would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract
persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of
property values in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might
otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable
housing in this State, then in such circumstances, the Board of Commissioners may, after the
expiration of such one year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner,
setting forth the following:
a. If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human
habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner either
repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days; or
b. If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it fit for human
habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the
then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
This ordinance shall be recorded in the Moore county Registry and shall be indexed in the name
of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with this ordinance, the
public officer shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance.
(6) Whenever a determination is made pursuant to § 151.52(B)(2) or (3) that a
dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, notice of the order shall be
given by first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for
affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of 45
days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the
Inspector, to allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to make
repairs, lease, or purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The
Inspector or Town Clerk shall certify the mailing of the notices, and the certification shall be
conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for such
notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order
requiring the public officer to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition.
(C) Failure to comply with order.
(1) In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or
dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector to repair, alter, or improve or to
vacate and close the same within the time specified therein, or if the owner of a dilapidated
dwelling or dwelling unit shall fall to comply with an order of the inspector to repair, alter, or
improve or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same within the time specified
therein, the Inspector may submit to the Board of Commissioners at its next regular meeting a
resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition the superior court for an order directing such
owner to comply with the order of the Inspector, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).
(2) In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a deteriorated or dilapidated
dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an order of the Inspector within the time specified
therein, if injunctive relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided by §
151.52(C)(1), the Inspector shall submit to the Board of Commissioners an ordinance specifying
the property and ordering the Inspector or authorized agent to cause such dwelling or dwelling
unit to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, closed, removed, or demolished, as provided in
the original order of the Inspector, and pending removal or demolition, to place a placard on such
dwelling as provided by G.S. § 160A-443 and § 151.54 of this code.
(3) Action in the nature of summary ejectment. If any occupant fails to comply
with an order to vacate a dwelling, the Inspector or Town Attorney may file a civil action in the
name of the town to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the
nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as partiesdefendant
any person occupying such dwelling. The clerk of superior court shall issue a
summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date and place
not to exceed 10 days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons
and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be returned
according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the
hearing the Inspector produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the Board of
Commissioners pursuant to § 151.52(C)(2) authorizing the Inspector to proceed to vacate the
occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and
that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be
enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. § 42-30.
An appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in
G.S. § 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. § 7A-227.
An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the
nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this paragraph unless such occupant was
served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the
Board of Commissioners has ordered the public officer to proceed to exercise his duties under
this chapter to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling.
(D) Appeals from orders of Inspector.
(1) An appeal from any decision or order of the Inspector may be taken by
any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board, or commission of the town. Any appeal
from the Inspector shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of
the order, and shall be taken by filing with the Inspector and with the Zoning Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based.
Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an
appeal is from a decision of the Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal
shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board, unless the
Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the appellant), a suspension of
his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement
shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown
upon not less than one day’s written notice to the Inspector, by the Board, or by a court of record
upon petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(f) and § 151.32(E) of this code.
(2) The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals, shall
give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any
party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and
order as in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the powers
of the Inspector, but the concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the Inspector. The Board shall have
power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the
application of the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The
Board shall keep an accurate journal of all its proceedings.
(3) Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by proceedings in
the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.
(E) Petition to superior court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an order issued by
the Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board shall have the right, within 30 days after
issuance of the order of rendering of the decision, to petition the superior court for a temporary
injunction restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S.
§ 160A-446(f).
(Amended 09-04-07; 03-08-2010).
§ 151.53 METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
(A) Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector pursuant to an ordinance
adopted under this chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or
certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or
order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or
certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office
within 10 days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.
(B) If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and
cannot be ascertained by the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or, if the owners
are known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, and the Inspector
makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or
other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city
at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under the
provisions of this chapter. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.54 IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING.
(A) After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an order
of the Building Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and upon adoption by
the Board of Commissioners of an ordinance authorizing and directing him to do so, as provided
by G.S. § 160A-443(5) and § 151.52(C) of this code, the Inspector shall proceed to cause such
dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this chapter, or to be vacated and closed and removed or
demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the Board of Commissioners, and shall cause to be
posted on the main entrance of such dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with the following
words: “This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for
human habitation is prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
(B) Each ordinance so adopted shall be recorded in the Moore County Registry, and
shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. §
160A-443(5).
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.55 COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.
(A) That the amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Inspector shall be a lien against the real
property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and
be collected as the lien for special assessment provided in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10.
(B) If the real property upon which the cost was incurred is located within the
corporate limits of the town, then the amount of the cost is also a lien on any other real property
of the owner located within the town limits or within one mile thereof except for the owner's
primary residence. The additional lien provided in this subsection is inferior to all prior liens and
shall be collected as a money judgment.
(C) If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Inspector, he shall sell the
materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or
attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal
or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the
Inspector, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or
otherwise.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.56 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
(A) In addition to the remedies provided in § 151.52, 151.54, and 151.55, the
remedies provided in Code of Ordinances § 10.98 may also be used to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
(B) Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair or limit
in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement
by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this chapter by criminal process as authorized by
G.S. § 14-4, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the
enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.
(C) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to otherwise abrogate or impair the
other powers of the town to enforce any provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations,
nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this chapter shall
be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law.
(Amended 09-04-07; 03-08-2010).
§ 151.57 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO HEAR APPEALS.
Repealed.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
§ 151.58 OTHER PROVISIONS.
In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the town, the provision which
establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the residents of the town shall prevail.
§ 151.59 VIOLATIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect,
or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the
same, upon order of the Inspector duly made and served as herein provided, within the time
specified in such order. Each day that any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with such
order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit, with respect to
which an order has been issued pursuant to § 151.52, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the
same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration, or improvement or its
vacation and closing. Each day that such occupancy continues after such prescribed time shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Amended 03-08-2010)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 152.01 THROUGH 152.11.
Repealed on 6/13/11.
MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
§ 153.02 THROUGH 153.59
Renumbered to Chapter 151 on 6/13/11.
LAND USAGE
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 THROUGH 154.09.
Repealed on 6/13/11.
PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 154.25 THROUGH 154.34.
Repealed on 6/13/11.
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENT, DEDICATION,
RESERVATION, MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN
§ 154.45 THROUGH 154.53.
Repealed on 6/13/11.
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.65 THROUGH 154.72.
Repealed on 6/13/11.
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
Repealed on 6/13/11.
LAND USAGE
WATERSHED WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION
§ 156.01 THROUGH 156.12.
Repealed on 6/13/11.
LAND USAGE
STREET NAMING AND RENAMING
(Renumbered to §150.25 - .28; Am. Ord. 1/12/09)
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Table of Contents (v3a)
Table of Contents
A. Acknowledgement a- 2
B. Ordinance to Adopt a- 3
Chapter 1 - General Provisions 1-1
1.1. - Title 1- 3
1.2. - Authority 1- 3
1.3. - General Purpose and Intent 1-3
1.4. - Applicability 1-5
1.5. - Conformance with Town Adopted Policy Guidance 1-6
1.6. - Development Guide 1-7
1.7. - Relationship to Other Laws, Agreements or Rights 1-7
1.8. - Transitional Provisions 1-8
1.9. - Transition to New Zoning Districts 1-11
1.10. - Vested Rights 1-12
1.11. - Severability 1-13
1.12. - Miscellaneous 1-13
Chapter 2 - Administration 2-1
2.1. - Summary Development Review 2-3
2.2. - Summary Development Review 2-5
2.3. - Advisory Bodies 2-21
2.4. - Standard Review Procedures 2-28
2.5. - Review Procedures (Decision-Making Body Review & Decision ) 2-44
2.6. - Review Procedures (Staff Review & Decision ) 2-97
Chapter 3 - Zoning Districts 3-1
3 .1. - General Provisions 3-3
3 .2. - General Zoning Districts Established 3-5
3 .3. - Residential Zoning Districts 3-7
3 .4. - Business Zoning Districts 3-13
3 .5. - Special Zoning Districts 3-20
3.6. - Conditional Zoning Districts 3-21
3.7. - Planned Development Zoning Districts 3-22
3.8. - Overlay Zoning Districts 3-27
Chapter 4 - Uses 4-1
4 .1. - Principal Use Table 4-2
4 .2. - Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types 4-10
a-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Table of Contents (v3a)
4.3. - Use Standards 4-42
4.4. - Accessory Structures and Uses 4-64
4.5. - Temporary Uses 4-72
Chapter 5 - Development Standards 5-1
5 .1. - Public Infrastructure 5-4
5 .2. - Zone Lot and Access 5-4
5.3 . - RESERVED 5-8
5.4 . - Off-Street Parking and Loading 5-8
5.5 . - Landscaping 5-19
5.6 . - Screening 5-40
5.7. - Signage 5-42
5.8. - Design Standards 5-54
5.9. - Sidewalks 5-59
5.10. - Exterior Lighting 5-62
5.11. - Fences 5-66
5.12. - Open Space 5-69
5.13. - Development Types 5-71
Chapter 6 - Environmental Standards 6-1
6 .1. - RESERVED 6-3
6 .2. - Watershed Protection 6-3
6 .3. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation 6-18
6 .4. - Flood Damage Prevention 6-30
Chapter 7 - Subdivision Standards 7-1
7 .1. - Subdivisions 7-2
7 .2. - Financial Guarantees 7-14
7 .3. - Homeowners’ or Property Owners’ Association 7-19
7 .4. - Greenway Dedication 7-22
7 .5. - Reservation of Land 7-22
Chapter 8 - Nonconformities 8- 1
8 .1. - General Applicability 8-2
8.2. - Nonconforming Uses 8-3
8.3. - Nonconforming Structures 8-6
8.4. - Nonconforming Lots of Record 8-7
8.5. - Nonconforming Sigs 8-9
Chapter 9 - Enforcement 9-1
9 .1. - Purpose 9-3
9 .2. - Compliance Required 9-3
a-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Table of Contents (v3a)
9.3. - Violations 9-3
9.4. - Responsible Persons 9-4
9.5. - Enforcement 9-5
9.6. - Enforcement Procedure 9-6
9.7. - Remedies 9-7
9.8. - Remedites 0 Cumulative and Continuous 9-10
9.9. - Assessment of Civil Penalties 9-10
Chapter 10 - Measurements & Definitions 10-1
10 .1. - General Rules for Interpretation 10-2
10.2. - Rules of Measurements 10-4
10.3. - Abbreviations 10-14
10.4. - Definitions 10-16
a-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Table of Contents (v3a)
A. Acknowledgement
The following is a list of individuals who participated in the drafting and adoption of the
Ordinance:
Contributors
Board of Commissioners Planning Board
Robert A. Farrell, Mayor Bryan Bowles, Chairperson
Jim Thomas, Mayor Pro-tem Janet Peele, Vice-Chair
Joe Dannelley Roger Bone
Kenneth Byrd Allen Bill Prevatte
Wilma Laney Tim Marcham
Elease Goodwin Brooks Pomeranz
Dianne Innes
Raymond Lee
Heidi Whitescarver
Appearance & Beautification Commission Downtown Aberdeen Advisory Board
Janet Peele, Chairperson Jacklyn Cornell, Chairperson
Dene Moon Enrique Artiga, Vice-Chair
Eldiweiss Lockey Kasey Zumwalt
Amanda Robbins Courtney Holmes
Elease Goodwin Stephen Wisniew
Teressa Beavers Angela McKew
Amanda Jakl
Staff Consulting Partners
Paul Sabiston, Town Manager G. Lee Burnette
Joe Wood, Public Works Director Heidi Galanti
Justin Westbrook, Planning Director Robert Robbins
Kathy Blake, Senior Planner
Christian Haas, Planner
Danielle Orloff, Permit Technician
Maria Carpenter, Administrative Assistant
a-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Table of Contents (v3a)
B. Ordinance to Adopt
AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT A NEW TOWN OF ABERDEEN
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
WHEREAS, the existing Unified Development Ordinance was adopted by the Board of
Commissioners on June 13, 2011 and subsequently amended;
WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners adopted the Comprehensive Land
Development Plan on January 28, 2019 which called for numerous changes in existing
Unified Development Ordinance standards to provide the foundation to preserve what is
of value in Aberdeen;
WHEREAS, numerous community sessions were held over an eight-month period with
various stakeholders in the town to solicit comments on regulatory changes and on the
draft ordinance;
WHEREAS, based upon these comments and recommended changes, the Town staff
produced a public hearing draft Unified Development Ordinance for the Planning
Board's consideration;
WHEREAS, on October 17, 2019 a public hearing was held before the Aberdeen Planning
Board in accordance with N.C. General Statute § 160A-387;
WHEREAS, on October 17, 2019 the Planning Board recommended the new Unified
Development Ordinance for adoption by the Aberdeen Board of Commissioners; and
WHEREAS, notice was published in The Pilot newspaper on November 13, 2019 and
November 20, 2019 and on November 25, 2019 the Board of Commissioners held a public
hearing on the Planning Board’s recommended Unified Development Ordinance in
accordance with N.C. General Statue § 160A-364 and other applicable statutes;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of
Aberdeen that:
Section 1. The Aberdeen Unified Development Ordinance adopted on June 13,
2011 is hereby repealed, except that the following appendices to the 2011 shall
remain in effect:
? Appendix B, “Specifications on Driveway Entrances”;
? Appendix C, “Specification for Street Design and Construction”; and
? Appendix L, “Design Principals & Guidelines, Aberdeen Historic
Preservation Commission.”
a-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Table of Contents (v3a)
The Aberdeen Town Clerk, in consultation with the Town manager and the Planning and
Inspections Director, is authorized to organize and codify these three appendices in such
a manner as she deems to be appropriate. The Town staff shall provide a written report
to the Board of Commissioners detailing how these appendices have been codified, and
said report shall be included in the official minutes of the Board of Commissioners.
Section 2. The Aberdeen Unified Development Ordinance recommended by
the Planning Board on October 17, 2019 is hereby adopted. The Ordinance shall be
a standalone technical ordinance, separate from the Aberdeen Code of
Ordinances.
Section 3. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
ordinance.
Section 4. All provisions of any town ordinance or resolution in conflict with
this ordinance are repealed.
Section 5. This ordinance shall become effective on January 1, 2020.
The foregoing ordinance, having been submitted to a vote, received the following vote
and was duly adopted this 25 th day of November, 2019.
Adopted this the 25 th day of November 2019.
Ayes: __________
Noes: __________
Absent or Excused: __________
Dated: __________
___________________________________
Robert A. Farrell, Mayor
ATTEST:
___________________________________
Regina M. Rosy, Town Clerk
a-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
Chapter 1 : General Provisions
1.1. Title 1- 3
1.2. Authority 1- 3
1.2.1. - General Authority 1- 3
1.2.2. - References to North Carolina General Statutes 1- 3
1.3. - General Purpose and Intent 1- 3
1.4. - Applicability 1- 5
1.4.1. - Effective Date 1- 5
1.4.2. - General Applicability 1- 5
1.4.3. - Application to Government Units 1- 5
1.4.4. - No Development Until Compliance With All Applicable Law 1- 5
1.4.5. - Annexation 1- 6
1.5. - Conformance With Town Adopted Policy Guidance 1- 6
1.5.1. - Adopted Policy Guidance 1- 6
1.5.2. - Conformance 1- 7
1.6. - Development Guide 1- 7
1.7. - Relationship to Other Laws, Agreements or Rights 1- 7
1.7.1. - Minimum Requirements 1- 7
1.7.2. - Conflict with Other Town Codes or Laws 1- 7
1.7.3. - Review of Private Agreements 1- 8
1.7.4. - Conflicts with State or Federal Law 1- 8
1.7.5. - Existing Agreements or Vested Rights 1- 8
1.8. - Transitional Provisions 1- 8
1.8.1. - Prior Violations Continue 1- 8
1.8.2. - Existing Nonconformities 1- 8
1.8.3. - Pending Complete Applications 1- 8
1.8.4. - Approved Applications 1- 9
1.8.5. - Prior-Approved Conditional Use Zoning 1- 10
1.8.6. - Prior-Approved Conditional Zoning 1- 10
1.8.7. - Prior-Approved Planned Unit Development 1- 10
1.8.8. - Existing Uses 1- 11
1.9. - Transition to New Zoning Districts 1- 11
1.9.1. - District Translation Table 1- 11
1.10. - Vested Rights 1- 12
1-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
1.10.1. - Building Permit 1- 12
1.10.2. - Vested Rights Certificate 1- 12
1.10.3. - Common Law Vesting 1- 12
1.10.4. - Prior Vesting 1- 13
1.11. - Severability 1- 13
1.12. - Miscellaneous 1-13
1-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
1.1. Title
This Ordinance shall be officially known as the "Unified Development Ordinance" and
may be referred to as "this Ordinance," and several abbreviated references ("the UDO,"
"this UDO," or "UDO.")
1.2. Authority
1.2.1. - General Authority
This Ordinance consolidates the Town’s zoning, subdivision, and flood damage
prevention regulations, as authorized by the North Carolina General Statutes. It is
adopted in accordance with:
A. The General Assembly. The authority granted to the Town of Aberdeen by the
General Assembly of the State of North Carolina;
B. The North Carolina Statutes. The North Carolina General Statutes, including:
1. Chapter 160A, Article 8 (Police Powers);
2. Chapter 160A, Article 19 (Planning and Regulation of Development);
3. Chapter 143, Article 21 (Water and Air Resources);
4. Chapter 113A, Article 4 (Sedimentation and Pollution Control);
C. The Town Charter. The Aberdeen Town Charter;
D. Other Relevant Laws
1. All other relevant laws of the State of North Carolina; and
2. Any special legislation enacted by the General Assembly.
1.2.2. - References to North Carolina General Statutes
Whenever any provision of this Unified Development Ordinance refers to or cites a
section of the North Carolina General Statutes and that section is later amended or
superseded, this Unified Development Ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to
the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded
section.
1.3. - General Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this Unified Development Ordinance is to protect the public health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens and landowners of the Town of
1-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
Aberdeen, and to implement the policies and objectives of Town-adopted plans
addressing the Town's growth and development. More specifically, the intent of this
Unified Development Ordinance is to:
A. Foster convenient, compatible, and efficient relationships among land uses;
B. Support and encourage a strong and diverse economy;
C. Better manage and lessen congestion in the streets;
D. Improve and revitalize the town’s downtown area, as identified in the Downtown
Plan;
E. Ensure the provision of adequate open space between uses for light, air, and fire
safety;
F. Secure the safety of landowners and residents from flooding, fire, seismic activity,
and dangers presented from extreme weather events, to the extent possible;
G. Encourage urban densities in appropriate locations such as the Downtown area;
H. Facilitate the adequate and economic provision of transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks, and other public services;
I. Improve development quality and the quality of life for town residents and
visitors;
J. Protect water quality within the General Watershed Areas of designated water
supply watersheds;
K. Preserve and enhance visual attractiveness and economic vitality;
L. Preserve the neighborhood character and quality of residential communities
while providing increased housing choices indicated in adopted policy guidance,
as appropriate;
M. Establish new compact, mixed-use centers in appropriate locations, as identified
in adopted policy guidance;
N. Maintain and enhance the character of distinct areas in the town through an
emphasis on design and form standards;
O. Require appropriate setbacks for buildings and other structures to facilitate the
safe movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, provide adequate fire lanes,
and ensure adequate distance from dust, noise, and fumes created by vehicular
traffic;
P. Protect and revitalize the Town's neighborhoods and gateways;
Q. Add flexibility and provide incentives for beneficial redevelopment, development
that incorporates sustainable features, and increased pedestrian-orientation;
R. Protect existing established development and neighborhoods from incompatible
infill and redevelopment; and
S. Protect open space, natural resources, and rural character, where appropriate.
1-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
1.4. - Applicability
1.4.1. - Effective Date
This Unified Development Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on January 1, 2020,
and repeals and replaces the Aberdeen Unified Development Ordinance, as originally
adopted on or before June 13, 2011, and as subsequently amended.
1.4.2. - General Applicability
The provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance shall apply to the development of
all land within the corporate limits and the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the Town
of Aberdeen unless it is expressly exempted by a specific section or subsection of this
Unified Development Ordinance.
1.4.3. - Application to Government Units
Except as stated elsewhere, this Unified Development Ordinance shall apply to:
A. The Town of Aberdeen. Development by the Town or its agencies or
departments;
B. Local and State Government. Development of buildings by state or Town
agencies or departments, public colleges or universities, or other political
subdivisions of the State, in accordance with the standards in Section 160A-392 of
the North Carolina General Statutes; and
C. The Federal Government. Development owned or held in tenancy by the
government of the United States, its agencies, departments, or corporate services,
to the full extent permitted by federal law.
1.4.4. - No Development Until Compliance With All
Applicable Law
A. No Land Developed. Unless exempted, no land shall be developed without
compliance with this Unified Development Ordinance and all other applicable
Town, State, and federal regulations.
B. No Use or Occupancy. No person shall use, occupy, or divide any land or a
building or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or division of land or a
building under their control, except in accordance with this Unified Development
1-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
Ordinance. The use or occupancy of a building or land relates to anything and
everything that is done to, on, or in that building or land.
C. No Building Constructed. No building, or portion thereof, shall be erected, used,
occupied, maintained, moved, or altered except in conformity with the applicable
regulations in this Unified Development Ordinance.
D. Applicability of UDO Amendments to Submitted Permit Applications. If a
permit applicant submits a permit application for any type of development under
this Unified Development Ordinance and any amendment is made to this Unified
Development Ordinance between the time the permit application was submitted
and a permit decision is made, the permit applicant may choose which version of
the Unified Development Ordinance will apply to the permit.
1.4.5. - Annexation
A. County or Municipal Regulations Prevail. If any portion of the territory subject to
county or other municipal jurisdiction is annexed by the Town or taken into the
Town's ETJ, county or previous municipal regulations and powers of enforcement
shall remain in effect until one of the following occurs:
1. The Town has adopted regulations for the area; or
2. A period of 60 days has elapsed following the effective date of annexation
or extension of the ETJ.
B. Utility Connection Required. The Town requires annexed land to connect to or
use public utilities (potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater, etc.) when
appropriate, as determined by the Public Works Director (Section 2.2.8). Such
annexed land shall connect to Town facilities when available and at the cost of the
land owner.
1.5. - Conformance With Town Adopted Policy
Guidance
1.5.1. - Adopted Policy Guidance
The administration, enforcement, and amendment of this Unified Development
Ordinance shall be accomplished in accordance with the Town’s adopted planning
policy framework. The Vision Statement of the Comprehensive Land Development Plan
provides overarching policy guidance. The comprehensive plan (also referred to as the
Comprehensive Land Development Plan ) sets out general goals for desired uses of land
and resource protection strategies. Area plans provide strategic planning policy
1-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
guidance for specific parts of the Town, and system plans address planning issues
related to the Town’s infrastructure systems.
1.5.2. - Conformance
A. Consistency. This Unified Development Ordinance is intended to ensure that all
development within the Town is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies,
strategies, and actions contained in the Town's adopted policy guidance.
B. Amendment Upon Inconsistency. To the extent this Unified Development
Ordinance is or becomes inconsistent with the adopted policy guidance, it should
be amended to remain consistent. All amendments to this Unified Development
Ordinance text or to the Official Zoning Map should maintain and enhance
consistency between this Unified Development Ordinance and adopted policy
guidance.
1.6. - Development Guide
The purpose of the Development Guide is to supplement and assist in the use of this
Unified Development Ordinance. The Planning and Inspections Director is authorized to
establish the content and form for each type of development application reviewed
under this Unified Development Ordinance. The Planning and Inspections Director shall
prepare and maintain a Development Guide that sets forth the procedures,
specifications, and practices necessary for the effective and efficient administration of
this Unified Development Ordinance. The content of the Development Guide shall be
maintained and amended subject to staff review and approval.
1.7. - Relationship to Other Laws, Agreements
or Rights
1.7.1. - Minimum Requirements
In the application of this Unified Development Ordinance, all provisions shall be
considered as minimum requirements and shall not be deemed to limit or repeal any
other powers or authority granted under the North Carolina General Statutes.
1.7.2. - Conflict with Other Town Codes or Laws
If a provision of this Unified Development Ordinance is inconsistent with another
provision of this Unified Development Ordinance, or with a provision found in other
adopted ordinances of the Town, the more restrictive provision shall govern unless the
1-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
terms of the more restrictive provision specifies otherwise. The more restrictive provision
is the one that imposes greater restrictions or burdens, or more stringent controls.
1.7.3. - Review of Private Agreements
The Town may review private agreements, such as those related to maintenance of
private common open space, shared parking, or cross access easements, but the Town is
not responsible for monitoring or enforcing private covenants and restrictions.
1.7.4. - Conflicts with State or Federal Law
If a provision of this Unified Development Ordinance is inconsistent with state or federal
law, the more restrictive provision controls, to the extent permitted by law.
1.7.5. - Existing Agreements or Vested Rights
Nothing in this Unified Development Ordinance is intended to repeal, supersede, annul,
impair, or interfere with any existing private agreements or vested rights, provided such
agreements or vested rights are lawfully established and remain in effect.
1.8. - Transitional Provisions
1.8.1. - Prior Violations Continue
Any prior violation of the previous 2011 Unified Development Ordinance, or earlier code,
shall continue to be a violation, unless the violation is deemed to be in compliance with
this newly adopted Unified Development Ordinance. Violations of this Unified
Development Ordinance shall be subject to Chapter 9: Enforcement.
1.8.2. - Existing Nonconformities
If any use, structure, lot or sign, legally existed on the effective date of this Unified
Development Ordinance, but does not fully comply with the standards of this Unified
Development Ordinance, the use, structure, lot or sign, is considered nonconforming
under this Unified Development Ordinance and shall comply with the requirements in
Chapter 8: Nonconformities.
1.8.3. - Pending Complete Applications
A. Final Action Pending. Except for applications for subdivision, any development
application accepted as complete before January 1, 2020, but still pending final
action as of that date, shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the
1-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
regulations in effect when the application was accepted as complete. To the
extent such an application is approved and proposes development that does not
comply with this Unified Development Ordinance, the subsequent development,
although permitted, shall be nonconforming and subject to the provisions of
Chapter 8: Nonconformities.
B. Complete Applications. Completed applications shall be processed and subject
to any time frames for review, approval, and completion as established in the
regulations in effect at the time of the application is deemed by the Planning and
Inspections Director to be complete. If the application fails to comply with the
required time frames, it shall expire and future development shall be subject to
the requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance.
C. Review Under this Unified Development Ordinance. An applicant with a
pending application accepted before January 1, 2020 may opt to have the
proposed development reviewed under this Ordinance by submitting a written
request to the Planning and Inspections Director.
D. Subdivision Applications. Applications for subdivision approval still pending final
action as of January 1, 2020 shall be reviewed under either the rules in place at the
time the application was deemed by the Planning and Inspections Director to be
complete or this Ordinance, at the choice of the applicant. To the extent such an
application is approved and proposes development that does not comply with
this Ordinance, the development, although permitted, shall be nonconforming
and subject to the provisions of Chapter 8: Nonconformities.
1.8.4. - Approved Applications
A. Valid Until Expiration. Any development approvals or permits granted before
January 1, 2020 shall remain valid until their expiration date. Developments with
valid approvals or permits shall be carried out in accordance with the terms and
conditions of their approval and the development standards in effect at the time
of approval, provided the approval or permit is valid and has not expired.
B. Expiration. If the prior approval expires or is revoked (e.g., for failure to comply
with the terms and conditions of approval), any subsequent development of the
site shall comply with this Unified Development Ordinance.
C. Nonconforming Development. To the extent a prior-approved application
proposes development that does not comply with this Unified Development
Ordinance, the subsequent development, although permitted, shall be
nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Chapter 8: Nonconformities.
1-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
1.8.5. - Prior-Approved Conditional Use Zoning
A. Subject to Existing Conditions. A conditional use zoning approval (and
associated conditional use permit) approved before June 13, 2011 shall be
translated to the corresponding new zoning district classification. It shall continue
to be subject to all conditions in the conditional use permit.
B. Amendment. A conditional use zoning (and associated conditional use permit)
approved before June 13, 2011 must be amended through an amendment to the
Official Zoning Map in accordance with Section 2.5.20, Zoning Map Amendment.
1.8.6. - Prior-Approved Conditional Zoning
A. Subject to Existing Conditions. A conditional zoning approved before January 1,
2020 shall be translated to the corresponding new zoning district classification. It
shall continue to be subject to all conditions of approval.
B. Minor Changes. Unless prohibited by the Board of Commissioners as part of the
original approval, a conditional rezoning approved before January 1, 2020 may
include minor changes from the approved conditions in accordance with the
standards in Section 2.5.5.F.1, Minor Changes.
C. Amendment. To the extent a landowner proposes development that is not
allowed by a conditional zoning approved before January 1, 2020, it must be
amended in accordance with Section 2.5.5.F.2, Material Changes are
Amendments.
1.8.7. - Prior-Approved Planned Unit Development
A. Classification Retained. A Planned Unit Development (PUD) district subject to a
master or general development plan approved before January 1, 2020 shall retain
the PUD classification and continue to be subject to the master plan or general
development plan and all associated conditions of approval.
B. Amendment of Conditional Use Zoning. Amendments to a PUD district
established through a conditional use zoning classification (and a conditional use
permit) approved before June 13, 2011 shall be subject to the standards in Section
1.8.5, Prior-Approved Conditional Use Zoning.
C. Amendment of Conditional Zoning. Amendments to a PUD district established
through a conditional zoning classification approved before January 1, 2020 shall
be subject to the standards in Section 1.8.6, Prior-Approved Conditional Zoning.
1-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
1.8.8. - Existing Uses
If a use was a lawfully established permitted use before January 1, 2020 and is
subsequently made a special use in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, the use shall be
considered a lawfully-established special use.
1.9. - Transition to New Zoning Districts
1.9.1. - District Translation Table
On January 1, 2020, land zoned with a zoning district classification from the previous
ordinance shall be translated or reclassified to one of the zoning district classifications in
this Unified Development Ordinance as set forth in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts. Table 1.9.1,
Zoning District Translation, summarizes the translation or reclassification of the zoning
districts used in the previous ordinance to the zoning districts used in this Ordinance.
(For example, Table 1.9.1 shows that all lands classified as Commercial and Industrial (C-I)
in the previous ordinance (under the column titled "Former Zoning District") are now
classified Light Industrial (LI) in this Ordinance (under the column titled "Current Zoning
District").
Table 1.9.1 : Zoning District Translation
Former Zoning District Current Zoning District
Residential Districts
R30-18 Residential Single-Family - 30 (R-30)
R20-16 Residential Single-Family - 20 (R-20)
R18-14
Residential Single-Family - 15 (R-15)
R15-12
R10-10 Residential Single-Family - 10 (R-10)
R6-10
Residential Multi-Family - 6 (RM-6)
Manufactures Home (MH)
Business Districts
Office and Industrial (OI)
Office & Institutional (OI)
Neighborhood Transitional (B-3)
Neighborhood Shopping (B-2) Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
Central Business District (B-1) Central Business (CB)
General Commercial (GC)
General Commercial (GC)
Highway Commercial (HC)
1-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
Planned Development (PD) Districts
Planned Unit Development - Residential (PUD-R)
Planned Development (PD)
Planned Unit Development - Business and Industrial (PUD-BI)
Industrial Districts
Commercial and Industrial(C-I) Light Industrial (LI)
Heavy Industrial (I-H) Heavy Industrial (HI)
Special Districts
Rural & Agricultural (RA) Agricultural & Rural (AGR)
1.10. - Vested Rights
Vested rights under this Unified Development Ordinance shall be established only in
accordance with the following.
1.10.1. - Building Permit
The issuance of a building permit establishes a vested right to development in
accordance with Section 160A-385.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes, as long as the
development complies with the terms and conditions of approval of that building
permit.
1.10.2. - Vested Rights Certificate
A vested right for a site plan, preliminary plat, or group development plan may be
established in accordance with Section 2.5.17, Vested Rights Certificate.
1.10.3. - Common Law Vesting
A common law vested right is established only when the following can be demonstrated
by the landowner:
A. There is an affirmative governmental act by the Town in the form of an approval
of a permit or development approval under this Ordinance; and
B. The landowner relies on this affirmative governmental act in good faith and
makes substantial expenditures to develop the land; and
C. It would be inequitable to prevent the landowner from proceeding to develop the
land consistent with the terms and conditions of the permit or development
approval relied upon.
1-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 1 : General Provisions (v3a)
1.10.4. - Prior Vesting
Amendments, supplements, repeals, or other changes in zoning regulations and zoning
boundaries shall not be applicable or enforceable without the consent of the landowner
with regard to lots for which building permits or vested rights certificates have been
issued (pursuant to state law) prior to the enactment of the ordinance making the
change(s), so long as the vested rights, building permit, or vested rights certificate
remain valid and unexpired.
1.11. - Severability
The legislative intent of the Board of Commissioners in adopting this Unified
Development Ordinance is that all provisions shall regulate development in accordance
with the existing and future needs of the Town as established in this Unified
Development Ordinance, and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the landowners and residents of Aberdeen. If any section, subsection, sentence,
boundary, or clause of this Unified Development Ordinance is for any reason held by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of the Unified Development Ordinance. The Board of
Commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed this Unified Development
Ordinance and any section, subsection, sentence, boundary, clause, and phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
boundaries, clauses, or phrases are declared invalid.
1.12. - Miscellaneous
Words used in the singular in this Unified Development Ordinance include the plural
and words used in the plural include the singular.
1-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
Chapter 2 : Administration
2.1. - Summary Development Review 2- 3
2.1.1. - Table Contents 2- 3
2.1.2. - Additional Information 2- 3
2.2. - Review Authorities 2- 5
2.2.1. - Overview 2- 5
2.2.2. - Board of Commissioners 2- 5
2.2.3. - Planning Board (PB) 2- 6
2.2.4. - Board of Adjustment (BOA) 2- 10
2.2.5. - Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) 2- 13
2.2.6. - Technical Review Committee (TRC) 2- 17
2.2.7 - Planning and Inspections Director 2- 18
2.2.8. - Public Works Director 2- 20
2.3. - Advisory Bodies 2- 21
2.3.1. - Overview 2- 21
2.3.2. - Downtown Aberdeen Advisory Board (DAAB) 2- 21
2.3.3. - Appearance and Beautification Commission (ABC) 2- 25
2.4. - Standard Review Procedures 2- 28
2.4.1. - General 2- 28
2.4.2. - Pre-Application Conference 2- 28
2.4.3. - Citizen Information Meeting 2- 29
2.4.4. - Application Submittal and Acceptance 2- 31
2.4.5. - Staff Review and Action 2- 32
2.4.6. - Public Notification 2- 34
2.4.7. - Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures 2- 37
2.4.8. - Review by PB or HPC 2- 38
2.4.9. - Action by Decision-Making Body 2- 39
2.4.10. - Conditions of Approval 2- 41
2.4.11. - Notification of Decision or Action 2- 41
2.4.12. - Effect of Development Approval 2- 41
2.4.13. - Deferral and Continuance 2- 42
2.4.14. - Withdrawal 2- 43
2.4.15. - Expiration of Permit or Development Approval 2- 43
2.5. - Review Procedures (Decision-Making Body Review & Decision ) 2- 44
2.5.1. - Overview 2- 44
2.5.2. - Appeal 2- 45
2-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2.5.3. - Beneficial Use Determination 2- 47
2.5.4. - Certificate of Appropriateness 2- 52
2.5.5. - Conditional Zoning 2- 56
2.5.6. - Development Agreement 2- 60
2.5.7. - Financial Guarantees 2- 63
2.5.8. - Land Use Plan Amendment 2- 65
2.5.9. - Planned Development 2- 66
2.5.10. - Reasonable Accommodation 2- 71
2.5.11. - Right-of-Way Encroachment 2- 73
2.5.12. - Special Use 2- 75
2.5.13. - Street Abandonment 2- 78
2.5.14. - Street Name Change 2- 79
2.5.15. - Text Amendment 2- 81
2.5.16. - Variance 2- 83
2.5.17. - Vested Rights Certificate 2- 88
2.5.18. - Voluntary Annexation 2- 90
2.5.19. - Watershed Variance 2- 92
2.5.20. - Zoning Map Amendment 2- 95
2.6. - Review Procedures (Staff Review & Decision ) 2- 97
2.6.1. - Overview 2- 97
2.6.2. - Administrative Adjustment 2- 97
2.6.3. - Building Permit 2- 99
2.6.4. - Determination 2- 101
2.6.5. - Driveway Permit 2- 103
2.6.6. - Easement Reconveyance 2- 104
2.6.7. - Exempt Map 2- 105
2.6.8. - Final Plat 2- 106
2.6.9. - Floodplain Development Permit 2- 108
2.6.10. - Group Development Permit 2- 109
2.6.11. - Land Disturbance Permit 2- 110
2.6.12. - Preliminary Plat 2- 112
2.6.13. - Sign Permit 2- 114
2.6.14. - Site Plan 2- 115
2.6.15. - Zoning Compliance Permit 2- 117
2-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2.1. - Summary Development Review
2.1.1. - Table Contents
Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table, identifies the review authority for
development applications reviewed under this Unified Development Ordinance. The
section also identifies:
A. The relevant section of this Unified Development Ordinance where procedural
information may be found;
B. Whether or not a pre-application conference is mandatory or optional;
C. If a citizen information meeting is required as part of an application's review
procedure;
D. If a public hearing is required; and
E. If a required public hearing is conducted as a quasi-judicial public hearing.
2.1.2. - Additional Information
Detailed information on each development review procedure is included in Section 2.5,
Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, and Section
2.6, Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision.
Table 2.1.2. : Summary Development Review Table
Pre-application Conference & Citizen Information Meeting: M = Mandatory, O = Optional
Type of Action: C : Comment | R : Recommendation | D : Decision | A : Appeal
Type of Hearing: { } = Public Hearing | ( ) = Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing
Procedure Section
Pre-
Application
Conference
Citizen
Information
Meeting
Review Authorities
Staff Decision Making Bodies
PID PWD TRC HPC PB BOC BOA
Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
Appeal 2.5.2 O C [1] C [1] (D)
Beneficial Use
Determination
2.5.3 O D
Certificate of
Appropriateness
2.5.4 O R (D) (A)
Conditional Zoning 2.5.5 M M R R [2] {R} {D}
Development
Agreement
2.5.6 M R {R} {D}
2-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
Financial Guarantee 2.5.7 R D
Land Use Plan
Amendment
2.5.8 M O R R [2] {R} {D}
Planned
Development
2.5.9 R [2] {D}
Reasonable
Accommodation
2.5.10 (D)
Right-of-Way
Encroachment
2.5.11 {D}
Special Use 2.5.12 R [2] {R} (D)
Street Abandonment 2.5.13 {R} {D}
Street Name Change 2.5.14 {D}
Text Amendment 2.5.15 R {R} {D}
Variance 2.5.16 R [2] (D)
Vested Rights
Certificate
2.5.17 (D)
Voluntary Annexation 2.5.18 {D}
Watershed Variance 2.5.19 D [5]
Zoning Map
Amendment
2.5.20 R [2] {R} {D}
Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision
Administrative
Adjustment
2.6.2 O D R [2] {R} {D} (A)
Building Permit 2.6.3 O D
Determination 2.6.4 O D (A)
Driveway Permit 2.6.5 O D (A)
Easement
Reconveyance
2.6.6 O D (A)
Exempt Map 2.6.7 O D (A)
Final Plat 2.6.8 O D (A)
Floodplain
Development Permit
2.6.9 O D (A)
Group Development 2.6.10 O D (A)
Land Disturbance
Permit
2.6.11 O C
Preliminary Plat 2.6.12 O D (A)
Sign Permit 2.6.13 O D (A)
Site Plan 2.6.14 O D (A)
2-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
Zoning Compliance
Permit
2.6.15 O D (A)
C : Comment | R : Recommendation | D : Decision | A : Appeal
[1] : The decision-making director provides comments on appeals.
[2] : The Historic Preservation Commission provides a recommendation on applications associated with a local
historic district and comments on applications associated with a landmark.
[3] : The Technical Review Committee decides right-of-way encroachments for features located below ground and
comments on above ground right-of-way encroachments.
[4] : The Public Works Director provides a recommendation on variance requests involving the flood damage
prevention provisions.
[5] : The Technical Review Committee decides minor watershed variances and provides a recommendation to the
Board of Commissioners on major watershed variances. Major watershed variances require approval by the Board
of Commissioners prior to consideration by the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission.
[6] : Only zoning map amendment applications seeking to re-designate land to a more intense zoning district
designation are subject to a citizen information meeting requirement.
2.2. - Review Authorities
2.2.1. - Overview
The following review authorities have powers and responsibilities in administering and
reviewing development applications under this Unified Development Ordinance:
A. Board of Commissioners (BOC);
B. Planning Board (PB);
C. Board of Adjustment (BOA);
D. Historic Preservation Commission (HPC);
E. Technical Review Committee (TRC);
F. Planning and Inspections Director; and
G. Public Works Director.
2.2.2. - Board of Commissioners
To exercise the authority granted the Board of Commissioners by State law, the Board of
Commissioners shall have the powers and duties under this Ordinance set out in Section
2.2.2, Board of Commissioners.
A. Powers and Duties
1. Application Review and Decision - To initiate, review and decide
applications for:
(a) Beneficial use determination;
(b) Conditional zonings;
2-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(c) Development agreements;
(d) Financial Guarantees;
(e) Land use plan amendments;
(f) Planned developments;
(g) Right-of-way encroachments;
(h) Special uses;
(i) Street abandonments;
(j) Text amendments;
(k) Vested rights certificates
(l) Voluntary annexations;
(m) Watershed variances (major); and
(n) Zoning map amendments.
2. Other Powers and Duties
(a) To approve, by resolution, a schedule of fees governing:
(1) Applications for permits and other development approvals
reviewed under this Unified Development Ordinance; and
(2) Civil penalties for violations of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
(b) To take any other action not delegated to the PB, BOA, HPC, TRC,
Planning and Inspections Director, or Public Works Director, as the
Board of Commissioners may deem desirable and necessary to
implement the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance.
B. Conflict of Interest
1. Practice
(a) A member shall not participate in or vote on any matter that has a
direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the
member.
(b) If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that
member does not recuse himself or herself, then the remaining
members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
2.2.3. - Planning Board (PB)
The Planning Board is hereby established in accordance with Section 160A-361 of the
North Carolina General Statutes.
A. Powers and Duties.
1. Application Review and Decision - To initiate, review and decide
applications for:
(a) Street name changes for existing streets.
2. Recommendation Authority - To make recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners on the following applications;
(a) Conditional zonings;
(b) Development agreements;
2-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(c) Land use plan amendments;
(d) Planned developments;
(e) Special uses;
(f) Street abandonments;
(g) Text amendments;
(h) Vested rights certificates; and
(i) Zoning map amendments
3. Other Powers and Duties - The PB shall have the following other powers
and duties:
(a) To develop a comprehensive plan for the territory under its
jurisdiction, subject to specific direction from the Board of
Commissioners.
(b) To make such other studies and plans and to review such other
related matters as directed by the Board of Commissioners.
(c) To exercise other powers and authority provided to it by the Board
of Commissioners this Unified Development Ordinance, or State
law.
B. Composition.
1. Membership: The PB shall consist of seven (7) regular posts, and two (2)
alternate posts. If an appointed member representing a Town post moves
outside the Town, or the appointed member representing the ETJ post
moves outside the ETJ, the move constitutes a resignation, effective upon
the date a replacement is appointed in accordance with the procedures of
this section.
(a) Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(b) Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(c) Post Three (3). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(d) Post Four (4). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(e) Post Five (5). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years. Post
to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(f) Post Six (6). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years. Post
to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(g) Post Seven (7). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the ETJ, and shall be appointed by
2-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
the Moore County Board of Commissioners in accordance with
Section 160A-362 of the North Carolina General Statutes. The ETJ
member shall have the same rights, privileges, and duties as the
other members.
2. Alternate Members: The Board of Commissioners may appoint at least
two (2) members for alternate posts to serve in the absence or temporary
disqualification of regular members. Each alternate member attending a
meeting and serving in the absence of a regular member may exercise all
the po wers and duties of a regular member. When an alternate member is
needed to serve in the absense or a regular member, the chairperson shall
designate the alternate member to serve in the case or meeting in
question.
(a) Alternate Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered
years. Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and
shall be appointed by the BOC.
(b) Alternate Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered
years. Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and
shall be appointed by the BOC.
3. Member Terms:
(a) Members, including alternate members are appointed to 2-year
terms and shall continue to serve until their successors are
appointed, provided that upon initial appointment their terms of
office may be staggered.
(b) The terms of all members shall not expire at the same time.
(c) Vacancies shall be filled by a new member or an alternate member
appointed by the BOC to serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
4. Officers:
(a) The PB shall elect from its members, a Chair and Vice Chair for a 1
year term of office commencing o n July 1.
(b) The Chair shall preside over all meetings.
(c) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside over
meetings.
(d) If both the Chair and Vice-Chair are absent, the PB membership
shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting Chair for the
meeting.
5. Staff. The Planning and Inspections Director shall:
(a) Provide administrative support to the PB;
(b) Record the minutes of all meetings;
(c) Conduct all correspondence of the PB;
(d) Supervise all clerical work; and
(e) Provide other technical support, as needed.
C. Rules of Procedure.
2-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
1. Schedule. The PB shall hold at least 1 regular meeting in each month
unless the Chair determines that there are no agenda items for
consideration.
2. Publication of Notice. Notice of all meetings shall be provided in
accordance with State law.
3. Open Meetings. All hearings shall be open to the public.
4. Official Record.
(a) The PB shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every action or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicate such fact.
(b) The PB shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions.
(c) All records and minutes shall be public record.
5. Quorum.
(a) No official business of the PB may be conducted without a quorum
present.
(b) A quorum is the majority of the PB membership, excluding
vacancie s, as set forth in Section 143-138.10 of the North Carolina
General Statutes, or as amended.
6. Voting.
(a) An affirmative vote of the majority of PB members present and
constituting a quorum is required for all decisions.
(b) The Chair shall vote as any other member.
(c) The ETJ post shall vote on all matters as any other member.
7. Continuance. The PB may continue a public hearing or delay voting on
any matter to a subsequent meeting upon showing of good cause, in
accordance with Section 2.4.13, Deferral and Continuance.
8. Absence.
(a) Members shall inform the Planning and Inspections Director of any
anticipated absence immediately after the receipt of the agenda.
(b) A regular member who misses 3 consecutive regular meetings or 33
percent or more of the regular meetings in a calendar year shall lose
their status as a voting member until reinstated by the BOC.
(c) Absences due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies
of a similar nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall
not affect the member's status on the PB; except that in the event
of a long illness or other such case resulting in a prolonged absence,
the member may be replaced by the BOC.
9. Special Committees:
(a) The PB may establish special committees to assist it in studying
specific issues.
(b) The membership of a special committee is not limited to PB
members.
(c) In establishing these committees, the PB may not delegate its
official powers and duties.
2-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
10. Compensation: Compensation for members may be provided by the
Board of Commissioners.
11. Conflict of Interest:
(a) A member shall not participate in or vote on any matter that has a
direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the
member.
(b) If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that
member does not recuse himself or herself, then the remaining
members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
12. Rules of Procedure:
(a) The PB shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and
establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice,
and meeting conduct.
(b) The PB's rules of procedure shall be made available for public
inspection in the Planning and Inspections Department.
2.2.4. - Board of Adjustment (BOA)
The Board of Adjustment is hereby established in accordance with Section 160A-388 of
the North Carolina General Statutes.
A. Powers and Duties.
1. Application Review and Decisions - To review and decide applications for:
(a) Appeals on decisions of the Planning and Inspections Director,
Public Works Director, TRC, or HPC;
(b) Reasonable accommodations; and
(c) Variances.
2. Other Powers and Duties:
(a) To hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Planning and
Inspections Director with regard to the Town of Aberdeen Code of
Ordinance, Title XV, Minimum Housing Standards provisions.
(b) To exercise other powers and authority provided to it by the Board
of Commissioners, this Ordinance, or state law.
B. Composition.
1. Membership. The BOA shall consist of five (5) regular posts and up to two
(2) alternate posts members. If an appointed member representing a Town
post moves outside the Town, or the appointed member representing the
ETJ post moves outside the ETJ, the move constitutes a resignation,
effective upon the date a replacement is appointed in accordance with the
procedures of this section.
(a) Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
2-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(b) Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(c) Post Three (3). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(d) Post Four (4). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
(e) Post Five (5). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a resident of the ETJ, and shall be appointed by
the Moore County Board of Commissioners in accordance with
Section 160A-362 of the North Carolina General Statutes. The ETJ
member shall have the same rights, privileges, and duties as the
other members.
2. Alternate Members: The Board of Commissioners may appoint two (2)
members for alternate posts to serve in the absence or temporary
disqualification of regular members. Each alternate member attending a
meeting and serving in the absence of a regular member may exercise all
the powers and duties of a regular member.
(a) Alternate Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered
years. Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and
shall be appointed by the BOC.
(b) Alternate Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered
years. Post to be filled by a resident of the Town of Aberdeen, and
shall be appointed by the BOC.
3. Member Terms:
(a) Membe rs, including alternate members are appointed to 2-year
terms and shall continue to serve until their successors are
appointed, provided that upon initial appointment the terms of
office may be staggered.
(b) The terms of all members shall not expire at the same time.
(c) Vacancies shall be filled by a new member or an alternate member
appointed by the BOC to serve for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
4. Officers:
(a) The BOA shall elect from its members a Chair and Vice Chair for a 1
year term of office commencing on July 1.
(b) The Chair shall preside over all meetings.
(c) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside over
meetings.
(d) If both the Chair and Vice-Chair are absent, the BOA membership
shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting Chair for the
meeting.
5. Staff - The Planning and Inspections Director shall:
2-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(a) Provide administrative support to the BOA;
(b) Record the minutes of all meetings;
(c) Conduct all correspondence of the BOA;
(d) Supervise all clerical work; and
(e) Provide other technical support, as needed.
C. Rules of Procedure.
1. Schedule. The BOA shall hold at least 1 regular meeting in each month
unless the Chair determines that there are no agenda items for
consideration.
2. Publication of Notice. Notice of all meetings shall be provided in
accordance with State law.
3. Open Meetings. All hearings shall be open to the public.
4. Official Record.
(a) The BOA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every action or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicate such fact.
(b) The BOA shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions.
(c) All records and minutes shall be public record.
5. Quorum.
(a) No official business of the BOA may be conducted without a
quorum present.
(b) A quorum is the majority of the BOA membership, excluding
vacancies.
6. Voting.
(a) The concurring vote of four-fifths ( 4/5 ) of the total number of BOA
members shall be necessary to grant a variance.
(b) A majority vote of the BOA members present and constituting a
quorum shall be required to approve an appeal reversing or
modifying a decision.
(c) Vacant posts on the BOA and members who are disqualified from
voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members
of the BOA for the calculation of the required majority if there are no
qualified alternate members available to take the place of such
members.
(d) The Chair shall vote as any other member.
(e) An ETJ member shall vote on all matters as any other member.
(f) The ETJ member shall be required to vote on all matters involving
land located within the ETJ.
7. Oaths. When required, the Chair shall administer required oaths to
witnesses in any matter coming before the BOA.
8. Continuance. The BOA may continue a public hearing or delay voting on
any matter to a subsequent meeting upon showing of good cause, in
accordance with Section 2.4.13, Deferral and Continuance.
2-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
9. Absence:
(a) Members shall inform the Planning and Inspections Director of any
anticipated absence immediately after receipt of the agenda.
(b) A regular member who misses 3 consecutive regular meetings or 33
percent or more of the regular meetings in a calendar year loses
their status as a voting member until reinstated by the BOC.
(c) Absences due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies
of a similar nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall
not affect the member's status on the BOA; except that in the event
of a long illness or other such case resulting in a prolonged absence,
the member may be replaced by the BOC.
10. Special Committees:
(a) The BOA may establish special committees to assist it in studying
specific issues.
(b) The membership of a special committee is not limited to BOA
members.
(c) In establishing these committees, the BOA may not delegate its
official powers and duties.
11. Compensation: Compensation for members may be provided for by the
Board of Commissioners.
12. Violation of Due Process:
(a) A member shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial
matter that would violate an affected person's' constitutional rights
to an impartial decision-maker. Impermissible violations of due
process include, but are not limited to: a member having a fixed
opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to
change; undisclosed ex parte communications; a close familial,
business, or other associational relationship with an affected person;
or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter.
(b) If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that
member does not recuse himself or herself, then the remaining
members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
13. Rules of Procedure:
(a) The BOA shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and
establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice,
and meeting conduct.
(b) The BOA's rules of procedure shall be made available for public
inspection in the Planning and Inspections Department.
2.2.5. - Historic Preservation Commission (HPC)
The HPC is hereby established in accordance with Chapter 160A-400.8 of the North
Carolina General Statutes.
A. Powers and Duties.
2-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
1. Application Review and Decisions - To review and decide applications for:
(a) Certificates of Appropriateness.
2. Recommendation Authority - To review and make recommendation on
the following, when they involve land located within the local historical
overlay (LHO) district:
(a) Conditional zonings;
(b) Planned developments;
(c) Special uses;
(d) Variances; and
(e) Zoning map amendments.
3. Other Powers and Duties - The HPC shall have the following other powers
and duties:
(a) To recommend to the Board of Commissioners regarding areas to
be designated by ordinance as a local historic district, or that such
designation of any local historic district or a part thereof be revoked
or removed for good cause shown.
(b) To adopt and update detailed historic district guidelines applicable
to lands within a local historic district.
(c) To recommend to the State Historic Preservation Office r egarding
the designation of any building, structure, site, area, or object as a
landmark, or that such designation be revoked or removed for good
cause shown.
(d) To review and act upon applications for COA proposals for
alterations, demolitions or new construction within local historic
districts, in accordance with this section and the North Carolina
General Statutes, and to revoke an approved COA for good cause
shown.
(e) To undertake an inventory of lands of historical, prehistoric,
architectural, and/or cultural significance, as authorized by the
Board of Commissioners.
(f) To recommend, as a North Carolina Certified Local Government
Commission, individual buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects
for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places.
(g) To recommend appropriate changes to this Unified Development
Ordinance which relate to local historic districts or which relate to
the preservation of historic buildings, structures, sites, areas or
objects, and to prepare and recommend the adoption of a
preservation element as part of the Town's adopted policy
guidance.
(h) To conduct an educational program with respect to historic
properties and districts within the town.
(i) To enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at
reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey
thereof. However, no member, employee, or agent of the HPC may
2-14
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
enter any private building or structure without the express consent
of the owner or occupant.
(j) To exercise other duties and authority provided to it by the Board of
Commissioners, this Ordinance, and state law.
B. Composition.
1. Membership: Th e HPC shall consist of five (5) regular posts, and two (2)
alternate posts .
(a) Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
(b) Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
(c) Post Three (3). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
(d) Post Four (4). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
(e) Post Five (5). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
2. Alternate Members: The Board of Commissioners may appoint two (2)
members for alternate posts to serve in the absence or temporary
disqualification of regular members. Each alternate member attending a
meeting and serving in the absence of a regular member may exercise all
the powers and duties of a regular member.
(a) Alternate Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered
years.
(b) Alternate Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered
years.
3. Residence Location and Qualifications:
(a) All posts of the HPC shall be filled by residents within the Town's
planning jurisdiction.
(b) Members shall have demonstrated experience or an interest in the
preservation of historic structures, or should be employed in
architecture, history, planning, archaeology, or a related discipline.
4. Member Terms:
(a) Members , including alternate members are appointed to 4-year
terms and sh all continue to serve until their s uccessors are
appointed, provided that upon initial appointment their terms of
office may be staggered.
(b) The terms of all members shall not expire at the same time.
(c) Vacancies shall be filled by a new member or an alternate member
appointed to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
5. Officers:
(a) The HPC shall elect from its members a Chair and Vice Chair for a 1
year term of office commencing on July 1.
(b) The Chair shall preside over all meetings.
(c) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside over
meetings.
(d) If both the Chair and Vice-Chair are absent, the HPC membership
shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting Chair for the
meeting.
2-15
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
6. Staff - The Planning and Inspections Director sh all:
(a) Provide administrative support to the HPC;
(b) Record the minutes of all meetings;
(c) Conduct all correspondence of the HPC;
(d) Supervise all clerical work; and
(e) Provide other technical support, as needed.
C. Rules of Procedure.
1. Schedule. The HPC shall hold at least 1 regular meeting in each month
unless the Chair determines that there are no agenda items for
consideration.
2. Publication of Notice. Notice of all meetings shall be provided in
accordance with state law.
3. Open Meetings. All meetings and hearings shall be open to the public.
4. Official Record.
(a) The HPC shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every action or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicate such fact.
(b) The HPC shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions.
(c) All records and minutes shall be public record.
5. Quorum.
(a) No official business of the HPC may be conducted without a
quorum present.
(b) A quorum is the majority of the HPC membership, excluding
vacancies
6. Voting:
(a) An affirmative vote of the majority of HPC members present and
constituting a quorum is required for all decisions.
(b) The Chair shall vote as any other member.
7. Continuance. The HPC may continue a public hearing or delay voting on
any matter to a subsequent meeting upon a showing of good cause, in
accordance with Section 2.4.13, Deferral and Continuance.
8. Absence:
(a) Members shall inform the Planning and Inspections Director of any
anticipated absence immediately after receipt of the agenda.
(b) A regular member who misses 3 consecutive regular meetings or 33
percent or more of the regular meetings in a calendar year loses
their status as a voting member until reinstated by the BOC.
(c) Absences due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies
of a similar nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall
not affect the member's status on the HPC; except that in the event
of a long illness or other such case resulting in a prolonged absence,
the member may be replaced by the BOC.
9. Special Committees:
2-16
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(a) The HPC may establish special committees to assist it in studying
specific issues.
(b) The membership of a special committee is not limited to HPC
members.
(c) In establishing these committees, the HPC may not delegate its
official powers and duties.
10. Compensation: Compensation for members may be provided for by the
Board of Commissioners.
11. Conflict of Interest:
(a) A member shall not participate in or vote on any matter that has a
direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the
member.
(b) If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that
member does not recuse himself or herself, then the remaining
members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
12. Rules of Procedure:
(a) The HPC shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and
establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice,
and meeting conduct.
(b) The HPC's rules of procedure shall be made available for public
inspection in the Planning and Inspections Department.
2.2.6. - Technical Review Committee (TRC)
The TRC is hereby established in accordance with Section 160A-361 of the North Carolina
General Statutes.
A. Powers and Duties.
1. Application Review and Decisions - To review and decide applications for:
(a) Administrative adjustments (Type II);
(b) Easement reconveyances;
(c) Group developments;
(d) Preliminary plats;
(e) Right-of-way Encroachments (below ground);
(f) Site plans; and
(g) Watershed variances (minor).
2. Recommendation Authority - To comment or make recommendations on
the following applications:
(a) Town construction and infrastructure projects and construction that
may impact town infrastructure;
(b) Planned development;
(c) Right-of-way encroachment (above ground);
(d) Street abandonments
(e) Voluntary annexations; and
(f) Watershed variances (major).
2-17
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
3. Other Powers and Duties - The TRC shall have the following other powers
and duties:
(a) To provide its expertise and technical assistance to the Planning
and Inspections Director in compiling and maintaining a
Development Guide and in establishing application content
requirements and a submission schedule for review of applications
and appeals.
(b) To review and recommend the acquisition, sale, and disposal of all
town real property (not equipment).
(c) To perform any other related duties that the Town Manager may
direct.
(d) To review and comment on an item submitted by a department
director.
(e) To exercise other powers and authority provided to it by the Board
of Commissioners, this Ordinance, or state law.
B. Composition.
1. Membership - The TRC shall be comprised of department heads (or their
designees) from the following town departments:
(a) Planning and Inspections;
(b) Public Works;
(c) Fire Department;
(d) Administration;
(e) Chief Building Inspector and
(f) Representatives from other departments, such as Police and Parks
& Recreation; private utility companies; and public or private school
systems may also provide comments on applications.
2. Officers: The Planning and Inspections Director shall serve as Chair of the
TRC, and shall schedule committee meetings, coordinate the committee's
activities, preside over committee meetings, prepare committee reports,
and serve as liaison to the departments and agencies involved for
clarification of issues and resolution of conflicts.
C. Rules of Procedure.
1. Meetings:
(a) The TRC shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and
establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice,
and meeting conduct.
(b) The TRC’s rules of procedure shall be made available for public
inspection in the Planning and Inspections Department.
(c) The TRC shall meet on a regular as needed.
2.2.7 - Planning and Inspections Director
A. Powers and Duties.
2-18
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
1. Application Review and Decision - To review and decide applications
for:
(a) Administrative adjustments (Type I);
(b) Building permits;
(c) Certificates of occupancy;
(d) Determinations;
(e) Exclusion maps;
(f) Final plats;
(g) Floodplain development permits
(h) Sign permits; and
(i) Zoning compliance permits.
2. Recommendation Authority - To comment or make
recommendations on the following applications:
(a) Appeals;
(b) Certificates of appropriateness;
(c) Conditional zonings;
(d) Development agreements;
(e) Land use plan amendments;
(f) Planned developments;
(g) Reasonable accommodations;
(h) Right-of-way encroachments;
(i) Special uses;
(j) Street abandonments;
(k) Street name changes;
(l) Text amendments;
(m) Variances;
(n) Vested rights certificates;
(o) Voluntary annexations; and
(p) Zoning map amendments.
3. Other Powers and Duties - The Planning and Inspections Director shall
have the following powers and duties:
(a) To investigate violations and enforce this Ordinance in accordance
with Chapter 9: Enforcement.
(b) To establish application content requirements and a submission
schedule for review of applications and appeals.
(c) To ensure proper public notification regarding pending
development applications is provided in accordance with state law.
(d) To serve as Chair of the TRC.
(e) To review development applications for compliance with this
Unified Development Ordinance and submit staff reports to
decision-making bodies.
(f) To maintain the Official Zoning Map and related materials.
(g) To compile and maintain a Development Guide.
2-19
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(h) To provide expertise and technical assistance to Town staff and
decision-making bodies, upon request.
(i) To maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this Unified
Development Ordinance and make records available for public
inspection.
(j) To perform any other related duties that the Town Manager may
direct.
(k) To exercise other powers and authority provided by the Board of
Commissioners, this Unified Development Ordinance, or state law.
2.2.8. - Public Works Director
A. Powers and Duties.
1. Application Review and Decision - To review and decide applications
for:
(a) Driveway permits;
(b) Inspection of stormwater management devices and best
management practices constructed in accordance with Section 6.2,
Watershed Protection;
(c) Investigate violations of stormwater management devices and best
management practices in accordance with Chapter 9: Enforcement;
(d) Determine the feasibility of water and sewer connections in
accordance with this Unified Development Ordinance and the Town
Code.
(e) Determine the required appropriate street size and construction
materials in compliance with UDO, Town Code of Ordinances and
North Carolina Department of Transportation requirements.
2. Recommendation Authority - To comment or make
recommendations on the following applications:
(a) Appeals;
(b) Land disturbance permits; and
(c) Flood damage prevention variance requests.
3. Other Power and Duties - The Public Works Director shall have the
following other powers and duties:
(a) To insure development applications comply with soil and erosion
control standards in Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation,
and flood damage prevention standards in Section 6.4, Flood
Damage Prevention.
(b) To inspect sites for compliance with the soil and erosion control
standards in Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, and flood
damage prevention standards in Section 6.4, Flood Damage
Prevention.
(c) Investigate violations of soil and erosion control and flood damage
prevention standards in accordance with Chapter 9: Enforcement.
2-20
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(d) To insure that stormwater management devices and best
management practices for watershed protection are designed in
accordance with Section 6.2, Watershed Protection, and the Town’s
Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual.
(e) To perform any other related duties that the Town Manager may
direct.
(f) To exercise other powers and authority provided to the Public
Works Director by the Board of Commissioners, this Unified
Development Ordinance, or state law.
2.3. - Advisory Bodies
2.3.1. - Overview
The following advisory bodies are created to advise and recommend actions for certain
Review Authorities under this Unified Development Ordinance:
A. Downtown Aberdeen Advisory Board (DAAB); and
B. Appearance and Beautification Commission (ABC)
2.3.2. - Downtown Aberdeen Advisory Board (DAAB)
The DAAB is hereby established in accordance with Section 160A-361 of the North
Carolina General Statutes, and as advised by the Town’s participation in the North
Carolina Main Street program, using the Main Street America Four Point Approach .
A. Power and Duties.
1. The DAAB’s jurisdiction shall apply to the ado pted Main Street District,
additionally referred to as the Central Business (CB) District.
2. The general purpose of the DAAB is to serve as an advisor to the Town’s
Board of Commissioners subject to such limitations as may be imposed by
state law or by ordinances of the town. The DAAB shall be embodied for
the following purposes:
(a) Advise and assist the Planning and Inspections Director with
developing annual comprehensive strategic work plans;
(b) Advise, deliberate and make recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners to help facilitate the implementation of Downtown
Streetscape Masterplan;
(c) Serve to support economic development efforts, and the marketing
and promotion of downtown;
(d) Identify appropriate uses for downtown and identify
developers/investors for downtown development;
2-21
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(e) Recommend policy to the Board of Commissioners for the
continued development and sustainability of downtown;
(f) Develop financial tools for downtown development;
(g) Promote and facilitate the improvement of downtown
infrastructure, including water, public safety, parks, parking,
transportation, utilities, sidewalks, sewer, and streetscape;
(h) Promote and facilitate a program to assist in business retention in
the downtown;
(i) Promote and facilitate a marketing program to increase sales,
visitors, and awareness of downtown;
(j) Provide the Board of Commissioners with representative
community participation in preparing and implementing plans and
reports concerning development of downtown;
(k) Promote, facilitate, and act as liaison to catalytic developments
significantly affecting the downtown area;
(l) Promote and support downtown as a special event location; and
(m) Encourage the historic preservation, protection and use of
Aberdeen’s downtown area.
B. Composition.
1. Membership: The DAAB shall consist of five (5) regular posts, and two (2)
alternate posts . Of the five regular posts, four shall be filled by a
“Downtown Stakeholder”, and the fifth post will be as an “at-large” seat,
filled by a resident of the Town or the Town’s ETJ. DAAB Members shall be
appointed, and eligible for reappointment, by the Board of Commissioners
upon staff recommendation.
(a) Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a “Downtown Stakeholder”.
(b) Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a “Downtown Stakeholder”.
(c) Post Three (3). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
Post to be filled by a “Downtown Stakeholder”.
(d) Post Four (4). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
Post to be filled by a “Downtown Stakeholder”.
(e) Post Five (5). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years. Post
to be filled by “at-large” member.
2. Alternate Members: The Board of Commissioners may appoint two (2)
members for alternate posts to serve in the absence or temporary
disqualification of regular members. Each alternate member attending a
meeting and serving in the absence of a regular member may exercise all
the powers and duties of a regular member.
(a) Alternate Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered
years. Post to be filled by a “Downtown Stakeholder”, and shall be
appointed by the BOC.
2-22
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(b) Alternate Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered
years. Post to be filled by “at-large” member.
3. Residence Location and Qualifications:
(a) “Downtown Stakeholder” for the purposes of this section, can be
defined as any party whom owns property within the CBD,
representative of any business addressed in the CBD, or permanent
residents of the CBD.
(b) Members shall have demonstrated experience or an interest in the
preservation of historic structure s, or should be employed in
architecture, history, planning, archaeology, or a related discipline.
4. Member Terms:
(a) Mem bers, including alternate members are appointed to 2-year
terms a nd shall continue to serve until their successors are
appointed, provided that upon initial appointment the terms of
office may be staggered.
(b) The terms of all members shall not expire at the same time.
(c) Vacancies shall be filled by a new member or an alternate member
appointed to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
5. Officers:
(a) The DAAB shall elect from its members a Chair and Vice Chair for a 1
year term of office commencing on July 1.
(b) The Chair shall preside over all meetings.
(c) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside over
meetings.
(d) If both the Chair and Vice-Chair are absent, the DAAB membership
shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting Chair for the
meeting.
6. Staff:
(a) Provide administrative support to the DAAB;
(b) Record the minutes of all meetings;
(c) Conduct all correspondence of the DAAB;
(d) Supervise all clerical work; and
(e) Provide other technical support, as needed.
C. Rules of Procedure
1. Schedule. The DAAB shall establish a regular meeting schedule which is
set out in the Development Guide.
(a) Regular Meetings: The DAAB shall hold at least 1 regular meeting in
each month unless the Chair determines that there are no agenda
items for consideration.
(b) Special Called Meetings: The chair and/or the Planning and
Inspections Director may call special meetings. A majority of the
DAAB may in writing demand its members call a meeting. Written
notice of a special meeting shall be provided to all members at least
one week in advance of the proposed meeting date.
2-23
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. Publication of Notice. Notice of all meetings shall be provided in
accordance with State law.
3. Open Meetings. All meetings shall be open to the public. Any person who
may be substantially affected by final action in any matter that comes
before the DAAB may appear in person or by agent or attorney to make
presentations respecting any such matter. The chair may impose
reasonable restraints on presentations.
4. Official Record.
(a) The DAAB shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon every action or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicate such fact.
(b) The DAAB shall keep records of its examinations and other official
ations.
(c) All records and minutes shall be public record.
5. Quorum.
(a) Whenever there is no business for the DAAB the chair and/or the
Planning and Inspections Director may cancel a meeting by giving
notice to all members not less than twenty-four hours before the
time set for the meeting. In the event of severe weather or other
sufficient cause the chair and/or the Planning and Inspections
Director may cancel a meeting by giving reasonable notice to all
members before the time set for the meeting. In the case of a
meeting called by a majority of the DAAB the chair and/or the
Planning and Inspections Director may cancel the meeting only
upon concurrence of a majority of the DAAB.
(b) A majority of members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of
business of the DAAB.
(c) Members must be present to vote on any matter. Except as may be
otherwise required by these rules or other prevailing law, any
motion to be carried must have the vote of the majority of sitting
members. The chair shall be eligible to vote as any other member.
6. Absence:
(a) Members shall inform the Planning and Inspections Director of any
anticipated absence immediately after receipt of the agenda.
(b) A regular member who misses 3 consecutive regular meetings or 33
percent or more of the regular meetings in a calendar year loses
their status as a voting member until reinstated by the BOC.
(c) Absences due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies
of a similar nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall
not affect the member's status on the DAAB; except that in the
event of a long illness or other such case resulting in a prolonged
absence, the member may be replaced by the BOC.
7. Special Committees. The DAAB shall have three standing committees and
may develop subcommittees as it finds necessary and convenient. The
three standing committees may gather concurrently if seen fit by the
2-24
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
DAAB and/or Planning and Inspections Director. The chair and standing
Planning and Inspections Director shall designate the membership of all
committees. Each DAAB member must serve on at least one of the three
standing committees. The chair shall be either an active or ex officio
member of all committees.
(a) Standing Committees:
1. Entrepreneur Recruitment
2. Home Décor and Design
3. Arts and Culture
8. Compensation. Compensation for members may be provided for by the
Board of Commissioners.
9. Violation of Due Process:
(a) No DAAB member shall take part in the hearing, consideration, or
deliberation of any case or matter before the DAAB in which the
DAAB member, or any member of the DAAB member’s family,
either directly or indirectly, is a party or has any financial interest.
10. Rules of Procedure:
(a) The DAAB shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and
establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice,
and meeting conduct.
(b) The DAAB’s rules of procedure shall be made available for public
inspection in the Planning and Inspections Department.
2.3.3. - Appearance and Beautification Commission (ABC)
The ABC is hereby established in accordance with Section 160A-451 of the North Carolina
General Statutes. The ABC will be served by the Planning and Inspections Director.
A. Powers and Duties.
1. To initiate, promote and assist in the implementation of programs of
general community beautification in the town and its environs.
2. To seek to coordinate the activities of individuals, agencies, organizations
and groups, public and private, whose plans, activities and programs bear
upon the appearance of the town and its environs.
3. To direct the attention of the Mayor and the Board of Commissioners to
ways in which the town government may take direct action affecting the
appearance of the town and its environs. (‘75 Code, § 2-34)
4. The ABC hereby authorized to receive contributions from private agencies,
foundations, organizations, individuals, the state or federal government or
any other source in addition to any sums which may be appropriated for its
use by the Board of Commissioners. Such funds will be expanded in
accordance with town policy.
B. Composition.
2-25
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
1. Membership: T he ABC shall consist of seven (7) regular posts. ABC
Members shall be appointed, and eligible for reappointment, by the Board
of Commissioners upon staff recommendation.
(a) Post One (1). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
(b) Post Two (2). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
(c) Post Three (3). Term expires on January 1 of even numbered years.
(d) Post Four (4). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
(e) Post Five (5). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
(f) Post Six (6). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
(g) Post Seven (7). Term expires on January 1 of odd numbered years.
2. Residence Location and Qualifications:
(a) All posts of the ABC shall be filled by residents within the Town's
planning jurisdiction.
(b) Members shall have demonstrated experience or an interest in the
appearance and beautification of the Town of Aberdeen, or should
be employed in horticulture, planning, architecture, landsc ape
architecture or a related discipline.
3. Member Terms:
(a) Memb ers, including alternate members are appointed to 2-year
terms and shall c ontinue to serve until their successors are
appointed, provided that upon initial appointment the terms of
office may be staggered.
(b) The terms of all members shall not expire at the same time.
(c) Vacancies shall be filled by a new member or an alternate member
appointed to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
4. Officers
(a) The ABC shall elect from its members a Chair and Vice Chair for a 1
year term of office commencing on July 1.
(b) The Chair shall preside over all meetings.
(c) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside over
meetings.
(d) If both the Chair and Vice-Chair are absent, the ABC membership
shall vote to determine who shall serve as acting Chair for the
meeting.
5. Staff:
(a) Provide administrative support to the ABC;
(b) Record the minutes of all meetings;
(c) Conduct all correspondence of the ABC;
(d) Supervise all clerical work; and
(e) Provide other technical support, as needed.
C. Rules of Procedure
1. Schedule. The ABC shall establish a regular meeting schedule which is set
out in the Development Guide.
2-26
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(a) Regular Meetings: The ABC shall hold at least 1 regular meeting in
each month unless the Chair determines that there are no agenda
items for consideration.
(b) Special Called Meetings: The chair and/or the Planning and
Inspections Director may call special meetings. A majority of the
ABC may in writing demand its members call a meeting. Written
notice of a special meeting shall be provided to all members at least
one week in advance of the proposed meeting date.
2. Publication of Notice. Notice of all meetings shall be provided in
accordance with State law.
3. Open Meetings. All meetings shall be open to the public. Any person who
may be substantially affected by final action in any matter that comes
before the ABC may appear in person or by agent or attorney to make
presentations respecting any such matter. The chair may impose
reasonable restraints on presentations.
4. Official Record.
(a) The ABC shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every action or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicate such fact.
(b) The ABC shall keep records of its examinations and other official
ations.
(c) All records and minutes shall be public record.
5. Quorum.
(a) Whenever there is no business for the ABC the chair and/or the
Planning and Inspections Director may cancel a meeting by giving
notice to all members not less than twenty-four hours before the
time set for the meeting. In the event of severe weather or other
sufficient cause the chair and/or the Planning and Inspections
Director may cancel a meeting by giving reasonable notice to all
members before the time set for the meeting. In the case of a
meeting called by a majority of the ABC the chair and/or the
Planning and Inspections Director may cancel the meeting only
upon concurrence of a majority of the ABC.
(b) A majority of members shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of
business of the ABC.
(c) Members must be present to vote on any matter. Except as may be
otherwise required by these rules or other prevailing law, any
motion to be carried must have the vote of the majority of sitting
members. The chair shall be eligible to vote as any other member.
6. Absence:
(a) Members shall inform the Planning and Inspections Director of any
anticipated absence immediately after receipt of the agenda.
(b) A regular member who misses 3 consecutive regular meetings or 33
percent or more of the regular meetings in a calendar year loses
their status as a voting member until reinstated by the BOC.
2-27
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(c) Absences due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies
of a similar nature shall be regarded as approved absences and shall
not affect the member's status on the ABC; except that in the event
of a long illness or other such case resulting in a prolonged absence,
the member may be replaced by the BOC.
7. Compensation. Compensation for members may be provided for by the
Board of Commissioners.
8. Violation of Due Process:
(a) No ABC member shall take part in the hearing, consideration, or
deliberation of any case or matter before the ABC in which the ABC
member, or any member of the ABC member’s family, either
directly or indirectly, is a party or has any financial interest.
9. Rules of Procedure:
(a) The ABC shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs and
establish its organization, committees, procedures, meeting notice,
and meeting conduct.
(b) The ABC’s rules of procedure shall be made available for public
inspection in the Planning and Inspections Department.
2.4. - Standard Review Procedures
2.4.1. - General
A. Overview. This section describes the standard procedural steps and rules
generally applicable to development applications reviewed under this Unified
Development Ordinance, unless otherwise specified in Section 2.5, Review
Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision or Section 2.6,
Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision. The flow charts of
specific procedures in Section 2.5 and Section 2.6 depict the procedural steps that
apply to the review of the particular type of development application.
B. Development Guide. The Town maintains a Development Guide that includes
information for persons submitting applications for development review under
this Unified Development Ordinance.
2.4.2. - Pre-Application Conference
A. Purpose. The purpose of a pre-application conference is to provide an
opportunity for the applicant to learn about the submittal requirements,
procedures, and standards applicable to a development application. A
pre-application conference is also an opportunity for town staff to become
familiar with, and offer preliminary comments about the scope, features, and
2-28
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
impacts of the proposed development, as it relates to the standards in this Unified
Development Ordinance.
B. Applicability.
1. Pre-Application Conference Required. A pre-application conference
between the applicant and Town staff shall be held before submittal of the
following applications:
a. Conditional zonings;
b. Development agreements;
c. Land use plan amendments;
d. Planned developments;
e. Reasonable accommodations;
f. Special uses;
g. Street abandonments;
h. Street name changes;
i. Text amendments;
j. Variances;
k. Vested rights certificates;
l. Voluntary annexations; and
m. Zoning map amendments.
2. Pre-Application Conference Optional. A pre-application conference may
be requested and held at the applicant's option for any development
application other than those listed in Section 2.4.2.B.1, Pre-Application
Conference Required.
C. Scheduling. Applicants shall contact the Planning and Inspections Department
to schedule a pre-application conference.
D. Effect. A completed pre-application conference entitles an applicant to take the
next step in the application process.
2.4.3. - Citizen Information Meeting
A. Purpose. The purpose of the citizen information meeting is to inform landowners
and occupants of nearby lands about a development application that is going to
be reviewed under this Unified Development Ordinance, and to provide the
applicant an opportunity to hear comments and concerns about the
development proposal as a means of resolving conflicts and outstanding issues,
where possible.
B. Favored Practice.
1. Citizen information meetings are encouraged and sometimes required as
opportunities for informal communication between applicants and the
landowners and occupants of nearby lands, and other residents who may
be affected by development proposals.
2-29
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. If a citizen information meeting is conducted, it is preferable to hold it in
close proximity to the proposed development.
C. Applicability. A citizen information meeting is required for any of the following
applications (unless they are initiated by Board of Commissioners):
1. Conditional zoning;
2. Planned developments;
3. Special uses; and
4. Zoning map amendments that propose to establish a more intense zoning
district.
D. Procedure. If a citizen information meeting is required, it shall comply with the
following procedures:
1. Timing . The applicant shall hold the citizen information meeting at least 15
days prior to consideration of the application by the PB.
2. Form . The citizen information meeting can take the form of a meeting,
gathering, or a telephone communication between the applicant or the
applicant's representative and landowners or other interested parties.
Nothing shall prohibit multiple meetings or telephone communications
from taking place.
3. Notification .
(a) Prior to the citizen information meeting, the applicant shall make
an effort to provide notice of the meeting to all landowners of land
located within 300 feet of the land subject to the application, as
shown on the county tax listing.
(b) Failure of a party to receive notice of the meeting shall not
invalidate the application.
4. Information Provided . The applicant shall provide the following
information to those attending a meeting or participating in a telephone
call:
(a) A description of the proposed development;
(b) Information provided by the Planning and Inspections Department
that describes:
1. The purpose of the citizen information meeting;
2. The development review procedure(s) the application will
follow;
3. The potential for changes in the applicant's development
proposal as it proceeds through the review process;
4. Sources of further information about the development
review process; and
5. Any additional information that would promote
understanding of the development proposal.
5. Conduct of Meeting. At the meeting, the applicant shall explain the
development proposal and application, inform attendees about the
application review process and the potential for change to the proposal as
2-30
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
it proceeds through the process, respond to questions and concerns
neighbors raise about the application, and propose ways to resolve
conflicts and concerns.
6. Written Summary. At le ast 14 days b efore the initial consideration of the
application by the PB, the applicant shall submit a written summary of the
citizen information meeting or telephone call to the Planning and
Inspections Department that includes:
(a) The date, time, and location of the meeting;
(b) The method and date of notification about the meeting;
(c) A list of landowners notified about the meeting;
(d) A list of meeting attendees;
(e) If the meeting was conducted as a series of telephone calls;
(f) The description of the development proposal presented to the
attendees; and
(g) A summary of attendee comments, ideas, and suggestions from
citizens to be incorporated into the development proposal.
(h) The written summary shall be included with the application
materials and be made available to the public for inspection.
7. No Meeting Conducted.
(a) Applicants subject to the requirement to conduct a citizen
information meeting but who cannot do so shall include, in writing,
the reasons for not conducting a meeting or the activities
undertaken in-lieu of conducting a meeting.
(b) The Board of Commissioners shall consider an application
regardless of whether a required citizen information meeting is
conducted.
2.4.4. - Application Submittal and Acceptance
A. Authority to File Applications. U nless expressly stated otherwise in this Unified
Development Ordinance, development applications reviewed under this Unified
Development Ordinance shall be submitted and signed by the landowner,
contract purchaser, or other person having a recognized property interest in the
land on which development is proposed, or their attorney. No other agents
involved in the development project may submit an application.
B. Application Content.
1. The Planning and Inspections Director is authorized to establish the
application content and forms, which shall be placed in the Development
Guide.
2. The application shall be completed in its entirety. Applications not
completely filled out shall not be accepted and will not be processed by
the Planning and Inspections Director.
2-31
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
3. The Planning and Inspections Director may change requirements for
submission of certain required information when, in the Director's opinion,
such information is otherwise available or is not necessary to review the
application.
C. Application Fees
1. The Board of Commissioners shall establish application fees, and may
amend and update those fees as necessary.
2. No action shall be taken on an application and no application approval
shall be issued until all required application fees are paid in full.
D. Submittal and Review Schedule. The Planning and Inspections Director is
authorized to and shall establish specific rules for submittal and review schedules
(including time frames for review) for the various types of development
applications, which shall be included in the Development Guide.
E. Application Submittal
1. Applications shall be submitted to the Planning and Inspections Director
in the form established by the Planning and Inspections Director, along
with the appropriate application fee.
2. Except for applications initiated by the Board of Commissioners, no
development application requiring approval by the Board of
Commissioners may be filed that includes land subject to a pending
appeal being considered by the BOA or the courts.
3. An application shall not be considered submitted until it has been
determined to be complete in accordance with subsection F below.
F. Determination of Application Completeness
1. Completeness Review. On receiving a development application, the
Planning and Inspections Director shall determine whether the application
is complete or incomplete based on the application completeness
requirements in the Development Guide.
2. Application Incomplete. If the application is incomplete, the Planning and
Inspections Director shall notify the applicant of the deficiencies in
accordance with the Development Guide and the application will not be
reviewed further.
3. Application Complete. On determining that the application is complete, it
shall be considered as submitted, and the Planning and Inspections
Director shall commence review in accordance with the procedures and
standards of this Unified Development Ordinance.
2.4.5. - Staff Review and Action
A. Staff Review
2-32
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
1. Applications shall be reviewed during the review cycle in place when the
application is determined to be complete.
2. When an application is determined complete, it shall be distributed by the
Planning and Inspections Director to all appropriate staff and review
agencies for review and comment, and the preparation of a staff report, if
appropriate.
3. In considering the application, the Planning and Inspections Director, the
TRC, or other town staff (as appropriate), shall review the application,
relevant support material, and any comments or recommendations from
other staff and review agencies to which the application was referred.
4. If deficiencies in complying with applicable standards of this Unified
Development Ordinance are identified, the Planning and Inspections
Director shall notify the applicant of such deficiencies and provide the
applicant a reasonable opportunity to discuss them and revise the
application accordingly.
5. If after 30 days from the time of submittal, the applicant fails to resolve,
correct, or amend their application so that it meets the applicable
standards in the Unified Development Ordinance or Development Guide in
the opinion of the Planning and Inspections Director the TRC will cease the
review of such application and it will be denied.
B. Staff Report and Recommendation
1. The Planning and Inspections Director shall prepare a written staff report
on any application listed under Procedures Subject to Decision-Making
Body Review and Decision in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review
Table. The staff report shall conclude whether the application complies
with all applicable review standards of this Ordinance, and recommend
one of the decisions authorized for the particular type of application, based
on the review standards applicable to the application type, in accordance
with Section 2.4, Review Procedures. The staff report may identify and
recommend conditions of approval addressing how compliance
deficiencies might be corrected and how adverse effects of the
development application might be mitigated.
2. A staff report is not required for an application listed under Procedures
Subject to Staff Review and Decision in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development
Review Table, even though one may be prepared.
C. Distribution and Availability of Application and Staff Report. In cases where a
development application is listed under Procedures Subject to Decision-Making
Body Review and Decision in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table,
the Planning and Inspections Director shall take the following actions within a
reasonable time period before the application is scheduled for review:
1. Schedule and ensure any required notice of the application (if appropriate)
is prepared in accordance with Section 2.4.6, Public Notification;
2-33
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. Transmit the application, related materials, and staff report to the
appropriate review authority;
3. Transmit a copy of the staff report to the applicant; and
4. Make the application, related materials, and staff report available for
examination by the public in the Planning and Inspections Department
during normal business hours.
D. Applications Subject to Decision by Staff
1. Decision. In cases where a development application is listed under
Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision in Table 2.1.2, Summary
Development Review Table, the appropriate Town staff member shall
approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove the application,
based on the review standards set forth in Section 2.6, Review Procedures
Subject to Staff Review and Decision, for the particular type of application.
2. Conditions of Approval. Conditions of approval shall be limited to those
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the standards of this Unified
Development Ordinance. They shall be related in both type and amount to
the anticipated impacts of the proposed development on the public and
surrounding development. All conditions of approval shall be expressly set
forth in the development permit or approval.
2.4.6. - Public Notification
A. Public Hearing Scheduling. When a development application is subject to a
public hearing, the Planning and Inspections Director shall ensure that the public
hearing is scheduled for a regular meeting or a meeting specially called for that
purpose by the review authority.
B. Public Notification. All development applications subject to public notification
shall comply with the North Carolina General Statutes, the provisions listed in
Table 2.4.6, Public Notification, the provisions of this section, and other provisions
in this Ordinance related to public notice.
1. Notification Requirements. The Planning and Inspections Director shall
ensure public notification is provided in accordance with the timing
requirements in Table 2.4.6, Public Notification, for the type of application
and the type of notice. In computing the required time periods, the day the
notice is published, mailed, or posted shall not be included, but the day of
the hearing shall be included.
Table 2.4.6. : Public Notification
Application Type
Decision-Making
Body Review
Types of Require Public Notice
Published Notice Mailed Notice Posted Notice
Appeal BOA X [1] X [2] X [3]
2-34
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
Certificate of
Appropriateness HPC X [1] X [2] X [3]
Conditional Zoning
PB X X [5] X [3]
BOC X [6] X [5] X [3]
Development
Agreement
PB X X [5] X [3]
BOC X [6] X [5] X [3]
Land Use Plan
Amendment
PB X
BOC X [6]
Planned Development
PB X X [5] X [3]
BOC X [6] X [5] X [3]
Reasonable
Accommodation BOA X [1] X [2] X [3]
Special Use
PB X X [5] X [3]
BOC X [6] X [5] X [3]
Street Abandonment
PB X X X [8]
BOC X [9] X [7] X [8]
Street Name Change PB X X [10] .
Text Amendment
PB X . .
BOC X [6] . .
Variance BOA X [1] X [2] X [3]
Vested Rights Certificate
PB X X [5] X [3]
BOC X [6] X [5] X [3]
Voluntary Annexation BOC X [1] . .
Zoning Map
Amendment
PB X X [5] X [3]
BOC X [6] X [5] X [3]
[1] : Published notice provided once, at least 10 days before hearing
[2] : Mailed notice provided to affected owners and landowners within 100 feet of the subject lot or site between 10
and 25 days before the hearing.
[3] : Posted notice provided between 10 and 25 days before the hearing.
[4] : Mailed notice provided to all landowners in the subject LHO district between 10 and 25 days before the hearing.
[5] : Mailed notice provided to affected owners and landowners within 300 feet of the subject lot or site between 10
and 25 days before the hearing.
[6] : Published notice provided once a week for 2 successive calendar weeks, with first notice between 10 and 25
days before the hearing.
[7] : Certified mailed notice provided to all landowners abutting the street, plus NCDOT if street is under NCDOT
control, between 10 and 25 days before the hearing.
[8] : Posted notice required in at least 2 locations along the street at least 10 days before the hearing.
[9] : Published notice provided once a week for 4 weeks before the hearing.
2-35
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
[10] : Mailed notice provided to all landowners abutting the street between 10 and 25 days before the hearing.
2. Published Notice Requirements. When the provisions of this Unified
Development Ordinance require that public notice be published, the
Planning and Inspections Director shall publish a notice in a newspaper
having general circulation in the Town.
3. Mailed Notice Requirements.
(a) Mailed notice specified in Table 2.4.6, Public Notification, shall be
mailed to:
(1) All landowners subject to the application;
(2) The applicant, if different from the landowner; and
(3) All landowners entitled to receive notice (including
landowners located outside the town) whose address is
known by reference to the latest county tax listing.
(b) Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States
mail, first class or certified (as appropriate), properly addressed,
postage paid. The content and form of the notice shall comply with
Section 2.4.6.B.5, Notice Content, and the North Carolina General
Statutes.
(c) The Planning and Inspections Director shall prepare an affidavit
affirming that notice meeting these standards was mailed. The
affidavit shall be conclusive that notice has been given in
compliance with the terms of this subsection. The affidavit shall be
included in the support materials of the application.
(d) A copy of the mailed notice shall be maintained in the Planning and
Inspections Department for public inspection during normal
business hours.
4. Posted Notice Requirements. Posted notice shall be made by the
Planning and Inspections Director, and shall comply with the following:
(a) A sign shall be placed on subject property in a conspicuous location
so as to be clearly visible to the traveled portion of the respective
street. Where the land subject to the notice does not have frontage
on a public street, the sign shall be erected on the nearest street
right-of-way with an attached notation generally indicating the
direction and distance to the land subject to the application.
(b) The content and form of the notice shall comply with Section
2.4.6.B.5, Notice Content, and the North Carolina General Statutes.
5. Notice Content. Unless expressly noted otherwise, all notices, whether
done by mail, publication, or posting shall:
(a) Identify the date, time, and place of the public hearing;
(b) Describe the land involved by street address or by its relationship to
a fronting street and the nearest cross street (if applicable), and its
size (except posted notice);
(c) Identify the reason for the public hearing; and
2-36
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(d) Identify the means to contac t a Town official for further information.
6. Notice Involving Street Abandonment.
(a) In the case of street abandonment, the Town shall publish the
required Board of Commissioners resolution of intent once a week
for 4 successive weeks.
(b) The resolution shall indicate the time, date, and location of a public
hearing to consider the street abandonment.
(c) In addition to published notice, all the landowners, as listed on the
county tax listing, fronting or abutting the street or segment
affected by the abandonment shall be given certified mailed notice
of the proposed abandonment.
(d) Notice shall also be mailed to the North Carolina Department of
Transportation, if the street is under the control and authority of the
department.
(e) In addition, the notification of the public hearing purpose, date,
time, and location shall be posted in at least 2 locations along the
street.
7. Notice Involving Street Name Change Requests.
(a) In the case of a street name change request, all the landowners, as
listed on the county tax listing, fronting, or abutting the street or
segment affected by the request, shall be given first class mailed
notice of the request.
(b) The Town shall also make a good faith effort to notify renters of
property affected.
(c) If the street name change is approved, the landowners of properties
affected shall be sent address change notices containing the
effective date of the change.
8. Constructive Notice.
(a) Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate
proceedings if a bona fide attempt is made to comply with
applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice may
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Errors in legal description;
(2) Errors or omissions in the county tax listing; or
(3) Typographical or grammatical errors that do not impede
communication of the notice to affected parties.
(b) Failure of a party to receive written notice shall not invalidate
subsequent action. In all cases, however, the requirements for the
timing of the notice and for specifying the time, date, and place of a
public hearing and the location of the subject property(ies) shall be
strictly adhered to.
2-37
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2.4.7. - Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures
If the development application is subject to a quasi-judicial public hearing by a
decision-making body, the decision-making body shall hold a quasi-judicial public
hearing in accordance with the following procedures.
A. Opportunity to Present Testimony and Evidence. Any affected party shall be
afforded a reasonable opportunity to present testimony and evidence in support
of or in opposition to the application, and to ask questions of the applicant, the
applicant's representatives, Town staff, and the Town staff's representatives. At
the discretion of the person chairing the body conducting the quasi-judicial
public hearing, an affected party may be granted an opportunity to ask questions
of any other member of the public who has testified at the hearing.
B. Not Bound by Rules of Evidence. Except as otherwise provided in the North
Carolina General Statutes, the body conducting a quasi-judicial public hearing is
not bound by the rules of evidence, or limited to consideration of evidence that is
admissible in a court of law. The body may consider all testimony and evidence it
deems competent and material to the application under consideration.
C. Cross Examination. Any inquiry under cross-examination shall be limited to
matters raised in the direct examination of the person testifying. No re-direct or
re-cross shall be allowed unless requested by the applicant, an affected party, or
the Town—who shall state the desired area of inquiry. The request shall be
approved by the person chairing the body conducting the quasi-judicial public
hearing. If re-direct or re-cross is allowed, it shall be limited to questions of the
witness on issues raised in the cross-examination or re-direct examination.
D. Ex Parte Communication. Ex parte communications between an applicant or an
affected party and a member of the decision-making body is prohibited. If it
occurs, it shall be disclosed during the quasi-judicial public hearing.
2.4.8. - Review by PB or HPC
If an application is subject to a recommendation by the PB or HPC, the PB or HPC shall
review and act on the application in accordance with the following procedures:
A. General. The PB or HPC, as appropriate, shall consider the application, relevant
support materials, staff report, and any public comments. One of the decisions
authorized for the particular type of application shall be recommended, based on
the review standards applicable to the application type, as set forth in Section 2.5,
Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision.
2-38
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
B. General Conduct. Members conducting a review and providing a
recommendation should act in accordance with the following guidelines:
1. No Prejudice. Consider the application without prejudice.
2. No Commitment Prior to Review. Make no commitment or agreement or
take a public position on an application or on any proposed condition until
the application is reviewed during the meeting.
3. Acknowledgement. Acknowledge any information obtained outside the
public meeting that they believe has influenced their evaluation of the
application.
4. Deliberation Refrain from deliberation or formulation of a judgment or
decision prior to the meeting at which the application is considered.
C. Clearly State Factors for Recommendation. The recommendation shall clearly
state the factors considered in making the recommendation and the basis or
rationale for the recommendation.
D. Vote.
1. A decision to recommend approval shall be decided by a simple majority of
a quorum present.
2. A tie vote by members of the PB shall be forwarded to the Board of
Commissioners without a recommendation.
3. Zoning map amendment, conditional zoning, special use, and text
amendment applications receiving a recommendation for denial by the PB
shall require a simple majority vote of the Board of Commissioners
members present and voting to be approved.
E. Timing. Unless an application is deferred or continued in accordance with Section
2.4.13, Deferral and Continuance, a vote or recommendation on an application
shall be made within 60 days from the date of the initial meeting where it is
considered.
F. Failure to Recommend. If the PB or HPC fails to make a recommendation in the
time allotted for an application to be reviewed and decided by the Board of
Commissioners, the application shall be forwarded to the Board of
Commissioners without a recommendation from the PB or HPC.
2.4.9. - Action by Decision-Making Body
If an application is subject to a decision by the Board of Commissioners, PB, BOA, or
HPC, the decision-making body shall review and decide the application in accordance
with the following procedures:
A. General. The decision-making body shall conduct any required public hearing(s)
and consider the application, relevant support materials, staff report, any advisory
2-39
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
body recommendations, and public comments. After the conclusion of the public
hearing, it shall make one of the decisions authorized for the particular type of
application based on the review standards applicable to the application type, as
set forth in Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body
Review and Decision.
B. General Conduct Members making a decision should act in accordance with the
following guidelines:
1. No Prejudice Consider the application without prejudice.
2. No Commitment Prior to Review Make no commitment or agreement or
take a public position on an application or on any proposed condition until
the application is reviewed during the hearing.
3. Acknowledgement Acknowledge any information obtained outside the
public hearing that they believe has influenced their evaluation of the
application.
4. Deliberation Refrain from deliberation or formulation of a judgment or
decision prior to the meeting to consider the application.
C. Quasi-Judicial Procedures Required quasi-judicial public hearings (see Table
2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table) shall be conducted in accordance
with Section 2.4.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures.
D. Remand The decision-making body may remand the application to Town staff or
the appropriate advisory body for further consideration of new information or
specified issues or concerns, if appropriate.
E. Clearly State Factors for Decision Unless stated otherwise in this Unified
Development Ordinance, the decision shall clearly state the factors considered in
making the decision and the basis or rationale for the decision.
F. Application Revision The decision-making body may revise an application to
apply more restrictive requirements, or to ensure the application better serves the
purpose and intent of this Unified Development Ordinance. In cases where an
application is revised by a decision-making body in this manner, additional public
notification or public hearings are not required.
G. Vote
1. A zoning map amendment, conditional zoning, special use, or text
amendment application receiving a recommendation for denial from the
PB shall be approved by the Board of Commissioners with a simple
majority vote of the Board of Commissioners members present and voting.
2. A board member shall recuse themselves from voting on an application
where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to
have a direct, substantial, or readily identifiable financial impact on the
member.
2-40
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
3. Vacant seats shall not be considered members for the calculation of the
requisite supermajority.
4. Upon failure of the Board of Commissioners to act on a request following a
public hearing and any properly followed continuance procedures, the
application shall be deemed denied.
H. Timing The decision-making body shall take action on the application as
promptly as reasonably possible in consideration of the public interest.
2.4.10. - Conditions of Approval
A. Unless expressly stated otherwise in the specific procedures in Section 2.5, Review
Procedures Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision or Section 2.6,
Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, a condition of approval
shall be limited to those deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the review
standards for the particular type of application, or to prevent or minimize adverse
effects from the proposed development on surrounding lands. They shall be
related in both type and amount to the anticipated impacts of the proposed
development on the public and surrounding development. All conditions of
approval shall be expressly set forth in the notice of decision or development
permit approval.
B. Conditions of approval associated with a conditional zoning may only be offered
by the applicant and may only be accepted or not accepted as proposed, by the
Board of Commissioners.
C. No condition of approval shall be less restrictive than the applicable standards
and requirements of this Ordinance.
D. No condition shall be made part of an approval that:
1. Specifies the ownership status, race, religion, or other characteristics of the
occupants of housing units;
2. Establishes a minimum size of a dwelling unit;
3. Establishes a minimum value of buildings or improvements;
4. Excludes residents based upon race, religion or income; or
5. Obligates the Town to perform in any manner relative to an approval
action regarding a development application.
2.4.11. - Notification of Decision or Action
A. Timing . Except where otherwise stated in this Unified Development Ordinance,
the Planning and Inspections Director may provide the applicant written
notification of a decision or action within 10 business days after a final decision on
a development application.
2-41
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
B. Copy of Decision. In addition, the Planning and Inspections Director shall make a
copy of the decision available to the public in the offices of the Planning and
Inspections Department, during normal business hours.
2.4.12. - Effect of Development Approval
A. Approval Limited. Approval of a development application in accordance with this
Ordinance authorizes only the particular use, plan for development, or other
specific activity approved.
B. Permit Prerequisite. In the event a permit or development approval is
prerequisite to another permit or development approval (e.g., administrative
adjustment or variance approval prior to a site plan approval), development may
not take place until all prerequisite approvals are obtained. Approval of one
development application does not guarantee approval of any subsequent
development application.
C. Sequence of Permit Issuance.
1. A land disturbance permit can be issued after a site plan is approved;
however, the Planning and Inspections Director may allow its issuance if a
watershed development plan, floodplain development permit, or
landscape plan (as applicable), has been approved.
2. If required, a well or septic tank permit, driveway approval, water and
sewer construction plan, site plan, watershed development plan, group
development plan, or final plat shall be approved prior to issuance of a
building permit.
3. The Planning and Inspections Director may issue permits for temporary
construction-related uses prior to approval of a site plan, group
development plan, or preliminary plat.
2.4.13. - Deferral and Continuance
A. Planning and Inspections Director Deferral.
1. Application to be Heard by the PB. A development application reviewed
or decided by the PB may be granted a 1-month deferral by the Planning
and Inspections Director, provided the request to defer is submitted in
writing by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the initial consideration of
a development application. The Planning and Inspections Director is
authorized to grant only one deferral. The application must then either be
forwarded to the PB for consideration or be withdrawn.
2. Application to be Heard by the BOA or HPC. A development application
reviewed or decided by the BOA or the HPC may be granted a 1-month
deferral by the Planning and Inspections Director, provided the request to
defer is submitted in writing by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the
2-42
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
initial consideration of a development application. The Planning and
Inspections Director is authorized to grant only one deferral. The
application must then either be forwarded to the BOA or HPC, as
appropriate, for consideration, or be withdrawn. Cost of readvertisement
for any deferral at the request of the application shall be borne by the
applicant
B. Decision-Making Body Continuance.
1. When a development application is before the Board of Commissioners,
PB, BOA, or HPC for a decision, the decision-making body may continue
consideration of the application for up to 60 days, provided the reason for
the continuance is stated in the motion to continue. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit a continuance from being granted for a greater period of
time, provided it is mutually agreed upon by the decision-making body
and the applicant.
2. In cases where a development application has been forwarded to the
Board of Commissioners following PB review and recommendation, the
applicant cannot request a continuance until the Board of Commissioners
public hearing.
2.4.14. - Withdrawal
A. Application to be Heard by the PB. An applicant may request, and the Planning
and Inspections Director may grant an applicant's request to withdraw an
application if it is done at least 10 days prior to initial consideration by the PB. A
request to withdraw an application after that date shall only be considered by the
PB at the public hearing.
B. Application to be Heard by the BOA or the HPC. An applicant may request, and
the Planning and Inspections Director may grant an applicant's request to
withdraw an application if it is done at least 10 days prior to initial consideration
of the application by the BOA or the HPC. A request to withdraw an application
after that date shall only be considered by the BOA or HPC, as appropriate, at the
public hearing.
C. Successive Requests. If an applicant withdraws an application for the same land
after public notification 2 times within a single calendar year, the same
application may not be resubmitted for a period of 1 year from the date of the
second withdrawal.
2.4.15. - Expiration of Permit or Development Approval
A. General.
2-43
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
1. Development approvals granted in accordance with this Ordinance shall
expire as provided in Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to
Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, or Section 2.6, Review
Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, for the particular type of
development permit or approval.
2. If no expiration period is provided in Section 2.5, Review Procedures
Subject to Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, or Section 2.6,
Review Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, then the
development approval does not expire.
3. A change in ownership of the land shall not affect the established
expiration time period. The filing of an appeal shall delay the established
expiration period until final resolution of the appeal.
B. Extension of Expiration Time Period.
1. Except as otherwise provided in Section 2.5, Review Procedures Subject to
Decision-Making Body Review and Decision, or Section 2.6, Review
Procedures Subject to Staff Review and Decision, for the particular type of
development permit or approval, the Planning and Inspections Director
may, on receipt of a written request for extension before the expiration
date and on a showing of good cause, grant one or more extensions of the
expiration time period for up to a cumulative total of 1 year.
2. Any further extensions shall be subject to approval by the decision-making
body that granted the development permit or approval, on submittal of a
request for extension to the Planning and Inspections Director before the
expiration date and a showing of good cause.
2.5. - Review Procedures Subject to
Decision-Making Body Review and Decision
2.5.1. - Overview
A. General. This section sets out supplemental procedures, standards, and related
information for each of the specific review procedures subject to decision-making
body review and decision, as identified in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development
Review Table. They apply in addition to, or instead of, the standard procedures set
forth in Section 2.4, Standard Review Procedures.
B. Structure of Procedures.
1. For each type of development application reviewed under this Ordinance,
the following sections state the purpose of the development permit or
approval, the steps in the review process, the review standards for the
2-44
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
application, and provisions addressing expiration and amendment, if
applicable.
2. Development application provisions in this section are organized in
alphabetical order in accordance with the sequence of procedures in Table
2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table.
2.5.2. - Appeal
A. Applicability
1. This section sets out the procedure and standards for an aggrieved party,
officer, department, or board of the Town affected by any decision or
determination by a Town official to determine if the decision or
interpretation complies with the requirements of this Unified
Development Ordinance.
2. In the event an applicant wishes to appeal a standard outside this Unified
Development Ordinance, or a decision by a staff member not addressed by
this Unified Development Ordinance, the appeal is made to the Town
Manager in accordance with Town policy, not this appeal procedure.
B. Initiation. An appeal shall be initiated by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Planning and Inspections Director within:
1. 30 days of the date the written determination or decision being appealed
is received by the applicant (except where otherwise specified in this
Ordinance); or
2. In the event that a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is denied in
accordance with Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, the applicant
may appeal the denial directly to the North Carolina Sedimentation
Control Commission.
C. Appeal Procedure.
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) The written notice of appeal shall include a statement of the error or
improper decision or determination, the date of the decision or
determination, the grounds for the appeal, and all related support
materials.
3. Staff Review.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
2-45
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(b) On accepting a notice of appeal, the Planning and Inspections
Director shall transmit to the BOA the appeal and the record of
material considered by the decision-maker in making the decision
or determination (including but not limited to, for example, the
application and support materials, staff report, other plans,
documents, reports, and studies considered in making the decision,
and any minutes, transcripts, or record of the meetings held to
consider and make the decision).
(c) The Planning and Inspections Director or Public Works Director, as
appropriate, shall review and comment on appeals related to the
aspects of this Ordinance for which they are responsible for
administering.
4. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. BOA Review and Decision.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and
2.4.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures).
(b) The BOA, at the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall
decide the application for the appeal.
(c) The decision shall be based on the competent, material, and
subsequent evidence in the record of the appeal, as supplemented
by arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the
standards in Section 2.5.2.D, Appeal Review Standards.
(d) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Affirmation of the decision or determination (in whole or in
part);
(2) Modification of the decision or determination (in whole or in
part); or
(3) Reversal of the decision or determination (in whole or in
part).
(e) A vote to reverse or modify a decision or determination shall require
approval of a majority of a quorum present at the hearing.
(f) Each decision shall be made in writing and reflect the BOA's
determination of contested facts and their application to the
standards in this Ordinance.
(g) The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly
authorized member of the BOA.
(h) The decision of the BOA shall be effective upon the filing of the
written decision.
6. Notification of Decision. The decision of the BOA shall be delivered by
personal service, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, the
landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a
copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person
providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has
been made.
2-46
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
D. Appeal Review Standards
1. The BOA is limited to the following determinations in considering the
appeal, which shall be based on clear and substantial evidence in the
record:
(a) The decision-maker did not make an error or correctly applied the
standards of this Unified Development Ordinance in making the
decision or interpretation;
(b) The decision-maker made an error in determining whether a
standard was met. The record must indicate that an error in
judgment occurred or facts, plans, or regulations were misread in
determining whether the particular standard was or was not met;
(c) The decision-maker made an error because the decision was based
on a standard not contained in this Ordinance or other appropriate
Town ordinances, regulations, or state law, or that a standard more
strict or broad than the standard established in this Ordinance was
applied; or
(d) The decision-maker made an error in applying a standard or
measuring a standard.
E. Effect
1. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed,
unless the Town official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
BOA, after notice of appeal has been filed, that because of facts stated in
the certificate a stay would, in the town official's opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay
would seriously interfere with enforcement of this Ordinance.
2. If certification by a Town official is filed, administrative proceedings shall
not be stayed except through issuance of a restraining order by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
3. If the appeal is not stayed, the appellant may file for an expedited hearing
of the appeal, and the BOA shall meet to consider the appeal within 15 days
of the date the request is filed.
4. The filing of an appeal prevents the filing of an application for a zoning
map amendment or special use for the same land subject to an appeal
application, as well as the filing of a text amendment application by the
same party filing the appeal until the appeal application is decided or
appealed to the courts.
F. Appeal. Any decision by the BOA shall be subject to Superior Court review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari.
2-47
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2.5.3. - Beneficial Use Determination
A. Applicability. If, after a decision on an application for development approval, a
landowner is of the opinion that application of this Unified Development
Ordinance during the application review process has denied an economically
beneficial use of the land, the procedures of this section shall be used by an
applicant before seeking relief from the courts in order that any denial of
economically beneficial use of land may be remedied through a non-judicial
forum.
B. Beneficial Use Determination Procedure.
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) An application for beneficial use determination may be submitted
by a landowner at any time to the Planning and Inspections
Director.
(c) The application shall include the following:
(1) The landowner's name and address;
(2) A legal description and the street address (when a street
address is available) of the land;
(3) Documentation of the date of purchase and the purchase
price of the land, and any offers to purchase the land made
by any person, corporation, or association, within the last 3
years;
(4) A description of the physical features present on the land, its
total acreage, the present use, the use of the land on the
effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance, and
the current use of the land;
(5) Evidence of any investments made by the landowner to
improve the land, the date the improvements were made,
and the costs of the improvements;
(6) A description of what uses of land were available when the
land was purchased by the landowner;
(7) A description of the regulations and uses permitted which
are alleged to result in an elimination of economically
beneficial use of the land;
(8) All appraisals, studies, and any other supporting evidence,
and any actions taken by the Town related to the land; and
(9) A description of the use which the landowner believes
represents the minimum legally required economically
beneficial use of the land and all documentation, studies, and
2-48
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
other supporting evidence thereof.
3. Hearing Officer Review and Recommendation
(a) Board of Commissioners Appointment of Hearing Officer. Within
a reasonable time after the date the application is determined
complete the Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Hearing
Officer to schedule and conduct a hearing on the application in
accordance with this section. The Hearing Officer shall be a licensed
attorney with expertise in land use and takings claims.
(b) Hearing by Hearing Officer At the hearing conducted by the
Hearing Officer, the applicant or the applicant's representative shall
present the applicant's case and the Town Attorney shall represent
the Town. All evidence presented shall be under oath, and the
parties involved shall be permitted to cross-examine witnesses. The
sworn testimony and evidence shall pertain to the standards set
forth in Section 2.5.3.B.5, Beneficial Use Determination Review
Standards, as to whether the applicant is deprived of an
economically beneficial use of the land and the standards in Section
2.5.3.B.6, Relief, pertaining to the degree of relief needed to provide
the landowner with an economically beneficial use of the land.
(c) Findings of the Hearing Officer Within a reasonable period of time
following the close of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall prepare
recommended findings of fact and a proposed order for
consideration by the Board of Commissioners. The recommended
findings and recommendations of the Hearing Officer as to whether
the land is provided economically beneficial use shall be based on
the evidence submitted and the standards in Section 2.5.3.B.5,
Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards. If the Hearing
Officer finds that the applicant has been denied economically
beneficial use of the subject land, then the Hearing Officer shall
recommend a use that permits an economically beneficial use and
results in a minimum change of this Unified Development
Ordinance as it applies to the subject land, in accordance with the
standards set forth in Section 2.5.3.B.5, Beneficial Use Determination
Review Standards, or other relief as is determined appropriate. The
Hearing Officer's recommended findings of fact and proposed order
shall be in writing and shall detail the basis of the conclusions from
the record of the hearing.
4. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) After receipt of the recommended findings and proposed order
from the Hearing Officer, the Board of Commissioners shall approve
the findings of fact and proposed order of the Hearing Officer, or
may attach conditions, modify, or reverse the findings of fact or
2-49
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
proposed order of the Hearing Officer, based on the standards of
Section 2.5.3.B.5, Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards. If
the Board of Commissioners attaches conditions, modifies or
reverses the findings of fact or proposed order, it shall do so only
where the record of the hearing indicates that the Hearing Officer is
unsupported by the record, or that the proposed order is not in
conformance with the standards of Section 2.5.3.B.5, Beneficial Use
Determination Review Standards.
5. Beneficial Use Determination Review Standards.
(a) General. In determining if a landowner has been deprived of an
economically beneficial use of land, the Hearing Officer and the
Board of Commissioners shall take into account the following
factors:
(1) Economically Viable Use. In making the determination of
whether the land is provided an economically viable use, the
Hearing Officer and the Board of Commissioners shall first
evaluate the uses of the land as provided by this Ordinance,
and the uses of land in relation to the uses provided similarly
situated lands. For the purposes of this section, "economically
viable use" means the opportunity to make a return
equivalent to that which would have been received from a
conservative financial investment. Transitory economic issues
shall not be relevant to this determination.
(2) Diminution in Value. The market value of the land, as
established by the comparable sales approach, prior to
adoption of this Unified Development Ordinance, or a
relevant amendment thereto, which caused the landowner
to apply for relief shall be compared to the market value of
the land, as established by the comparable sales approach,
with the regulations as applied. Market value of the land prior
to the adoption of this Ordinance, or a relevant amendment,
shall constitute its highest and best use on December 31,
2019 of the relevant amendment thereto or the date of
purchase of the land, whichever is later, and any other land
value/appraisal information that the applicant would like to
be considered. All appraisals shall be proposed by qualified
licensed appraisers, and shall follow the best professional
practices as established by the profession. A mere diminution
in market value is not sufficient to support a determination of
denial of economically beneficial use.
(b) Subsidy. The amount or nature of any subsidy that may be required
by the Town, neighbors, purchasers, tenants, or the public if the
uses allowed under this Unified Development Ordinance are
modified.
2-50
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(c) Other Adverse Effects. Any other adverse effects on the Town and
its residents.
(d) Current State of the Law. The state of the law established by the
United States Supreme Court, the federal Circuit Courts of Appeals,
and the North Carolina Supreme Court, relevant to these standards.
6. Relief. If the finding is that a landowner has been deprived economically
beneficial use of land, or is otherwise entitled to relief in accordance with
the standards of this section, relief shall be granted.
(a) General. In granting relief, the Hearing Officer may recommend and
the Board of Commissioners may adopt any legally available
incentive or measure reasonably necessary to offset any substantial
economic hardship, and may condition such incentives upon
approval of specific development plans. If there is a finding that the
denial of the application would create a substantial economic
hardship, the Hearing Officer may recommend and the Board of
Commissioners may consider additional relief to provide an
appropriate increase in market value or other benefit or return to
the applicant sufficient to offset the substantial economic hardship.
The types of incentives that the Hearing Officer may recommend
and the Board of Commissioners may consider include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) A zoning map amendment of the land to a more appropriate
classification, issuance of a variance, approval of a site plan, or
other appropriate land use regulatory action that will enable
the applicant to realize a reasonable return on the land;
(2) An opportunity to transfer density or cluster development on
other land;
(3) A modification of permit fees;
(4) Development finance assistance;
(5) Approval of development on some portion of the land; or
(6) Acquisition of all or a portion of the property at market value.
(b) Minimum Increase. In granting relief, the landowner shall be given
the minimum increase in use or density/intensity or other possible
concessions from this Ordinance and Section 2.5.3.B.6, Relief, above,
in order to permit an economically viable use of the land or a use
that is determined to be required by law. The highest use, or even
an average or generally reasonable expectation, is not required or
intended as the appropriate remedy. The following guidelines shall
be used for determining the minimum economically viable use of
land and, therefore, the amount of relief to be granted a landowner
in order to reach that minimum.
(1) A minimum economically viable use of the land should be
one that does not have any governmental subsidy attached
to the long-term safe occupation of the land. If such a
subsidy is needed, then that should be reflected by lowering
2-51
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
the use intensity that is considered a minimum economically
viable use on a market valuation basis.
(2) A use common to the town, although it may not involve
further development of the land, is considered an
economically viable use. Attention shall also be given to land
uses that are considered to be the lowest intensity in the
Town but which still provide for occupation and living within
the Town. These land uses, as well, shall be considered
economically viable uses.
(3) The actual condition of the land shall be considered. The
reality of limited development potential, given the natural
condition of the land, shall not be attributed to the
regulations applied to the land. If the land is such that it
cannot safely accommodate development with normal
grading and clearing practices, this fact shall lower the
intensity of use that is considered a minimum economically
viable use.
(4) The potential for damages to either residents or land shall be
assessed in determining economically viable use. The need
for a governmental subsidy to future landowners shall be
considered, and the cost of such subsidies shall be deducted
from the otherwise established minimum economically
viable use.
(5) Expectations shall, in general, not be considered. Only
reasonable expectations backed by investments as required
by the current state of the law shall be considered.
(6) The current state of law established by the United States
Supreme Court, the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals, and the
North Carolina Supreme Court, relevant to the granting of
relief.
2.5.4. - Certificate of Appropriateness
A. Applicability. A certificate of appropriateness (COA) or Minor Work COA is
required within an LHO district whether or not a building permit is required. If a
building permit is required, the COA must be obtained prior to its issuance.
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 2.5.4.B, Exemptions, a COA shall be
required within an LHO for the following:
1. Making an architectural or environmental change to the exterior features
of a property.
(a) For the purposes of this section, "architectural or environmental
change" means the erection, construction, alteration,
reconstruction, restoration, moving, removal, or demolition of all or
part of a building or other structure, or an appurtenant fixture.
2-52
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(b) For purposes of this section, "exterior features" means the
architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the
exterior of a building or other structure, including the kind and
texture and color of building materials, the size and scale of a
building or structure, and the type and style of all windows, doors,
light fixtures, steps, pavement, masonry walls, fences, decks, signs,
and other appurtenant features. It is also deemed to include major
replacement or redesign of landscaping, and the removal of mature
trees.
2. Any changes in the character of street paving, street width, utility
installations or removals, street lighting, street trees, walls, fences,
sidewalks, or to the exterior of buildings or structures on property or streets
in which the Town and all public utilities have a fee or other interest.
B. Exemptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply to:
1. The ordinary maintenance, repair, or replacement of streets, sidewalks,
pavement markings, utility service lines, street signs, traffic signs, and
street light fixtures, provided such activities comply with the purpose and
intent of this section and any guidelines adopted by the HPC.
2. The immediate restoration of utility service in the event of an emergency.
C. Certificate of Appropriateness Procedure.
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) An application shall include sketches, drawings, photographs,
specifications, descriptions, and other information which clearly
show the proposed development.
3. Staff Review.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) Except as otherwise provided in Section 2.5.4.C.3(c), Minor Work, the
Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.4.D, Certificate of Appropriateness
Review Standards.
(c) Minor Work
1. If the development proposed is identified by the Design
Review Guidelines-Historic Districts Aberdeen, North
Carolina as a minor work, the Planning and Inspections
Director may review and make a decision on the application
in accordance with the standards in Section 2.5.4 .D,
Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards.
2-53
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. If the Planning and Inspections Director proposes to
disapprove the minor work, the application shall be
forwarded to the HPC for a final decision in accordance with
Section 2.5.4.C.5, HPC Review and Decision.
4. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. HPC Review and Decision.
(a) Applicable (See Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and
Section 2.4.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures).
(b) The HPC, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall
decide the application for a certificate of appropriateness.
(c) The decision shall be based on the competent, material, and
substantial evidence in the record, as supplemented by the
arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the
standards in Section 2.5.4.D, Certificate of Appropriateness Review
Standards.
(d) The decision shall be one of the following:
1. Approval of the certificate of appropriateness in part, or as
submitted;
2. Approval of the certificate of appropriateness subject to
conditions or revisions; or
3. Denial of the certificate of appropriateness in part, or as
submitted. The HPC shall not deny an application except for
the purpose of preventing the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, or moving of buildings, appurtenant
features, or signs that are incompatible with the Aberdeen
Design Guidelines.
(e) Each decision shall be made in writing and reflect the HPC's
determination of contested facts and their application to the
standards in this Unified Development Ordinance.
(f) The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly
authorized member of the HPC.
(g) The decision of the HPC shall be effective upon the filing of the
written decision.
6. Notification of Decision. The decision of the HPC shall be delivered by
personal service, electronic mail, or by first class mail to the applicant, the
landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a
copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person
providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has
been made.
D. Certificate of Appropriateness Review Standards.
1. A certificate of appropriateness shall be approved upon a finding the
applicant demonstrates the proposed development complies with the
guidelines set forth in the Design Review Guidelines-Historic Districts
2-54
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
Aberdeen, North Carolina , and is otherwise congruous with the special
character of the LHO district.
2. In making its decision on the application the HPC shall not consider the
interior arrangement of a building or structure.
E. Condition of Approval Applicable. Applicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of
Approval).
F. Delay in Relocation, Demolition, or Destruction.
1. The effective date of a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
relocation, demolition, or destruction of a designated building, structure, or
site within the LHO district may be delayed for a period of up to 365 days
from the date of approval, except the maximum period of delay authorized
by this section shall be reduced by the HPC where the landowner would
suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use of
or return from the property by virtue of the delay.
2. During this period the HPC shall negotiate with the landowner and with
any other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building or
site.
3. If the HPC finds a building or site within a LHO district has no special
significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, it
shall waive all or part of the period and authorize demolition or removal
before expiration of the time period.
4. If the HPC has voted to recommend designation as a LHO district, and final
designation has not been made by the Board of Commissioners, the
relocation, demolition, or destruction of any building, site or structure
located in the proposed district may be delayed by the HPC for a period of
up to 180 days or until the Board of Commissioners takes final action on
the designation, whichever occurs first.
5. The Board of Commissioners may enact an ordinance to prevent the
demolition by neglect of any designated building or structure within an
LHO district. The ordinance shall provide appropriate safeguards to protect
landowners from undue economic hardship.
6. An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
demolition or destruction of a building, site, or structure determined by the
State Historic Preservation Officer as having statewide significance as
defined in the criteria of the National Register of Historic Places may be
denied, except where the HPC finds the landowner would suffer extreme
hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by
virtue of the denial.
G. Amendment. Amendment of a certificate of appropriateness may only be
reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards
established for its original approval.
2-55
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
H. Expiration.
1. Unless otherwise stated in the approval of a certificate of appropriateness,
a certificate of appropriateness shall expire and be null and void if a
building permit is not issued or construction or installation commenced for
development approved by the certificate within 18 months of the date of
certificate issuance.
2. If work on development approved under a certificate of appropriateness is
started then discontinued for a period exceeding 12 months, the certificate
of appropriateness shall expire and become null and void.
I. Appeals. Appeal of a decision on a COA shall be reviewed and decided by the
BOA in accordance with Section 2.5.2, Appeal.
2.5.5. - Conditional Zoning
A. Applicability. I n cases where the standards of a zoning district are inadequate to
ensure that development allowed by a zoning district will conform to the Town’s
adopted policy guidance or to appropriately address the impacts expected to be
generated by development, a landowner may apply for a conditional zoning in
accordance with this section. Approval of a conditional zoning application
establishes a parallel conditional zoning district that is equivalent to a
corresponding zoning district, but is subject to additional conditions or
restrictions that the applicant and Town mutually agree are necessary to ensure
conformance with adopted policy guidance and adequately address expected
development impacts.
B. Conditional Zoning Procedure.
1. Pre-Application Conference. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Citizen Information Meeting. Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Citizen
Information Meeting).
3. Application Submittal and Acceptance.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) Conditional zoning applications may only be initiated by the
landowner(s) of the land subject to the application.
(c) All conditions of approval proposed by the applicant must be
included with the conditional zoning application.
(d) An application for a conditional zoning may include a conditional
zoning plan that illustrates the proposed development in order to
demonstrate proposed conditions where text does not provide an
adequate description.
(e) When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for
review with the submittal of an application for a conditional zoning.
2-56
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
Th e threshold requirements and procedure for preparation of a
traffic impact analysis is described in the Development Guide.
4. Staff Review.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.5.C, Conditional Zoning Review
Standards.
5. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
6. PB or HPC Review and Recommendation.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) If the application is proposed for land located within a LHO district,
the HPC, following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on
the application to the PB. The PB shall not make a recommendation
on an application until they receive a recommendation from the
HPC.
(c) The PB, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation
on the application in accordance with Section 2.5.5.C, Conditional
Zoning Review Standards.
(d) During its review of the application, the PB may suggest revisions to
the proposed conditions (including the conditional zoning plan),
consistent with the provisions of Section 2.4.10, Conditions of
Approval. Only those revisions agreed to in writing by the applicant
shall be incorporated into the application.
(e) Upon completion of the public hearing, the PB shall comment on
the application's consistency with the Town’s adopted policy
guidance.
7. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision.
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a public
hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section
2.5.5.C, Conditional Zoning Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Adoption of the conditional zoning as proposed;
(2) Adoption of a revised conditional zoning;
(3) Denial of the conditional zoning; or
(4) Remand of the conditional zoning application to the PB for
further consideration.
(d) As part of the decision, the Board of Commissioners shall adopt a
written statement of consistency and reasonableness that:
(1) Describes whether the decision is consistent with all
applicable Town’s adopted policy guidance; and
(2) Explains why the decision is reasonable and in the public
interest.
2-57
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
8. Changes to Application. An applicant may change the conditions
associated with a conditional zoning application until 22 days prior to the
initial review by the PB. After that time, the applicant may only propose
changes in accordance with the following:
(a) Changes shall be made in writing to the Planning and Inspections
Director during or after the hearing conducted by the PB but no
closer two business days prior to final action by the Board of
Commissioners on the conditional zoning application;
(b) Changes shall be signed by all landowners or those authorized to
submit the application; and
(c) Changes shall be approved by PB, or the Board of Commissioners,
depending upon the time the changes were submitted by the
applicant.
9. Designation on Official Zoning Map. The Planning and Inspections
Director shall make changes to the Official Zoning Map promptly after
approval of a conditional zoning district application by the Board of
Commissioners.
C. Conditional Zoning Review Standards. The advisability of a conditional zoning is
a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the Board of Commissioners
and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to approve or
deny a conditional zoning, the Board of Commissioners may consider the
following standards:
1. Consistency with Adopted Policy Guidance. Whether and the extent to
which the proposed conditional zoning district is appropriate for its
proposed location, and is consistent with the Town’s adopted policy
guidance.
2. Reasonableness/Public Interest. Whether an approval of the conditional
zoning is reasonable and in the public interest.
3. Review Factors. Whether the applicant's proposed conditional zoning
district, including the proposed use(s), written conditions, and conditional
zoning plan (if applicable), will satisfactorily:
(a) Result in a development that is compatible with surrounding
development character and land uses;
(b) Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse impact on
adjacent and nearby land, such as that caused by traffic, parking,
noise, lighting, trash, loading areas, etc.;
(c) Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse
environmental impact on water and air resources, minimize land
disturbance, preserve trees, and protect habitat;
(d) Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse impact on
municipal facilities and services, such as streets, potable water and
wastewater facilities, parks, police, and fire; and
(e) Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse effect on the
use, enjoyment, or value of adjacent lands.
2-58
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
4. Changes in the Area. There have been changes in the type or nature of
development in the area of the proposed conditional zoning district that
support the application.
5. Development Patterns. The proposed conditional zoning district results in
development that promotes a logical, preferred, and orderly development
pattern.
D. Conditions of Approval.
1. Only conditions mutually agreed to by the landowner(s) of the land to be
conditionally zoned and the Board of Commissioners may be approved as
part of a conditional zoning district.
2. Conditions shall be limited to those that address conformance of
development and use on the site with Town regulations and adopted
policy guidance and that address the impacts reasonably expected to be
generated by the development or use of the site.
3. Conditions may be in the form of text or plans and maps, or both.
4. No condition shall be less restrictive than the standards of the parallel
general zoning district, any applicable overlay zoning district standard, or
other applicable requirements in this Unified Development Ordinance.
5. No condition shall be made part of the application which:
(a) Specifies the ownership status, race, religion, or other characteristics
of the occupants of housing units;
(b) Establishes a minimum size of a dwelling unit;
(c) Establishes a minimum value of buildings or improvements;
(d) Excludes residents based upon race, religion, or income; or
(e) Obligates the Town to perform in any manner relative to the
approval of the conditional zoning or development of the land.
6. Failure by the applicant to object to a condition at the public hearing by
the BOC, shall constitute agreement by the applicant to the conditions in
the approving motion .
E. Effect.
1. Lands rezoned to a conditional zoning district shall be subject to the
standards applicable to the parallel zoning district (including the range of
allowable land uses), as modified by the more restrictive conditions
proposed by the applicant and approved by the Board of Commissioners
for the conditional zoning district. These standards and approved
conditions are perpetually binding on the land as an amendment to this
Unified Development Ordinance and the Official Zoning Map, and may
only be changed in accordance with the procedure for zoning map
amendment, conditional zoning, or planned development.
2. No condition shall have the effect of removing or amending any
requirement of this Ordinance.
3. No permit or development approval shall be issued for development
subject to a conditional zoning district except in accordance with the
2-59
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
approved conditions and an accompanying conditional zoning plan (if
submitted).
F. Amendment.
1. Minor Changes. Unless expressly prohibited by the Board of
Commissioners in approval of a conditional zoning district, subsequent
plans and permits for development within a conditional zoning district
may include minor changes from the approved conditions, provided the
development continues to meet the minimum requirements of this
Unified Development Ordinance. Minor changes are limited to changes
that will result in equal or better compliance with the conditions of
approval or that address technical considerations that could not
reasonably be anticipated at the time of the conditional zoning approval.
The following minor changes may be approved by the Planning and
Inspections Director:
(a) Changes to the location of entrances or driveways, the
rearrangement of internal streets, turn lanes, drives, or access
restrictions;
(b) Changes to the configuration of parking areas;
(c) Changes to the configuration or location of open space or
placement of required amenities;
(d) Changes to the arrangement or location of buildings, provided
there is no increase in number;
(e) Changes to the proposed building elevation or facade, including
materials, provided that the change retains the same general
architectural character;
(f) Changes to the configuration of landscape yards, including types of
materials;
(g) Increases in non-residential gross floor area of up to 10 percent, or
50,000 square feet, whichever is less; and
(h) Changes to features on a conditional zoning plan that are not
specifically conditioned.
2. Material Changes are Amendments. Changes that materially affect the
basic configuration of the development or are beyond the scope of a minor
change are not considered minor changes, and shall be reviewed and
considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established
for the original approval of a conditional zoning application.
G. Expiration. If no application for approval of a preliminary plat, site plan, or group
development for any part of the rezoned land is submitted within 3 years after
approval of the conditional zoning, the PB may forward a recommendation to the
Board of Commissioners to initiate an application to rezone the land to a zoning
district determined to be appropriate. Prior to making such a recommendation,
2-60
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
the PB shall determine that the landowner(s) has been notified and given a
reasonable opportunity to comment.
2.5.6. - Development Agreement
A. Applicability. I n order to provide more regulatory certainty, establish a schedule
for development, coordinate the provision of public facilities, and improve
management of environmentally sensitive lands, the Board of Commissioners
may enter into a development agreement with a developer, subject to Section
160A-400 of the North Carolina General Statutes, and the provisions of this
section. In entering into a development agreement the Town may not exercise
any authority or make any commitment that is unauthorized by general or local
act, and may not impose any unauthorized tax or fee.
B. Development Agreement Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.6.C, Development Agreement Review
Standards.
4. Public Notification. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. PB Review and Recommendation
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) T he PB, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation
on the application in accordance with Section 2.5.6.C, Development
Agreement Review Standards.
6. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) T he Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a public
hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section
2.5.6.C, Development Agreement Review Standards.
(c) The action taken shall be one of the following:
(1) Enter into the development agreement, as submitted;
(2) Enter into the development agreement, subject to changes
agreed to in writing by the developer; or
(3) Not enter into the development agreement.
7. Recordation. W ithin 14 days after entering into a development agreement,
the applicant shall record the agreement in the office of the Moore County
2-61
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
Register of Deeds.
C. Development Agreement Review Standards. F or consideration of the Town to
participate in a development agreement, a development subject to the
agreement must meet the following:
1. T he land subject to the development agreement shall contain 25 acres or
more of developable land (exclusive of wetlands, mandatory buffers,
unbuildable slopes, and other portions of the land that may be precluded
from the property at the time of application).
2. T he development shall demonstrate phasing, and participation in the
proposed agreement shall not exceed 20 years.
3. T he development shall demonstrate the impact on existing and future
provisions of capital improvements by the Town, including at least one of
the following: transportation, potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste,
stormwater management, educational, parks and recreation, and health
systems and facilities.
D. Effect
1. Burdens and Benefits. T he burdens of the development agreement are
binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to, all
successors in interest to the parties to the agreement.
2. Rights and Obligations. R ights and obligations established by a
development agreement shall not preclude or supersede rights and
obligations established pursuant to other law regarding building permits,
site specific development plans, phased development plans, group
developments, or other provisions of law.
3. Building and Housing Code. A development agreement shall not exempt
the property landowner or developer from compliance with the State
Building Code or the Town’s Minimum Housing Code.
4. Identify Subsequently Enacted Laws. U nless the development
agreement specifically provides for the application of subsequently
enacted laws, the laws applicable to development of the property subject
to a development agreement are those in force at the time of execution of
the agreement.
5. Application of Subsequently Adopted Laws. E xcept for grounds specified
in Section 160A-385.1(e) of the North Carolina General Statutes, the Town
may not apply subsequently adopted ordinances or development policies
to a development that is subject to a development agreement.
6. Change in State of Federal Law. I f state or federal law is changed after a
development agreement has been entered into and the change prevents
or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the development
agreement, the Town, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, may modify
the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal
law has a fundamental effect on the development agreement.
2-62
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
7. Vested Rights. T his Ordinance does not abrogate any rights preserved by
Sections 160A-385 or 160A-385.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes, or
that may vest pursuant to common law or otherwise in the absence of a
development agreement.
E. Approval of Debt. I f any of the obligations of the Town in the development
agreement constitute debt, the Town shall comply, at the time of the obligation
to incur the debt and before the debt becomes enforceable against the Town,
with any applicable constitutional and statutory procedures for the approval of
the debt. The agreement shall be signed by the Town Attorney, Finance Director,
and the Town Clerk.
F. Periodic Review and Beach of Agreement
1. Annual Review. D uring any period of time in which a permit or
development approval subject to a development agreement is active, the
Planning and Inspections Director shall review the development at least
once every year for compliance with the agreement and file a report with
the Board of Commissioners. The developer must demonstrate good faith
compliance with the terms of the development agreement. Failure to
meet a commencement or completion date specified in the development
agreement shall not, in and of itself, constitute a material breach of the
agreement, but must be judged based upon the totality of the
circumstances.
2. Material Breach. I f the Board of Commissioners finds and determines that
the developer has committed a material breach of the terms or conditions
of the development agreement, the Town Attorney shall serve written
notice of the breach upon the developer within a reasonable time after the
periodic review. Such notice shall set forth with reasonable particularity the
nature of the breach and the evidence supporting the finding and
determination, and shall provide the developer a reasonable time in which
to cure the material breach.
3. Failure to Cure Material Breach. I f the developer fails to cure the material
breach within the time given, then the Board of Commissioners may
unilaterally terminate or modify the development agreement.
G. Amendment
1. Mutual Consent. A development agreement may be amended or
canceled by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or by their
successors in interest.
2. Minor Change. T he Planning and Inspections Director may approve minor
changes of the development agreement with the mutual consent of the
other parties to the agreement, without following the same procedures as
required for initial approval of the agreement, upon making written
findings that the proposed minor changes would not significantly change
the use, intensity, or design of the development, would be consistent with
2-63
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
the purposes and goals of the agreement, would comply with this
Ordinance, and would not adversely affect the public health, safety, or
general welfare.
3. Material Changes are Amendments. C onsideration of a proposed material
change of a development agreement beyond the scope of a minor change
shall be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and
standards established for the original approval of a development
agreement.
2.5.7. - Financial Guarantees
A. Applicability. The section provides a procedure for the acceptance and release of
a financial guarantee by the Board of Commissioners in-lieu of the completion,
installation and dedication of any required public improvement (streets, potable
water, sanitary sewer, electricity, street lights, street trees and sidewalks. This
includes the acceptance of a financial guarantee and the release of a financial
guarantee.
B. Acceptance of Financial Guarantee Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Applicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Citizen Information Meeting. Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Citizen
Information Meeting).
3. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) The acceptance of a financial guarantee may only be initiated by the
landowner(s) of the land subject to the application.
4. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Public Works Director shall review the request and provide a
recommendation in accordance with Section 2.5.7.D, Financial
Guarantee Review Standards.
(c) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the request,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.7.D, Financial Guarantee Review
Standards.
5. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners shall decide the request in accordance
with Section 2.5.7.D, Financial Guarantees Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
1. Acceptance of the financial guarantee as proposed;
2. Reject the the financial guarantee as proposed;
2-64
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
C. Release of Financial Guarantee Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Applicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Citizen Information Meeting. Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Citizen
Information Meeting).
3. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) The release of a financial guarantee may only be initiated by the
applicant(s) of the accepted financial guarantee.
4. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Public Works Director shall review the request and provide a
recommendation in accordance with Section 2.5.7.D, Financial
Guarantee Review Standards.
(c) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the request,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.7.D, Financial Guarantee Review
Standards.
5. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners shall decide the request in accordance
with Section 2.5.7.D, Financial Guarantees Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
1. Approve the release of the financial guarantee as proposed;
2. Reject the released of the financial guarantee as proposed;
D. Financial Guarantee Review Standards. A financial guarantee shall be accepted
or released on a decision that the applicant demonstrates:
1. Acceptance.
(a) An itemized estimate of the costs that sufficiently covers the
materials and labor for installation of the improvement, as certified
by a NC licensed engineer;
(b) The proposed financial guarantee is 125% of the certified engineer’s
estimate; and
(c) The itemized estimate of the costs and financial guarantee shall not
be accepted until after the applicable plan is approved.
2. Release.
(a) The proposed work covered by the previously accepted financial
guarantee has been completed to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Director and Planning and Inspections Director.
E. Amendment. Amendment of a financial guarantee may only be reviewed and
considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its
original approval.
2-65
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2.5.8. - Land Use Plan Amendment
A. Purpose. T he purpose of this section is to provide a uniform means for amending
the Aberdeen Land Use Plan whenever the public necessity, changed conditions,
convenience, general welfare, or appropriate land use practices justify or require
doing so.
B. Land Use Plan Amendment Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Citizen Information Meeting. O ptional (see Section 2.4.3, Citizen
Information Meeting).
3. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Ap plicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) A pplications may be initiated by the Board of Commissioners, the
PB, the Planning and Inspections Director, any person who may
submit applications in accordance with Section 2.4.4.A, Authority to
File Applications, or any other interested party.
4. Staff Review
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and pro vide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.8.C, Lan d Use Plan Amendment Review
Standards.
5. Public Notification. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
6. PB Review and Recommendation
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) T he PB, following a public hearing, shall make a rec ommendation
on an application in accordance with Section 2.5.8.C, Land Use Plan
Amendment Review Standards.
7. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a public
hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section
2.5.8.C, Land Use Plan Amendment Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
1. Adoption of the Land Use Plan amendment as proposed;
2. Adoption of a revised Land Use Plan amendment;
3. Denial of the Land Use Plan amendment; or
4. Remand of the Land Use Plan amendment application to the
PB for further consideration.
C. Land Use Plan Amendment Review Standards. Amending the Aberdeen Land
Use Plan is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the Board of
2-66
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
Commissioners and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to
adopt or deny a proposed land use plan amendment, the Board of
Commissioners may consider whether and the extent to which the proposed land
use plan amendment is appropriate and is consistent with the Town’s adopted
policy guidance.
D. Amendment. Amendment of a land use plan amendment may only be reviewed
and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval.
2.5.9. - Planned Development
A. Applicability. T his section provides a uniform means for amending the Official
Zoning Map to establish a Planned Development (PD) zoning district.
B. Planned Development Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Citizen Information Meeting. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.3, Citizen
Information Meeting).
3. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) P lanned development applications may only be initiated by the
landowner(s) of the land subject to the application.
(c) T he application shall include a master plan map and a statement of
intent and development standards completed in accordance with
Section 3.7.3, Standards Applied to All Planned Development
Districts.
(d) T o ensure unified control, the application shall also include a copy of
the title to all land that is part of the proposed PD zoning district
classification.
(e) W hen required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for
review with the s ubmittal of an application for a planned
development. The threshold requirements and procedure for
preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in the
Development Guide.
4. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The TRC shall review the application and comment on the
availability of municipal services to the development.
(c) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.9.C, Planned Development Review
Standards
2-67
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
5. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
6. PB or HPC Review and Recommendation
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) If the application is for land located within a LHO district, the HPC,
following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on the
application to the PB. The PB shall not make a recommendation on
an application until they receive a recommendation from the HPC.
(c) The P&Z, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation
on the application in accordance with Section 2.5.9.C, Planned
Development Review Standards.
(d) Upon completion of the public hearing, the PB shall comment on
the application's consistency with the Town's adopted policy
guidance.
7. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a public
hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section
2.5.9.C, Planned Development Review Standards. The decision shall
be one of the following:
(1) Adoption of the planned development as proposed;
(2) Adoption of a revised planned development;
(3) Denial of the planned development; or
(4) Remand of the planned development application to the PB
for further consideration.
(c) As part of the decision, the Board of Commissioners shall adopt a
written statement of consistency and reasonableness that:
(1) Describes whether the decision is consistent with all
applicable Town adopted policy guidance; and
(2) Explains why the decision is reasonable and in the public
interest.
8. Changes to Application. An applicant may change the standards
associated with a planned development zoning application until 22 days
prior to the initial review by the PB. After that time, the applicant may only
propose changes in accordance with the following:
(a) Changes shall be made in writing to the Planning and Inspections
Director during or after the hearing conducted by the PB but no
closer than 48 hours prior to final action by the Board of
Commissioners on the planned development application;
(b) Changes shall be signed by all landowners or those authorized to
submit the application; and
(c) Changes shall be approved by PB, or the Board of Commissioners
depending upon the time the changes were submitted by the
applicant.
2-68
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
C. Planned Development Review Standards. The advisability of establishing a
planned development district classification is a matter committed to the
legislative discretion of the Board of Commissioners and is not controlled by any
one factor. In determining whether to adopt or deny a planned development, the
Board of Commissioners shall consider the following:
1. Consistency with Adopted Policy Guidance. Whether a decision to
approve, or to deny, the proposed PD zoning district is consistent with the
Town’s adopted policy guidance.
2. Consistency with PD District Standards. Whether the proposed PD
district meets the standards of Section 3.7.3., Standards Applied to All
Planned Development Districts.
3. Compatibility with Surrounding Areas
(a) Whether development along the perimeter of the proposed PD
district is compatible with adjacent existing or proposed
development.
(b) Where there are issues of compatibility, the master plan map,
statement of intent and the standards document shall establish
transition areas along the perimeter of the PD district that provide
for appropriate buffering and ensure a complementary character of
development.
(c) Determination of complementary character shall be based on
densities/intensities, use types, lot sizes and dimensions, building
height, mass and scale, exterior lighting, siting of service areas, or
other aspects identified by the Board of Commissioners.
4. Promotes a Preferred Development Pattern
(a) Whether and the extent to which there have been changes in the
type or nature of development in the area of the proposed PD
zoning district that support the application.
(b) Whether and the extent to which the proposed PD zoning district
will result in development that promotes a logical, preferred, and
orderly development pattern.
5. Mitigation of Impacts. How the proposed PD District, including the
proposed use(s), standards, and PD Master Plan, will satisfactorily:
(a) Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse impact on
adjacent and nearby land, such as that caused by traffic, parking,
noise, lighting, trash, loading areas, etc.;
(b) Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse
environmental impact on water and air resources, minimize land
disturbance, preserve trees, and protect habitat;
(c) Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse impact on
municipal facilities and services, such as streets, potable water and
wastewater facilities, parks, police, and fire; and
(d) Minimize or effectively mitigate any identified adverse effect on the
use, enjoyment, or value of adjacent lands.
2-69
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
6. Reasonableness / Public Interest. Why a decision to approve, or to deny,
the proposed PD District would be reasonable and in the public interest.
D. Effect
1. Lands rezoned to a planned development district shall be subject to the
approved master plan map and the statement of intent and development
standards document. The master plan map and the statement of intent
and development standards document are binding on the land as an
amendment to the Official Zoning Map. The applicant may apply for and
obtain subsequent development permits and approvals necessary to
implement the planned development master plan map and the statement
of intent and development standards document in accordance with the
appropriate procedures and standards in this Unified Development
Ordinance. Any permits or development approvals shall comply with the
planned development master plan map and the statement of intent and
development standards document.
2. The PD master plan map, statement of intent and development standards
document shall not include any standards which:
(a) Specifies the ownership status, race, religion, or other characteristics
of the occupants of housing units;
(b) Establishes a minimum size of a dwelling unit;
(c) Establishes a minimum value of buildings or improvements;
(d) Excludes residents based upon race, religion, or income; or
(e) Obligates the Town to perform in any manner relative to the
approval of the PD District or development of the land.
E. Amendment
1. Minor Changes. Subsequent plans and permits for development within a
planned development district may include minor changes to the approved
master plan map or statement of intent and development standards,
provided the development continues to meet the minimum requirements
of this Unified Development Ordinance. Minor changes are limited to
changes that have no material effect on the character of the planned
development or any of its terms or conditions or changes that address
technical consideration that could not reasonably be anticipated at the
time of the planned development approval. The following minor changes
may be approved by the Planning and Inspections Director:
(a) Changes to the location of entrances or driveways, the
rearrangement of internal streets, turn lanes, drives, or access
restrictions;
(b) Changes to the configuration of parking areas;
(c) Changes to the configuration or location of open space or
placement of required amenities;
(d) Changes to the configuration of landscape yards, including types of
materials;
2-70
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(e) Changes to the proposed building elevation or facade, including
materials, provided that the change retains the same general
architectural character; and
(f) Changes to the arrangement or location of buildings provided there
is no increase in the number of buildings or size.
2. Material Changes are Amendments
(a) Changes that materially affect the basic concept of the planned
development master plan or basic parameters establishing the
terms and conditions or that exceed the scope of a minor change
are not considered minor changes. They shall be considered
amendments. Amendments include, but are not limited to:
(1) Changes in use designations;
(2) Density/intensity increases;
(3) Decreases in open space;
(4) Substantial changes in the location of streets (particularly if
streets are to be deleted or access points to the development
moved so traffic flows both inside and outside the
development are affected);
(5) Change in the location of any public easement; or
(6) Change in the proportion of housing types by more than 15
percent.
(b) Amendments shall be reviewed and considered in accordance with
the procedures and standards established for the original approval
of a planned development application.
F. Expiration. If no application for approval of a preliminary plat, site plan, or group
development for any part of the planned development is submitted within 3 years
after approval of the planned development, the PB may forward a
recommendation to the Board of Commissioners to initiate an application to
rezone the land to a zoning district determined to be appropriate. Prior to making
such a recommendation, the PB shall determine that the landowner(s) has been
notified and given a reasonable opportunity to comment.
2.5.10. - Reasonable Accommodation
A. Applicability. This section provides a procedure for reasonable accommodation
of eligible persons in cases where the strict application of the standards of this
Unified Development Ordinance would deprive them of their right to equal
opportunity to use a dwelling under the Federal Fair Housing Act.
B. Eligible Person
1. An eligible person is a person who meets the definition of a disabled or
handicapped person under federal law.
2. A person recovering from substance abuse is considered a person with a
disability or handicap provided they are not currently engaging in the
2-71
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
illegal use of controlled substances.
C. Reasonable Accommodation Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Required (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) An application for reasonable accommodation may be made by any
of the following:
(1) A person with a disability or handicap, or their legal
representative; or
(2) A provider of housing for persons with disabilities or
handicaps.
(c) In addition to the requirements of Section 2.4.4, Application
Submittal and Acceptance, an application for reasonable
accommodation shall also include the following:
(1) The basis for the claim that the applicant or persons
receiving services from the applicant is considered disabled
or handicapped under federal law;
(2) The Ordinance provision from which the reasonable
accommodation is being requested; and
(3) An explanation of why the reasonable accommodation is
necessary to make specific land or development available for
the applicant.
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
and after consultation with the Town Attorney, prepare a staff
report, and provide a recommendation in accordance with Section
2.5.10.C, Reasonable Accommodation Review Standards.
4. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. BOA Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and
Section 2.4.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures).
(b) The BOA, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall
decide the application.
(c) The decision shall be based on the competent, material, and
subsequent evidence in the record, as supplemented by the
arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the
standards in Section 2.5.10.D, Reasonable Accommodation Review
Standards.
(d) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Approval of the reasonable accommodation application as
proposed;
2-72
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(2) Approval of the reasonable accommodation application with
revisions; or
(3) Denial of the application.
(e) Ech decision shall be made in writing and reflect the BOA's
determination of contested facts and their application to the
standards in this Unified Development Ordinance.
(f) The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly
authorized member of the BOA.
(g) The decision of the BOA shall be effective upon the filing of the
written decision.
6. Notification of Decision. The decision of the BOA may shall be delivered
by personal service, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant,
the landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for
a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person
providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has
been made.
D. Reasonable Accommodation Review Standards
1. A reasonable accommodation application shall be approved on a finding
the proposed accommodation:
(a) Will be used by an individual or individuals with a disability or
handicap protected under federal law;
(b) Is the minimum needed to provide accommodation; and
(c) Is reasonable and necessary.
2. For the purposes of this section, an accommodation is reasonable if it
would not undermine the legitimate purposes of this Unified Development
Ordinance, it does not constitute a substantial alteration of this Unified
Development Ordinance or other Town standard, and it will not impose
significant financial and administrative burden upon the Town.
3. For the purposes of this section, an accommodation is necessary if it would
provide direct or meaningful therapeutic amelioration of the effects of the
particular disability or handicap, and would afford handicapped or disabled
persons equal opportunity to use housing in the Town.
E. Conditions of Approval. Applicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
F. Effect
1. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
2. A reasonable accommodation shall not affect an applicant's obligation to
comply with other applicable standards in this Unified Development
Ordinance that are not the subject of the reasonable accommodation
application.
G. Amendment. Amendment of an application for reasonable accommodation may
only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and
2-73
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
standards established for its original approval.
H. Expiration. Approval of a reasonable accommodation shall describe the
conditions or events that would terminate the reasonable accommodation or
cause it to expire.
I. Appeal. Any decision by the BOA shall be subject to Superior Court review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari.
2.5.11. - Right-of-Way Encroachment
A. Applicability. Development proposing to encroach, either above or below
ground, into a Town-maintained right-of-way shall gain approval of a right-of-way
encroachment in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section,
prior to encroachment. Installation of a driveway does not constitute a
right-of-way encroachment.
B. Above-Ground Encroachment Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) The person seeking approval to encroach may file an application for
a right-of-way encroachment.
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The TRC shall review and comment on infrastructure-related issues
associated with the application.
(c) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.11.D, Right-of-Way Encroachment
Review Standards.
4. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after conclusion of a public hearing,
shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.11.D,
Right-of-Way Encroachment Review Standards.
(c) The action taken shall be one of the following:
(1) Approval of the encroachment as proposed;
(2) Approval of a revised encroachment;
(3) Denial of the encroachment; or
(4) Remand of the encroachment application to Town staff for
further review.
2-74
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
C. Below-Ground Encroachment Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with
Section 2.5.11.D, Right-of-Way Encroachment Review Standards.
D. Right-of-Way Encroachment Review Standards. A right-of-way encroachment
shall be approved on a decision that the applicant demonstrates:
1. The right-of-way encroachment is in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this Unified Development Ordinance;
2. The Town is properly indemnified by the applicant against liability arising
from the placement of structures within the right-of-way;
3. Evidence is furnished of insurance covering liability arising from the
proposed encroachment, if any; and
4. Any above-ground encroachment is outside areas needed for pedestrian
or vehicular safety, or the visual obstruction has been properly mitigated.
E. Effect. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
F. Amendment. Amendment of a right-of-way encroachment may only be reviewed
and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval.
2.5.12. - Special Use
A. Applicability. Uses identified as requiring a special use in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use
Table, shall be approved as a special use in accordance with the procedures and
standards of this section, prior to development. A special use is a use that may be
appropriate in a zoning district, but because of its nature, extent, and external
effects, requires special consideration of its location, design, and methods of
operation before it can be deemed appropriate in the district and compatible
with its surroundings.
B. Special Use Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Applicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Citizen Information Meeting. Applicable (see Section 2.4.3, Citizen
Information Meeting).
3. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
2-75
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(b) An application shall be submitted only by the landowner(s), and
shall include a site plan.
(c) When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for
review with the submittal of an application for a special use. The
procedure for review of a traffic impact analysis is described in the
Development Guide.
4. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.12.C, Special Use Review Standards.
5. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
6. PB or HPC Review and Recommendation
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) If the application is for land located within the LHO district, the HPC,
following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on the
application to the PB. The PB shall not make a recommendation on
an application until they receive a recommendation from the HPC.
(c) The PB, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation
on the application in accordance with Section 2.5.12.C, Special Use
Review Standards.
7. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and
2.4.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial
public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with
Section 2.5.12.C, Special Use Review Standards. The decision shall be
the one of the following:
(1) Approval of the special use as proposed;
(2) Approval of a revised special use;
(3) Denial of the special use; or
(4) Remand of the special use application to the P&Z for further
consideration.
(c) Any conditions of approval shall meet or exceed the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance.
C. Special Use Review Standards. A special use shall be approved upon a finding
that the applicant demonstrates the proposed special use:
1. Will not materially endanger the public health or safety if located where
proposed;
2. Complies with all required standards, conditions, and specifications of this
Ordinance, including Chapter 4: Uses;
3. Will not substantially injure the value of the abutting land, or the special
use is a public necessity;
4. Will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located; and
2-76
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
5. Is in general conformity with the Town’s adopted policy guidance.
D. Conditions of Approval. Applicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Effect
1. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
2. A special use and the associated site plan approval are perpetually binding
and run with the land, unless amended.
3. An action invalidating a special use condition of approval for any reason
shall render the special use null and void.
F. Amendment
1. Minor Changes
(a) The Board of Commissioners may approve a minor change to a
special use requested by the applicant without a recommendation
from the PB and without a public hearing, upon receipt of a report
from the Planning and Inspections Director on the proposed minor
change.
(b) A minor change includes changes to conditions of a special use or
associated site plan which will result in equal or better performance
of the conditions and that do not alter the objectives and purposes
of the special use.
(c) In granting a minor change, the Board of Commissioners may
require such conditions as will address the objectives of the
requirements or conditions changed.
2. Material Changes are Amendments
(a) A material change to a special use or to an associated site plan that
alters the objectives and purposes of the requirements or conditions
of the special use constitute an amendment to the special use.
(b) An amendment includes but is not limited to:
(1) Boundary changes;
(2) Use changes; and
(3) Increases in density or intensity of development.
(c) Amendments of a special use may only be reviewed and considered
in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its
original approval.
G. State and Federal Requirements. Special uses shall meet all applicable federal
and state requirements for location and operation. Failure to maintain
compliance with those requirements may result in the revocation of the special
use.
H. Expiration
1. General
2-77
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(a) Unless otherwise stated in the special use approval, a special use
shall expire and become null and void 18 months after the date of
issuance if a footing inspection for the development approved has
not been passed or an applicant has not requested an extension in
accordance with Section 2.5.12.H.2, below.
(b) If development approved as a special use is discontinued for a
period exceeding 18 months, or if a special use is replaced by a use
otherwise permitted by right in the zoning district, the special use
approval is deemed abandoned and the special use approval is null
and void.
2. Extension
(a) An applicant may request an extension of a special use approval in
writing to the Planning and Inspections Director at least 30 days
prior to expiration.
(b) Extension requests are considered as minor changes and shall be
reviewed and approved by the Board of Commissioners in
accordance with Section 2.5.12.F.1, above.
2.5.13. - Street Abandonment
A. Applicability. This section provides a procedure for requests to abandon any
platted or dedicated street or alley rights-of-way determined to be unnecessary
for the movement of vehicles in the Town, in accordance with Section 160A-299 of
the North Carolina General Statutes.
B. Street Abandonment Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference
(a) Applicable (See Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application Conference).
(b) The TRC shall review the application and comment on municipal
service and infrastructure issues associated with the abandonment.
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) Applications may be initiated by the Town or landowners abutting a
street.
(c) If the Board of Commissioners wishes to abandon a public street or
alley it shall adopt a resolution of intent to close the street or alley.
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.13.C, Street Abandonment Review
Standards.
4. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. PB Review and Recommendation
2-78
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) The PB, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation
on the application in accordance with 2.5.13.C, Street Abandonment
Review Standards.
6. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a public
hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section
2.5.13.C, Street Abandonment Review Standards.
(c) The action taken shall be one of the following:
(1) Approve abandonment of all or a portion of the street or alley
right-of-way;
(2) Approve abandonment of all or a portion of the street or alley
right-of-way with retention of all or a portion of the utility or
other easement;
(3) Denial of the street abandonment; or
(4) Remand of the street abandonment application to the PB for
further consideration.
C. Street Abandonment Review Standards. A street abandonment application
shall be approved on a decision that the applicant demonstrates:
1. Closing of the street or alley is in the best interest of the public; and
2. A landowner in the vicinity of the street or alley would not be deprived of
reasonable ingress or egress to their land.
D. Recordation. The Planning and Inspections Director shall file a certified copy of
the street abandonment approval in the office of the Moore County Register of
Deeds in the county where the subject street is located within a reasonable
period of time after the approval.
E. Effect. Where a platted street or alley is abandoned in accordance with this
section, the regulations applicable to a lot shall apply to the portion of the lot
formerly occupied by the abandoned street or alley.
2.5.14. - Street Name Change
A. Applicability. This section establishes a uniform street name change procedure
in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of Town residents and
visitors by improving emergency response times and ease of locating
destinations.
B. Street Name Changes Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Applicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
2-79
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) The Board of Commissioners or any governmental department of
the Town, the PB, or any landowner of land along the street where a
name change is proposed may initiate a request to change the
name of a street.
(c) An application for a street name change submitted by landowners
along the street shall include a petition of support for the name
change signed by a minimum of 66.67 percent of the number of
different landowners that are affected by the renaming. The petition
shall indicate the desired new street name. No petition shall be
required for Town-initiated applications.
(d) The application shall not be accepted until the Planning and
Inspections Director confirms the availability of the proposed new
street name.
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.14.C, Street Name Change Review
Standards.
4. Determination of Merit
(a) Each street name change request filed by the required deadline
shall be forwarded to the PB and placed on the next scheduled
regular meeting to determine whether the request should be
granted a public hearing. If the PB determines that the request
should be heard, it shall set the date, time and place for a public
hearing.
(b) When a change is initiated due to public safety or emergency
service delivery issues, no merit determination is needed and the
request shall be placed on the next scheduled regular meeting for
public hearing and decision.
(c) If the PB decides not to conduct a public hearing on the street
name change request, it shall be considered a denial of the request.
5. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification),
whenever a public hearing has been scheduled for a street name change
request.
6. PB Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) If a public hearing is conducted, the PB, at the conclusion of the
public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with
Section 2.5.14.C, Street Name Change Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Approval of the street name change as submitted;
(2) Approval of the street name change, with revisions; or
2-80
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(3) Denial of the street name change.
(d) The PB may consider and approve a name change for a portion of
the request or a change of prefix or suffix without a new submittal
or additional hearing. The PB shall not approve alterations to the
primary name requested, nor approve the application of the name
to a street or segment thereof not included in the original request,
without re-notification and re-hearing.
C. Street Name Change Review Standards. A street name change shall be
approved on a finding that the applicant demonstrates:
1. The street name change is in accordance with the Town’s Development
Guide ;
2. The street name change will serve the public interest by enhancing public
safety or that it will do no harm;
3. The street name change will not adversely affect land values or cause
excessive economic impact to landowners or the Town; and
4. The street name change will result in an overall public good that generally
cannot be measured in monetary terms, but is found to outweigh known
or perceived economic interests and costs.
D. Effect
1. All approved street name change applications shall have an effective date
at least 45 days from the date of approval, but may be further delayed for a
set period of time not to exceed 1 year, to assist businesses and other
affected landowners in preparing for the name change.
2. Street name changes initiated by Board of Commissioners, PB, or other
Town department due to public safety or emergency service delivery
issues may take effect immediately upon approval.
E. Amendment. An application for a street name change with the same name for
the same street or portion of the same street shall not be filed within 2 years from
the date of final action on the previous request, unless the PB determines a
substantial change has occurred in the nature of the application that merits
reconsideration.
2.5.15. - Text Amendment
A. Applicability. This section provides a uniform means for amending the text of this
Unified Development Ordinance whenever the public necessity, changed
conditions, convenience, general welfare, or appropriate land use practices justify
or require doing so.
B. Text Amendment Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Applicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2-81
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) Applications may be initiated by the Board of Commissioners; any
board, commission, or department of the Town; any landowner; or
any resident of the town.
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.15.C, Text Amendment Review
Standards.
4. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. PB Review and Recommendation
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) The PB, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation
on an application in accordance with Section 2.5.15.C, Text
Amendment Review Standards.
(c) The PB shall comment on whether or not the text amendment is
consistent with the Town’s adopted policy guidance.
6. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a public
hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section
2.5.15.C, Text Amendment Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Adoption of the text amendment as proposed;
(2) Adoption of a revised text amendment;
(3) Denial of the text amendment; or
(4) Remand of the text amendment application to the PB for
further consideration.
(d) In making its decision, the Board of Commissioners shall adopt a
written statement of consistency and reasonableness that:
(1) Describes whether the decision is consistent with the Town’s
adopted policy guidance; and
(2) Explains why the decision is reasonable and in the public
interest.
C. Text Amendment Review Standards. The advisability of amending the text of
this Ordinance is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the Board of
Commissioners and is not controlled by any one factor. In determining whether to
adopt or deny the proposed text amendment, the Board of Commissioners may
weigh the relevance of and consider whether and the extent to which the
proposed text amendment:
1. Is consistent with the Town's adopted policy guidance;
2-82
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. Is not in conflict with any provision of this Unified Development Ordinance
or the Town of Aberdeen Code of Ordinances;
3. Is required by changed conditions;
4. Addresses a demonstrated community need;
5. Addresses an unforeseen matter not present when the Unified
Development Ordinance was adopted;
6. Is consistent with the purpose and intent of the zoning districts in this
Unified Development Ordinance, or would improve compatibility among
uses and ensure efficient development within the town;
7. Would result in a logical and orderly development pattern; and
8. Would not result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural
environment, including but not limited to water, air, noise, stormwater
management, wildlife, vegetation, and the natural functioning of the
environment.
D. Effect. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
E. Amendment. Amendment of a text amendment approval may only be reviewed
and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval.
2.5.16. - Variance
A. Applicability. D evelopment that would otherwise be subject to undue and
unique hardship from the applications of the standards in this Unified
Development Ordinance may seek relief from the standards in accordance with
this section, by appeal to the Board of Adjustment (BOA).
B. Variances Distinguished. T his section sets out the procedure and review
standards for two type of variances.
1. T he zoning variance procedure may be used to seek hardship relief from
the dimensional standards in this Ordinance. A variance shall not be
requested to:
(a) V ary from density or intensity beyond that allowed in a base zoning
district;
(b) P ermit a use not allowed in a zoning district;
(c) Modify any standards in Section 5.7, Signage other than sign height
or allowable sign location; or
(d) Allow a prohibited use.
2. The flood damage prevention variance may be used to request relief from
the standards in Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention, for:
(a) The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures when the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not affect the structure's designation as
2-83
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure;
(b) A functionally dependent facility, provided it is protected by
methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and
create no additional threats to public safety; and
(c) Any other type of development, provided it meets the standards of
this section for a flood damage prevention variance.
C. Variance Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Applicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance)
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.16.D, Variance Review Standards.
4. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. HPC Review and Recommendation
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) If the application is for land located within a LHO district, the HPC,
following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on the
application to the BOA. The BOA shall not make a decision on an
application until they receive a recommendation from the HPC.
6. BOA Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and
Section 2.4.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures).
(b) The BOA, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial public hearing, shall
decide the application for a variance.
(c) The decision shall be based on the competent, material, and
subsequent evidence in the record, as supplemented by the
arguments presented at the quasi-judicial hearing, and the
standards in Section 2.5.16.D, Variance Review Standards.
(d) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Approval of the variance as proposed;
(2) Approval of the variance with revisions; or
(3) Denial of the variance.
(e) Each decision shall be made in writing and reflect the BOA's
determination of contested facts and their application to the
standards in this Ordinance.
(f) The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly
authorized member of the BOA.
(g) The decision of the BOA shall be effective upon the filing of the
written decision.
2-84
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
7. Notification of Decision. The decision of the BOA shall be delivered by
personal service, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, the
landowner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for a
copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person
providing notification of decision shall certify that proper notification has
been made.
D. Variance Review Standards
1. Zoning Variance Standards
(a) Required Findings. A zoning variance shall be approved on a
finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following:
(1) Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict
application of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to
demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no
reasonable use can be made of the property.
(2) The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size or topography. Hardships
resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships
resulting from conditions that are common to the
neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance.
(3) The hardship did not result from actions taken by the
applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing
property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may
justify the granting of the variance shall not be regarded as a
self-created hardship.
(4) The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose,
and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is
secured, and substantial justice is achieved.
(b) Other Considerations. In addition to the making the required
findings in subsection (a) above, the BOA may also consider the
following:
(1) The variance approval is the minimum necessary to make
possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
(2) None of the following may be used as the basis for approving
a variance:
(i) Neither the nonconforming use of lands, buildings, or
structures in the same zoning district, or the
permitted use of lands, buildings, or structures in
other zoning districts, or personal circumstances;
(ii) A request for a particular use that is expressly, or by
inference, prohibited in the zoning district;
(iii) Hardships resulting from factors other than
application of the relevant standards of this
Ordinance;
2-85
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(iv) The fact that land or a structure may be utilized more
profitably or be more marketable with a variance;
(v) The citing of other conforming or nonconforming uses
of land or structures in the same or other zoning
districts; or
(vi) Financial hardship.
2. Flood Damage Prevention Variance Standards
(a) Required Findings. A flood damage prevention variance shall be
approved on a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the
following standards are met:
(1) There is a good and sufficient cause to grant the variance.
(2) Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the landowner.
(3) Granting the variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with this Ordinance.
(b) Other Considerations. In addition to making the required findings
in subsection (a) above, the BOA may also consider the following:
(1) The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Approval of the variance will not render the building in
violation of applicable federal, state, or local requirements.
(3) Approval of the variance will not result in any increase in
flood levels within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area during the base flood discharge.
(4) The variance is issued prior to any other prerequisite permit
or development approvals.
(5) All of the following factors shall be considered by the BOA if
an application for a flood damage prevention variance is
denied:
(i) The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands and injure others;
(ii) The danger to life and land due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(iii) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual landowner;
(iv) The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;
(v) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as
a functionally-dependent facility;
(vi) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
2-86
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(vii) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
and anticipated development;
(viii) The relationship of the proposed use to the Town's
adopted policy guidance and the Town’s floodplain
management program;
(ix) The safety of access to the use in times of flood for
ordinary emergency vehicles;
(x) The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site; and
(xi) The costs of providing governmental services during
and after flood conditions including maintenance and
repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
E. Conditions of Approval. In granting a variance the BOA may prescribe conditions
of approval to ensure compliance with the standards of this section, and to assure
that the use of the land to which the variance applies will be compatible with
surrounding lands and will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
1. A variance granted subject to a condition of approval shall be permitted as
long as there is compliance with the condition.
2. Violation of a condition of approval shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance.
3. If a violation or invalidation of a condition of approval occurs, the Planning
and Inspections Director may revoke the certificate of occupancy for the
development subject to the variance.
F. Effect
1. General. Approval of a zoning variance or flood damage prevention
variance authorizes only the particular regulatory relief approved by the
BOA. It does not exempt the applicant from the responsibility to obtain all
other permits or development approvals required by this Unified
Development Ordinance or any other applicable laws, and does not
indicate that the development for which the variance is granted should
receive other permits or development approvals under this Unified
Development Ordinance unless the relevant and applicable portions of this
Ordinance are met.
2. Notification Regarding Flood Insurance Costs
(a) An applicant for whom a flood damage prevention variance is
approved shall be provided written notice by the Planning and
Inspections Director specifying the difference between the base
flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is
built. The notice shall inform the applicant about the risks to life and
2-87
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
property from construction below the BFE and that issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance.
(b) The notification shall be maintained by the Public Works Director
with the record of the flood damage prevention variance action.
3. Records. Upon request, the Public Works Director shall report all flood
damage prevention variances approved in accordance with this section to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State of North
Carolina.
G. Amendment. Amendment of a variance may only be reviewed and considered in
accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original
approval.
H. Expiration. If the BOA does not include a time period by which development
subject to a zoning variance or a flood damage prevention variance expires,
development shall commence within 12 months of the date of issuance of the
variance or the variance shall expire and become null and void.
I. Appeal. Any decision by the BOA shall be subject to Superior Court review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari.
2.5.17. - Vested Rights Certificate
A. Applicability
1. A vested right may be established, in accordance with Section 160A-385.1 of
the North Carolina General Statutes and this section, for the following
permits and development approvals:
(a) Site plans;
(b) Group development plans; or
(c) Preliminary plats.
2. Any application for a vested rights certificate shall be processed
concurrently or after the approval of a site plan, group development plan,
or a preliminary plat.
B. Vested Rights Certificate Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Required (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) Applications may be initiated by the landowner or any person who
may submit an application in accordance with Section 2.4.4.A,
Authority to File Applications.
3. Staff Review
2-88
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.17.C, Vested Rights Certificate Review
Standards.
4. Public Notification. Applicable (See Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable. (See Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body, and
2.4.7, Quasi-Judicial Public Hearing Procedures).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a quasi-judicial
public hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with
Section 2.5.17.C, Vested Rights Certificate Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Approval of the vested rights certificate as proposed;
(2) Approval of a revised vested rights certificate;
(3) Denial of vested rights certificate; or
(4) Remand of the vested rights certificate application to the
Planning and Inspections Director for further review.
C. Vested Rights Certificate Review Standards. A vested rights certificate shall be
approved if the applicant demonstrates:
1. The vested rights certificate is for an approved site plan, group
development plan, or preliminary plat;
2. The development is valid and unexpired; and
3. Any required variances have been obtained.
D. Effect
1. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
2. A vested rights certificate shall be approved prior to issuance of a building
permit.
E. Amendment. Amendment of vested rights certificate may only be reviewed and
considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its
original approval.
F. Expiration
1. A vested right certificate shall expire and become null and void:
(a) If a building permit application for the development subject to the
certificate is not submitted within 5 years of the approval of the
vested rights certificate.
(b) Upon a finding by the Board of Commissioners after notice and a
public hearing, that:
(1) Natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate vicinity
of the land, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the
2-89
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to
proceed as contemplated; or
(2) The landowner or landowner's representative intentionally
supplied inaccurate information or made material
misrepresentations which affected the approval of the site
plan, group development, preliminary plat, or vested right
certificate; or
(3) The landowner failed to comply with any condition imposed
upon the establishment of the site plan, group development,
preliminary plat, or vested right certificate.
(c) Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all
costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner,
including but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of
financing, and all architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other
consultant fees incurred after approval of the certificate by the
Town, together with interest at the legal rate until paid.
Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the
land which is caused by such action.
(d) With the written consent of the affected landowner.
2. Upon enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or regulation
that precludes development as contemplated in the site plan, group
development, or preliminary plat, the Board of Commissioners may modify
the affected provisions of the certificate by ordinance, if after conducting a
hearing, it finds the changed conditions created by the change in the state
or federal law have a fundamental effect on the site plan, group
development, or preliminary plat.
2.5.18. - Voluntary Annexation
A. Applicability. The Board of Commissioners may consider voluntary annexation
petitions, prepared in accordance with the standards in this section, from:
1. The landowner of land that is contiguous with the Town’s corporate limits;
and
2. The landowner of land that is not contiguous to the corporate limits when
the proposed voluntary annexation complies with the following standards:
(a) The land proposed for annexation is no more than 3 miles from the
contiguous corporate limits; and
(b) No portion of the land proposed for annexation is closer to the
contiguous corporate limits of another municipality unless the land
is subject to an approved annexation agreement that includes the
land within the Town’s planning area; and
(c) If the land proposed for annexation is part of a recorded subdivision,
all lots in the recorded subdivision are part of the annexation
petition; and
2-90
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(d) The combined total land area associated with the annexation, when
added to all other non-contiguous land areas annexed by the Town
does not exceed 10 percent of the land area located within the
Town’s contiguous corporate limits.
B. Voluntary Annexation Review Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Applicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) The voluntary annexation petition shall be signed by all the
landowners of land proposed for annexation.
(c) Applications shall be accompanied by an application for a zoning
map amendment for the subject land in accordance with Section
2.5.20, Zoning Map Amendment, unless the land is within the
Town’s Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.
(d) The voluntary annexation petition shall include a signed statement
declaring whether or not any vested right with respect to the land
subject to the petition has been established under Section
160A-385.1 or 153A-344.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes.
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) Following receipt of a voluntary annexation petition the Town Clerk
shall investigate and certify whether the petition is legally sufficient.
If certified as legally sufficient, the petition shall be reviewed in
accordance with this section.
(c) The TRC shall review the application and comment on the Town’s
ability to provide municipal services.
(d) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.18.C, Voluntary Annexation Review
Standards.
4. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
5. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, after the conclusion of a public
hearing, shall decide the application in accordance with Section
2.5.18.C, Voluntary Annexation Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Approval of the voluntary annexation petition;
(2) Denial of the voluntary annexation petition; or
(3) Remand of the voluntary annexation petition to the Planning
and Inspections Director for further review.
2-91
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
C. Voluntary Annexation Review Standards. Approval of a voluntary annexation is
a matter committed to the legislative discretion of the Board of Commissioners.
The voluntary annexation petition may be approved upon a finding the petition
complies with all the standards in Section 160A-31 or Section 160A-58 of the North
Carolina General Statutes, as appropriate, and:
1. The voluntary annexation petition bears the signatures of all landowners
within the area to be annexed;
2. The area to be annexed can be adequately served by the same municipal
services provided within the Town’s corporate limits;
3. The debt obligations from serving the subject lands do not exceed the
anticipated revenues to the Town; and
4. The public health, safety, and welfare of Town residents and the residents
of the lands proposed for annexation will be best served by the annexation.
D. Recording. An ordinance approving a voluntary annexation adopted by the Town,
together with a map of the annexed area, shall be recorded in the office of the
Moore County Register of Deeds within a reasonable period of time after adoption
of the annexation.
E. Effect
1. Within 60 days of voluntary annexation, the Board of Commissioners shall
adopt a zoning district classification for the land involved. The Board of
Commissioners may consider a Town-initiated or landowner-initiated
zoning map amendment immediately following approval of the
annexation.
2. Upon the effective date of annexation, the land shall be subject to the
debts, laws, ordinances and regulations of the Town, and shall be entitled
to the same privileges and benefits as other parts of the Town.
F. Expiration. Land may be de-annexed only by act of the North Carolina General
Assembly.
2.5.19. - Watershed Variance
A. Applicability. Development that would otherwise be subject to undue and
unique hardship from the applications of the State's watershed protection
standards in this Unified Development Ordinance may seek relief from those
standards in accordance with this section. Where the watershed protection
standards exceed the State's minimum watershed protection standards, then a
modification to the requirements may be requested in accordance with Section
6.2.16, Watershed Modifications.
B. Variances Distinguished. There are 2 types of watershed variance:
2-92
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
1. Major Watershed Variance. A major watershed variance is a variance from
the minimum State watershed protection rules that result in the relaxation
of:
(a) Any buffer, density, or built-upon area requirement by a factor
greater than 5 percent under the high density option;
(b) Any variation in the design, maintenance or operation requirements
of a wet detention pond or other approved stormwater
management system;
(c) Any management requirement by a factor greater than 10 percent
under the low density option; or
(d) Any variance that pertains to activities impacting Zone 1 of a surface
water buffer.
2. Minor Watershed Variance. A minor watershed variance is a variance
from the minimum State watershed protection rules that result in the
relaxation of:
(a) Any buffer, density or built-upon area requirement by a factor of up
to 5 percent under the high density option;
(b) Any management requirement by a factor up to 10 percent under
the low density option; or
(c) Any variance that pertains to activities impacting Zone 2 of a surface
water buffer.
C. Major Watershed Variance Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The TRC shall review the application and the associated watershed
development plan, and provide a recommendation in accordance
with Section 2.5.19.E, Watershed Variance Review Standards.
(c) In the case of water supply watersheds, the Town shall notify and
allow a reasonable comment period for all local governments
having jurisdiction in the applicable designated watershed and any
entity using the water supply for consumption where a major
watershed variance is being considered.
4. Board of Commissioners Review and Recommendation
(a) The Board of Commissioners shall review the application and make
a recommendation in accordance with Section 2.5.19.E, Watershed
Variance Review Standards.
(b) In making a watershed variance recommendation, the Board of
Commissioners may suggest conditions to assure that the use of
the land will be compatible with surrounding lands and will not
alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
2-93
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(c) If the Board of Commissioners recommends approval, the
application shall be forwarded to the North Carolina Environmental
Management Commission (EMC) with a report containing the
findings of fact for Board of Commissioner’s favorable
recommendation, conclusions of law, a recommended decision,
recommended conditions and a record of the Commissioner’s
decision on the request.
(d) If the Board of Commissioners does not recommend approval, it
shall be deemed disapproved and shall not be forwarded to the
EMC.
D. Minor Watershed Variance Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with
Section 2.5.19.E, Watershed Variance Review Standards.
(c) In approving a watershed variance, the TRC may apply conditions to
assure that the use of the land will be compatible with surrounding
properties and will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood.
E. Watershed Variance Review Standards
1. Required Findings. A watershed variance (major or minor) shall be
approved upon a finding the applicant demonstrates all of the following:
(a) Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the
ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the
absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the
property.
(b) The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size or topography. Hardships resulting
from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from
conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general
public, may not be the basis for granting a variance.
(c) The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or
the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge
that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of the
variance shall not be regarded as a self-created hardship.
(d) The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and
substantial justice is achieved.
2-94
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. Other Considerations. In addition to making the required findings in
subsection (1) above, the TRC and Board of Commissioners, as applicable,
may also consider the following:
(a) The watershed variance approval is the minimum necessary to
make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
(b) None of the following may be used as the basis for approving a
watershed variance:
(1) Neither the nonconforming use of lands, buildings, or
structures in the same zoning district, nor the permitted use
of lands, buildings, or structures in other zoning districts, nor
personal circumstances;
(2) Hardships resulting from factors other than application of the
relevant standards of this Ordinance;
(3) The fact that land or a structure may be utilized more
profitably or be more marketable with a variance; or
(4) Financial hardship.
F. Effect
1. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
2. The Planning and Inspections Director shall keep a record of all watershed
variances in accordance with Section 6.2.17.B, Record Keeping.
G. Amendment. Amendment of a watershed variance may only be reviewed and
considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its
original approval.
H. Expiration. An approved watershed variance is part of an approved plan and shall
have the same duration as the original plan approval.
2.5.20. - Zoning Map Amendment
A. Applicability. This section provides a uniform means for reviewing and deciding
proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map whenever the public necessity,
general welfare, the Town’s adopted policy guidance, or appropriate land use
practices justify or require doing so.
B. Zoning Map Amendment Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Applicable (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Citizen Information Meeting. Applicable when a more intense zoning
district classification is being requested (see Section 2.4.3, Citizen
Information Meeting).
3. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
2-95
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(b) Applications may be initiated by the Board of Commissioners or all
landowner(s) of the land in the proposed Zoning Map Amendment
application.
(c) When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for
review with the submittal of an application for a zoning map
amendment. The threshold requirements and procedure for
preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in the
Development Guide.
4. Staff Review
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application,
prepare a staff report, and provide a recommendation in
accordance with Section 2.5.20.C, Zoning Map Amendment Review
Standards.
5. Public Notification. Applicable (see Section 2.4.6, Public Notification).
6. PB or HPC Review and Recommendation
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.8, Review by PB or HPC).
(b) If the application is for land located within a LHO district, the HPC,
following a meeting, shall provide a recommendation on the
application to the PB. The PB shall not make a recommendation
until they receive a recommendation from the HPC.
(c) The PB, following a public hearing, shall make a recommendation
on the application in accordance with Section 2.5.19.C, Zoning Map
Amendment Review Standards, and shall comment on the
application's consistency with applicable Town adopted policy
guidance.
7. Board of Commissioners Review and Decision
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.9, Action by Decision-Making Body).
(b) The Board of Commissioners, at the conclusion of a public hearing,
shall decide the application in accordance with Section 2.5.19.C ,
2.5.20.C, Zoning Map Amendment Review Standards.
(c) The decision shall be one of the following:
(1) Adoption of the zoning map amendment as proposed;
(2) Adoption of a revised zoning amendment;
(3) Denial of the zoning map amendment; or
(4) Remand of the zoning map amendment application to the
P&Z for further consideration.
(d) In making its decision, the Board of Commissioners shall adopt a
written statement of consistency and reasonableness that:
(1) Describes whether the decision is consistent with the Town’s
adopted policy guidance; and
(2) Explains why the decision is reasonable and in the public
interest.
8. Designation on Official Zoning Map. The Planning and Inspections
Director shall make changes to the Official Zoning Map promptly after
2-96
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
approval of a map amendment application by the Board of
Commissioners.
C. Zoning Map Amendment Review Standards. The advisability of an amendment
to the Official Zoning Map is a matter committed to the legislative discretion of
the Board of Commissioners and is not controlled by any one factor. In
determining whether to adopt or deny a proposed zoning map amendment, the
Board of Commissioners may weigh the relevance of and consider the following:
1. Consistency with Adopted Plans. Whether and the extent to which the
proposed zoning map amendment is appropriate for its proposed location,
and is consistent with the purposes, goals, objectives, and policies of the
Town’s adopted policy guidance.
2. Reasonableness / Public Interest. Whether an approval of the zoning
map amendment is reasonable and in the public interest.
D. Effect. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
E. Amendment. Amendment of an approved zoning map amendment may only be
reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards
established for its original approval.
2.6. - Review Procedures Subject to Staff
Review and Decision
2.6.1. - Overview
A. General. T his section sets forth supplemental procedures, standards, and related
information for each of the specific review procedures subject to staff review and
decision, as identified in Table 2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table. They
apply in addition to, or instead of, the standard procedures set forth in Section 2.4,
Standard Review Procedures.
B. Structure of Procedures
1. F or each type of development application reviewed under this Unified
Development Ordinance, the following sections state the applicability of a
procedure, the steps in the procedure, the review standards for the
application, and provisions addressing expiration and amendment, if
applicable.
2. D evelopment application provisions in this section are organized in
alphabetical order in accordance with the sequence of procedures in Table
2.1.2, Summary Development Review Table.
2-97
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2.6.2. - Administrative Adjustment
A. Applicability. T his section provides an administrative mechanism for allowing
minor adjustments to certain standards (e.g., setbacks) in this Unified
Development Ordinance, based on specific review criteria, with the intent of
providing relief where application of a standard creates practical difficulties in
allowing development that otherwise advances the purposes served by this
Unified Development Ordinance where the adjustment is compatible with the
surrounding development.
B. Administrative Adjustment. A n administrative adjustment is reviewed and
decided by the Planning and Inspections Director and allows an adjustment of
the standards in accordance with Section 2.6.2.C, Administrative Adjustment
Amount.
C. Administrative Adjustment Amount. T able 2.6.2.C, Administrative Adjustment
Amount, sets out the standards that may be adjusted through the administrative
adjustment procedure and the maximum percentage of allowable adjustment.
Table 2.6.2.C : Administrative Adjustment Amount
Standard Maximum Administrative
Adjustment
Maximum building height (except where increases in maximum height are
prohibited in this Ordinance) 10%
Minimum building setbacks 10%
Maximum residential density 10%
Minimum required lot width 10%
Minimum lot area 10%
Minimum required parking spaces 10% [1]
Average landscape yard width 10%
Minimum open space amount 10%
Average landscape yard width 10%
Minimum active recreational area open space 10%
[1] : Allowed for existing development to retrofit parking to conform to the landscaping regulations or to allow an
existing or new development to preserve trees within or adjacent to a vehicular use area.
D. Administrative Adjustment Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2-98
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review and decide
applications for an administrative adjustment in accordance with
Section 2.6.2.E, Administrative Adjustment Review Standards.
E. Administrative Adjustment Review Standards. An administrative adjustment
shall be approved on a decision the applicant demonstrates all of the following:
1. The administrative adjustment is consistent with the thresholds for an
administrative adjustment established in this section;
2. The administrative adjustment is consistent with the character of
development on surrounding land, and is compatible with surrounding
land uses;
3. The administrative adjustment is either:
(a) Required to compensate for some unusual aspect of the site or the
proposed development that is not shared by landowners in general;
(b) Supports an objective or goal from the purpose and intent
statements of the zoning district where it is located; or
(c) Saves healthy existing trees;
4. The administrative adjustment will not pose a danger to the public health
or safety;
5. Adverse impacts resulting from the administrative adjustment will be fully
mitigated; and
6. The development standard being adjusted is not the subject of a
previously approved administrative adjustment on the same site.
7. The development standard being adjusted is not expressly prohibited by a
condition of approval.
F. Conditions of Approval. Applicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
G. Effect. An administrative adjustment shall be reviewed and decided prior to the
other applications with which it is submitted. (For example, if an administrative
adjustment application is submitted in conjunction with a site plan application
because the administrative adjustment is needed to achieve the plan for
development in the site plan, the administrative adjustment application shall be
reviewed and decided prior to the approval of the site plan application.)
H. Amendment. Amendment of an administrative adjustment may only be
reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards
established for its original approval.
I. Expiration. If an administrative adjustment is associated with another permit or
development approval, the expiration of the administrative adjustment shall be
2-99
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
the same as the permit or development approval with which it is associated.
J. Appeal. Applicable (see Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.3. - Building Permit
A. Applicability. U nless exempted in accordance with the State Building Code, no
construction, addition, alteration, repair, movement to another site, removal, or
demolition of any building or structure may occur until a building permit is
approved in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.
B. Building Permit Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. O ptional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he Planning and Inspections Director shall review and decide the
application for a building permit in accordance with Section 2.6.3.C,
Building Permit Review Standards.
(c) A ll applications for a building permit shall also be granted a
certificate of occupancy or a certificate of compliance upon
satisfactory completion of all required building and site inspections
in accordance with Section 2.6.3.C, Building Permit Review
Standards.
(d) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Planning
and Inspections Director prior to the completion of all construction
or changes if occupancy will not violate any health or safety
considerations of any applicable codes.
(1) T he Planning and Inspections Director shall specify the
duration of the temporary certificate of occupancy, which
shall not exceed 90 days.
(2) I f all remaining work is not completed within the specified
timeframe of the temporary certificate of occupancy, the
Planning and Inspections Director shall order the applicant
to cease occupancy immediately. Occupancy shall not
re-commence until a certificate of occupancy is obtained in
accordance with this section.
(e) The Planning and Inspections Director may require the applicant to
submit a financial guarantee (see Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees)
in an amount necessary to ensure that any work not completed as
specified in the development permit or approval will be completed
within the specified timeframe for a certificate of occupancy or a
2-100
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
temporary certificate of occupancy.
C. Building Permit Review Standards.
1. The North Carolina State Building Code;
2. The applicable requirements of the county Health Department;
3. All standards or conditions of any prior, applicable permits and
development approvals; and
4. All other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the Town Code of
Ordinances.
D. Effect. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
E. Amendment. Amendment of a building permit may only be reviewed and
considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its
original approval.
F. Expiration
1. A building permit shall expire and become null and void if the
development it authorizes is not commenced within 6 months of the
permit issuance.
2. If development authorized by a building permit commences but is
discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months, the permit shall expire
and become null and void.
G. Appeal. An appeal of a decision on a building permit may be filed with the North
Carolina Commissioner of Insurance, in accordance with Section 160A-434 of the
North Carolina General Statutes.
2.6.4. - Determination
A. Applicability. T he Planning and Inspections Director is responsible for written
determinations of all provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance, including,
but not limited to:
1. D eterminations of the meaning of the text;
2. D eterminations of the zoning district boundaries on the Official Zoning
Map;
3. D eterminations of whether an unlisted use in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use
Table, is comparable to a listed use or not, and should be allowed in a
zoning district or prohibited in that district; and
4. D eterminations of compliance with a condition of approval.
B. Determination Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. O ptional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
2-101
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) A n application for a formal written determination may be initiated
by any person having an interest in the matter in question.
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he Planning and Inspections Director shall review the request and
make determinations in accordance with Section 2.6.4.C,
Determination Review Standards.
(c) T he Planning and Inspections Director may request additional
information as necessary to make a determination.
(d) P rior to rendering a determination the Planning and Inspections
Director may consult with the Town Attorney and other affected
Town officials.
C. Determination Review Standards
1. Zoning District Map Boundaries. D etermination of zoning district
boundaries on the Official Zoning Map shall be in accordance with the
standards in Section 3.1.5.C, Interpretation of Official Map Boundaries, and
consistent with the Town’s adopted policy guidance.
2. Unlisted Uses. D etermination of whether an unlisted use is similar to a use
identified in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, shall be based on consistency
with the Town’s adopted policy guidance and the following standards:
(a) T he function, product, or physical characteristics of the use;
(b) T he impact on adjacent lands created by the use;
(c) T he type, size, and nature of buildings and structures associated
with the use;
(d) T he type of sales (retail, wholesale), and the size and type of items
sold and displayed on the premises;
(e) T he types of items stored (such as vehicles, inventory, merchandise,
chemicals, construction materials, scrap and junk, and raw materials
including liquids and powders);
(f) T he volume and type of vehicle traffic generated by the use, and the
parking demands of the use;
(g) An y processing associated with the use, including assembly,
manufacturing, warehousing, shipping, distribution, and whether it
occurs inside or outside a building;
(h) A ny dangerous, hazardous, toxic, or explosive materials associated
with the use;
(i) T he amount and nature of any nuisances generated on the
premises, including but not limited to noise, smoke, odor, glare,
vibration, radiation, and fumes; and
(j) A ny prior determinations made by the Planning and Inspections
Director or decisions made by the BOA.
2-102
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
3. Text Provisions. D etermination of the text and its application shall be
based on the standards in Section 10.1, General Rules for Interpretation, and
the following considerations:
(a) T he clear and plain meaning of the provision’s wording, as defined
by the meaning and significance given specific terms used in the
provision—as established in Section 10.4, Definitions, and by the
common and accepted usage of the term;
(b) T he intended purpose of the provision, as indicated by purpose
statements, its context and consistency with surrounding and
related provisions, and any legislative history related to its adoption;
(c) T he general purposes served by this Unified Development
Ordinance, as set forth in Section 1.3, General Purpose and Intent;
and
(d) C onsistency with the Town’s adopted policy guidance.
D. Effect
1. General
(a) A written determination shall be binding on subsequent decisions
by the Planning and Inspections Director or other administrative
officials in applying the same provision of this Unified Development
Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map in the same circumstance,
unless the determination is modified in accordance with this
section, or the text of this Unified Development Ordinance is
amended.
(b) T he Planning and Inspections Director shall maintain a record of
written determinations in the Development Guide that shall be
available in the Planning and Inspections Department for public
inspection, on reasonable request, during normal business hours.
2. Approval of Unlisted Use
(a) A fter the Planning and Inspections Director determines the use
category or use type in which the unlisted use is best classified as
well as the land use intensity score, then the unlisted use shall be
subject to all applicable requirements of that use category or use
type.
(b) A fter making a determination of an unlisted use, the Planning and
Inspections Director shall determine whether the unlisted use is
likely to be common or recur frequently, and whether its omission is
likely to lead to uncertainty and confusion. On determining that the
unlisted use is likely to be common and would lead to confusion if
unlisted, the Planning and Inspections Director shall initiate an
application for a text amendment. Until final action is taken on the
text amendment, the Planning and Inspections Director's decision
shall be binding.
(c) I f after making a determination of an unlisted use, the Planning and
Inspections Director determines that the unlisted use is of an
2-103
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
unusual or transitory nature, and unlikely to recur frequently, the
determination shall be binding without further action or
amendment of this Unified Development Ordinance.
E. Appeal. A pplicable (see Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.5. - Driveway Permit
A. Applicability.
1. All new driveway locations
2. Alteration or Modification to existing driveways, to include repaving,
repairing or other maintenance.
B. Driveway Permit Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Public Works Director shall review and decide the application in
accordance with Section 2.6.5.C, Driveway Permit Review Standards.
C. Driveway Permit Review Standards. A driveway permit shall be approved on a
decision that the application complies with:
1. Driveway Permit Application
2. Driveway design standards as found in the Development Guide.
D. Conditions of Approval. Applicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Appeal. Applicable (see Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.6. - Easement Reconveyance
A. Applicability. This section provides a procedure for the Town to transfer a
recorded, but unnecessary access, utility, drainage, conservation, or other
easement back to one or more landowners.
B. Easement Reconveyance Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
2-104
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(b) The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with
Section 2.6.6.C, Easement Reconveyance Review Standards.
(c) Following a decision on the reconveyance application by the TRC,
the Town Attorney shall prepare a quitclaim deed that is signed by
the Mayor.
C. Easement Reconveyance Review Standards. An easement reconveyance shall
be approved on a decision that the application complies with:
1. The easement being reconveyed is no longer required and is not likely to
be needed in the future;
2. Reconveyance of all or a portion of an easement will not impair the Town’s
ability to provide necessary municipal services;
3. Reconveyance will not convey a right or obligation to one landowner over
another similarly situated landowner; and
4. The proposed reconveyance would be in the best interest of the public.
D. Conditions of Approval. Applicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Appeal. Applicable (see Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.7. - Exempt Map
A. Applicability. T his section provides a procedure, in accordance with Section
160A-376 of the North Carolina General Statutes, for exemption of the following
divisions of land from the subdivision requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance:
1. A combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and
recorded lots that does not increase the total number of lots, and the
resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this Ordinance;
2. T he division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved;
3. P ublic acquisition involving the purchase of strips of land for the widening
or opening of streets; or
4. D ivision of a tract of land in single ownership, where the total area is no
greater than 2 acres, the division creates no more than 3 lots, where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved, and the resultant lots are equal
to or exceed the standards of this Unified Development Ordinance.
B. Exempt Map Review Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. O ptional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
i. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
2-105
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
ii. T he Planning and Inspections Director shall review the application
in accordance with Section 2.6.7.C, Exempt Map Review Standards,
and certify that the land division qualifies as an exempt map. If
certified, the land division shall be certified exempt from the
standards and procedures in Section 2.6.12, Preliminary Plat.
4. Recordation. I f an exempt map is prepared, and certified by the Planning
and Inspections Director, it may be recorded in the office of the Moore
County Register of Deeds.
C. Exempt Map Review Standards. A division of land shall be certified as an exempt
map if it:
1. I s exempt from the definition of a subdivision in accordance with Section
160A-376 of the North Carolina General Statutes; and
2. C omplies with all applicable standards in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts; and
3. C omplies with all standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits
and development approvals; and
4. C omplies with all other prior applicable requirements of this Unified
Development Ordinance and the Town Code of Ordinances.
D. Effect. Applicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
E. Amendment. A mendment of an exempt map may only be reviewed and
considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its
original approval.
F. Appeal. A pplicable (see Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.8. - Final Plat
A. Applicability. A final plat, reviewed and approved in accordance with this section,
shall be required for all subdivisions of land required to obtain a preliminary plat
under this Unified Development Ordinance. A landowner shall not submit an
application for final plat review until a preliminary plat is approved and all
required improvements serving the subdivision are installed and inspected by the
Town, or the developer provides a financial guarantee in accordance with Section
7.2, Financial Guarantees.
B. Final Plat Review Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
2-106
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review and decide the
application in accordance with Section 2.6.8.C, Final Plat Review
Standards.
4. Recordation. Once a final plat is approved, a signed statement by the
Planning and Inspections Director shall be entered on the face of the plat.
The final plat may not be recorded without this certification. Failure to
record the final plat in accordance with Section 2.6.8.F, Expiration, shall
render the plat null and void.
C. Final Plat Review Standards. A final plat shall be approved on a decision that the
application complies with the following:
1. The final plat is prepared and sealed by a licensed professional land
surveyor or professional engineer.
2. The final plat is in substantial conformance with the preliminary plat and
all applicable requirements in Chapter 7: Subdivision Standards;
3. All required improvements depicted on the preliminary plat and final plat
are installed and inspected by the Town, or are subject to a financial
guarantee (see Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees);
4. The final plat complies with all standards and conditions of any applicable
permits and development approvals; and
5. The final plat complies with all other applicable requirements of this
Unified Development Ordinance and the Town Code of Ordinances.
D. Effect
1. General. Approval of a final plat allows the sale or conveyance of lots within
the subdivision. Building permits may be issued following recordation of
the final plat.
2. Acceptance of Public Infrastructure
(a) Approval and recordation of a final plat constitutes dedication by
the owner and acceptance by the Town and the public of the
right-of-way of each public street, alley or utility easement shown on
the plat.
(b) Approval of the final plat does not constitute acceptance for
maintenance responsibility of any improvements within such
right-of-way or easement and the Town assumes no responsibility
to open, operate, repair, or maintain any improvements until it is in
the public interest to do so. Improvements within such
rights-of-way or easements, such as utilities, streets, drainage
facilities or sidewalks may be accepted for maintenance by the
Board of Commissioners or the Public Director, when appropriate.
(c) The subdivider shall retain responsibility for public improvements
until maintenance responsibility is accepted by the Town, NCDOT,
or a public utility provider, as appropriate.
(d) The Town may require specific provisions to be noted and signed by
the developer on the Final Plat prior to recordation. These provisions
2-107
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
shall address the future care and maintenance of infrastructure by
the developer and/or Homeowners Association (HOA).
E. Amendment. Amendment of a final plat approval may only be reviewed and
considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its
original approval.
F. Expiration
1. A final plat shall be null and void unless it is recorded in the office of the
Moore County Register of Deeds within 60 days of approval.
2. If a final plat is not recorded within 2 years of the associated preliminary
plat approval, or if there is a lapse of more than 2 years between the
recording of different sections or phases, then the preliminary plat shall
expire.
3. An expired preliminary plat may be resubmitted in accordance with
Section 2.5.12, Preliminary Plat, and shall be reviewed in accordance with
the standards of this Unified Development Ordinance.
G. Appeal. Applicable (see Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.9. - Floodplain Development Permit
A. Applicability. T o reduce the potential for damage to land and life from flooding or
floodwaters, development proposed on land in a special flood hazard area within
the Town’s zoning jurisdiction shall obtain a floodplain development permit in
accordance with this section prior to or concurrent with an application for a site
plan, group development, building permit, or zoning compliance permit, as
appropriate.
B. Floodplain Development Permit Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. Applicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review and decide the
application in accordance with Section 2.6.9.C, Floodplain
Development Permit Review Standards.
C. Floodplain Development Permit Review Standards. A floodplain development
permit shall be approved on a decision that the application complies with the
following:
1. The permit is issued prior to the commencement of development; and
2-108
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. The development complies with all applicable standards in Section 6.4,
Flood Damage Prevention.
D. Conditions of Approval. Applicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Effect. Approval of a floodplain development permit authorizes an applicant to
obtain all required elevation certificates or other required certificates and proceed
with development following issuance of a building permit.
F. Amendment. Amendment of a floodplain development permit approval may
only be reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and
standards established for its original approval.
G. Expiration. A floodplain development permit shall expire and become null and
void if the development it authorizes is not commenced within 6 months of
permit issuance.
H. Appeal. Applicable (see Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.10. - Group Development Permit
A. Applicability. G roup development review is applicable to any land development
subject to a site plan that includes 2 or more principal buildings (without a
subdivision of land) for the purpose of development (whether immediate or in the
future) to be occupied by separate families, firms, businesses, or other enterprises.
B. Group Development Review Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. O ptional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) W hen required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for
review with the application for a group developme nt. The threshold
requirements and procedure for preparation of a traff ic impact
analysis is described in the Development Guide.
(c) I f a watershed development plan, landscape plan, or land
disturbance plan approval are required, they shall be obtained
concurrently with the group development approval.
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with
Section 2.6.10.C, Group Development Review Standards.
(c) T he TRC may grant conditional approval of a group development
pending additional revision by the applicant. In the case of a
2-109
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
conditional approval, the applicant shall revise the group
development to address all TRC comments and re-submit the
revised plan to the Planning and Inspections Director, who shall
convert the conditional group development approval to an
approved group development, upon finding the revised group
development complies with all TRC comments. Failure to submit a
revised group development shall render the conditional approval
null and void.
C. Group Development Review Standards. A group development shall be
approved on a decision that the application complies with the following:
1. A ll standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and
development approvals; and
2. A ll applicable requirements of this Ordinance and the Town Code of
Ordinances.
D. Conditions of Approval. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Effect
1. General. A pproval of a group development plan authorizes the submittal
of street and utility plans, if applicable, and the submittal of an application
for a building permit in accordance with Section 2.6.3, Building Permit.
2. Street and Utility Construction Plans
(a) S treet and utility construction plans for all public improvements
associated with the group development shall be approved prior to
street and utility construction in accordance with Section 7.1.3,
Street and Utility Construction.
(b) I n the case of a multi-phase group development, street and utility
construction plans shall include all improvements within a phase
and all public improvements outside the phase but necessary to
serve development within that phase.
3. Land Disturbance Permit. U pon issuance of a land disturbance permit in
accordance with Section 2.6.11, Land Disturbance Permit, any approved soil
erosion and sedimentation control devices, and approved permanent
runoff control structures may be installed prior to the approval of street
and utility construction plans in accordance with Section 7.1.5, Permanent
Runoff Control Structures/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices.
4. Financial Guarantees. A ll public improvements that have not been
installed by the developer and inspected and accepted by the Town shall
comply with the requirements in Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees, prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
5. As-Built Plan. A s-built plans for all public improvements shall be
submitted in accordance with Section 7.2.4, As-Built Plans Required.
2-110
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
F. Amendment. A mendment of a group development approval may only be
reviewed and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards
established for its original approval.
G. Expiration. G roup development approval shall expire and become null and void if
the development approved in the plan does not begin within 18 months of
issuance of the group development approval.
H. Appeal. A pplicable (see Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.11. - Land Disturbance Permit
A. Applicability. No grading or land disturbance shall begin until the applicant has
obtained all applicable permits from local, state and federal organizations, as
required by the Town. I n order to avoid groundwater contamination, sediment
accumulation in drainage conveyances and surface waters, and unnecessary loss
of erodible soils, land-disturbing activities specified in Section 6.3.1, Applicability
require approval of a land-disturbance permit in accordance with this section,
prior to commencement.
B. Land Disturbance Permit Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. O ptional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he Public Works Director shall review the application in
accordance with Section 2.6.11.C, Land Disturbance Permit Review
Standards.
(c) A pre-construction conference shall be conducted on-site with the
applicant.
(d) F ollowing the pre-construction conference, the Public Works
Directo r may r ecommend approval to the North Carolina -
Department of Environmental Quality (NCDEQ) to issue the land
disturbance permit.
C. Land Disturbance Permit Review Standards. A land disturbance permit shall be
approved in accordance with a soil erosion and control plan developed in
accordance with Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation.
D. Conditions of Approval. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Effect
1. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
2-111
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
2. T he applicant shall post the approved land disturbance permit in a
prominent location on the site where the land disturbance is occurring at
all times while it is in effect.
F. Amendment. A mendment of a land disturbance permit may only be reviewed
and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval.
G. Expiration. T he land disturbance permit shall be null and void subject to the
expiration terms set forth by the North Carolina - Department of Environmental
Quality (NCDEQ) at the time of permit issuance.
H. Appeal. Not a pplicable.
2.6.12. - Preliminary Plat
A. Applicability. U nless exempted in accordance with Section 2.6.7, Exempt Map, all
divisions of land shall comply with the provisions of this section, and require
submission and approval of a preliminary plat.
B. Preliminary Plat Review Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. O ptional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Sketch Plan Review
(a) A sketch plan for land subject to a preliminary plat shall be reviewed
by the TRC prior to submittal of an application for a preliminary plat
in the following instances:
(1) T he applicant for a preliminary plat owns land adjacent to the
preliminary plat, but the land under common ownership is
not included in the preliminary plat application; or
(2) T he preliminary plat includes more than 20 lots.
(b) A sketch plan shall be prepared in accordance with the
Development Guide.
(c) F ollowing the review of a sketch plan, an applicant may file an
application for a preliminary plat.
(d) A pplicants are encouraged to file sketch plans, even when not
required.
3. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) A preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed professional
surveyor, registered professional landscape architect, or licensed
professional engineer, and shall be prepared in accordance with the
Development Guide.
2-112
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
(c) W hen required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for
review with the submittal of a prelim inary plat application. The
threshold requirements and procedu re for preparation of a traffic
impact analysis is described in the Development Guide.
(d) If a watershed development plan approval is required, it shall be
obtained concurrent with preliminary plat approval.
4. Staff Review and Action
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he TRC shall decide an application for a preliminary plat in
accordance with Section 2.6.12.C, Preliminary Plat Review Standards.
(c) The TRC may grant conditional approval of a preliminary plat. In the
case of a conditional approval, the applicant shall revise the
preliminary plat to address the conditions of approval and re-submit
the revised plat to the Planning and Inspections Director, who shall
convert the conditional approval to an approval upon finding the
revised preliminary plat complies with all conditions of approval. If
the plat is not revised within 60 days of a conditional approval, then
it shall be deemed denied.
(d) If the preliminary plat is denied, then the reasons shall be stated in
writing. The applicant may revise and resubmit a preliminary plat
that has been denied.
C. Preliminary Plat Review Standards. A n application for a preliminary plat shall be
approved on a decision that the application complies with:
1. A ll applicable standards in Chapter 7: Subdivision Standards;
2. A ll standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and
development approvals; and
3. A ll other applicable requirements of this Ordinance and in the Town Code
of Ordinances.
D. Effect
1. General. A pproval of a preliminary plat authorizes the submittal of street
and utility construction plans, and soil erosion and sedimentation control
plans.
2. Street and Utility Construction Plans
(a) S treet and utility construction plans for all public improvements
associated with the preliminary plat shall be approved prior to street
and utility construction and prior to the approval of a final plat in
accordance with Section 7.1.3, Street and Utility Construction.
(b) I n the case of a multi-phase subdivision, street and utility
construction plans shall include all improvements within a phase
and all public improvements outside the phase but necessary to
serve development within that phase.
3. Land Disturbance Permit. A preliminary plat shall only be approved once
the soil erosion and sedimentation control plans have been approved by
the appropriate state agency, and the Land Disturbance Permit has been
2-113
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
issued and presented to the Town of Aberdeen. Any approved soil erosion
and sedimentation control devices, and approved permanent runoff
control structures may be installed prior to the approval of street and utility
construction plans in accordance with Section 7.1.5, Permanent Runoff
Control Structures/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices.
4. Final Plat. A n approved preliminary plat, along with approved street and
utility construction plans, allows the applicant to submit for final plat
approval in accordance with Section 2.6.8, Final Plat.
5. Financial Guarantees. A ll public improvements that have not been
installed by the developer, and inspected and accepted by the Town shall
comply with the requirements in Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees, prior to
the recordation of a final plat.
6. As-Built Plans. A s-built plans for all public improvements shall be
submitted in accordance with Section 7.2.4, As-Built Plans Required.
E. Amendment. A mendment of a preliminary plat approval may only be reviewed
and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval.
F. Expiration. A n approved preliminary plat shall be valid for two years from the
date of approval and may be extended in accordance with Section 2.6.8, Final Plat.
G. Appeal. A pplicable (See Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.13. - Sign Permit
A. Applicability. A ll signs, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.7, Signage,
shall obtain a sign permit in accordance with this section before being erected,
replaced, relocated, or altered.
B. Sign Permit Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. O ptional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he Planning and Inspections Director shall review and decide the
application in accordance with Section 2.6.13.C, Sign Permit Review
Standards.
C. Sign Permit Review Standards. A sign permit shall be approved on a decision
the application complies with:
1. T he standards in Section 5.7, Signage;
2. T he State Building Code;
2-114
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
3. A ll standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and
developments approvals; and
4. A ll other applicable requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance
and in the Town Code of Ordinances.
D. Conditions of Approval. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Effect. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval).
F. Amendment. A mendment of a sign permit may only be reviewed and considered
in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its original
approval.
G. Expiration. I f the work authorized by a sign permit is not commenced within 6
months from the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
H. Appeal. A pplicable (See Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.14. - Site Plan
A. Applicability. Site plan review is applicable to any development activity that
includes constructing a building or increasing the amount of impervious surface
other than a group development, single-family detached dwelling, duplex,
including their accessory buildings.
B. Site Plan Review Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. Optional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application Submittal and Acceptance
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.4, Application Submittal and
Acceptance).
(b) When required, a traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for
review with a site plan application. The threshold requirements and
procedure for preparation of a traffic impact analysis is described in
the Development Guide.
(c) If a watershed development plan, landscape plan, or land
disturbance plan is required, they shall be obtained concurrently
with the site plan approval.
3. Review and Action
(a) Applicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) The TRC shall review and decide the application in accordance with
Section 2.6.14.C, Site Plan Review Standards.
(c) The TRC may grant conditional approval of a site plan pending
additional revision by the applicant. In the case of a conditional
approval, the applicant shall revise the site plan to address all TRC
2-115
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
comments and re-submit the revised plan to the Planning and
Inspections Director, who shall convert the conditional site plan
approval to an approval, upon finding the revised site plan complies
with all TRC comments. Failure to submit a revised site plan shall
render the conditional approval null and void.
C. Site Plan Review Standards. A site plan shall be approved on a decision the
application complies with:
1. All standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and
development approvals; and
2. All applicable requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance and
the Town Code of Ordinances.
D. Conditions of Approval. Applicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Effect
1. General. Approval of a site plan authorizes the submittal of street and
utility construction plans, if applicable, and the submittal of an application
for a building permit in accordance with Section 2.6.3, Building Permit, or
for a zoning compliance permit in accordance with Section 2.6.15, Zoning
Compliance Permit.
2. Street and Utility Construction Plans
(a) Street and utility construction plans for all public improvements
associated with the site plan shall be approved prior to street and
utility construction and prior to the approval of a final plat in
accordance with Section 7.1.3, Street and Utility Construction.
(b) In the case of a multi-phase site plan, street and utility construction
plans shall include all improvements within a phase and all public
improvements outside the phase but necessary to serve
development within that phase.
3. Land Disturbance Permit. Upon issuance of a land disturbance permit in
accordance with Section 2.6.11, Land Disturbance Permit, any approved soil
erosion and sedimentation control devices, and approved permanent
runoff control structures may be installed prior to the approval of street
and utility construction plans in accordance with Section 7.1.5, Permanent
Runoff Control Structures/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices.
4. Financial Guarantees. All public improvements that have not been
installed by the developer, and inspected and accepted by the Town shall
comply with the requirements in Section 7.2, Financial Guarantees, prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
5. As-Built Plans. As-built plans for all public improvements shall be
submitted in accordance with Section 7.2.4, As-Built Plans Required.
F. Amendment. Amendment of a site plan approval may only be reviewed and
considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for its
2-116
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
original approval
G. Expiration. Site plan approval shall expire and become null and void if the
development approved in the site plan does not begin within 18 months of
issuance of the site plan approval.
H. Appeal. Applicable (See Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2.6.15. - Zoning Compliance Permit
A. Applicability. A pproval of a zoning compliance permit is required for the
following:
1. Development that does not require a building permit (such as accessory
buildings with no horizontal dimension greater than 12 feet, outdoor
storage activities, fences, and temporary uses), or
2. A change of use, as established in Section 10.4, Definitions, that does not
require a building permit.
B. Zoning Compliance Permit Procedure
1. Pre-Application Conference. O ptional (see Section 2.4.2, Pre-Application
Conference).
2. Application SUbmittal and Acceptance. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.4,
Application Submittal and Acceptance).
3. Staff Review and Action
(a) A pplicable (see Section 2.4.5, Staff Review and Action).
(b) T he Planning and Inspections Director shall review and decide the
application in accordance with Section 2.6.15.C, Zoning Compliance
Permit Review Standards.
C. Zoning Compliance Permit Review Standards
1. Temporary Uses. T emporary uses shall comply with the standards in
Section 4.5, Temporary Uses.
2. All Other Uses. A zoning compliance permit shall be approved on a
decision the application complies with:
(a) A ll standards or conditions of any prior applicable permits and
development approvals; and
(b) All applicable requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance
and in the Town Code of Ordinances.
D. Conditions of Approval. A pplicable (see Section 2.4.10, Conditions of Approval).
E. Effect. A pproval of a zoning compliance permit authorizes an applicant to
commence construction or move forward with the approved development, and is
subject to obtaining all additional or required permits.
2-117
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 2 : Administration (v3a)
F. Amendment. A mendment of a zoning compliance permit may only be reviewed
and considered in accordance with the procedures and standards established for
its original approval.
G. Expiration
1. Temporary Uses. A zoning compliance permit for a temporary use is
effective on the date of approval and shall remain effective for the time
period indicated in the permit.
2. All Other Development. A zoning compliance permit shall expire and
become null and void if development it authorizes is not commenced
within 180 days of permit issuance.
H. Appeal. A pplicable (See Section 2.5.2, Appeal).
2-118
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
Chapter 3 - Zoning Districts
3.1. - General Provisions 3- 3
3.1.1. - Types of Zoning Districts 3- 3
3.1.2. - Compliance with District Standards 3- 3
3.1.3. - Conflict 3- 3
3.1.4. - Maximum Density May be Increased 3- 3
3.1.5. - Official Zoning Map 3- 3
3.2. - General Zoning Districts Established 3- 5
3.3. - Residential Zoning Districts 3- 7
3.3.1. - General Purpose and Intent 3- 7
3.3.2. - Residential Single-Family - 30 (R-30) 3- 8
3.3.3. - Residential Single-Family - 20 (R-20) 3- 9
3.3.4. - Residential Single-Family - 15 (R-15) 3- 10
3.3.5. - Residential Single-Family - 10 (R-10) 3- 11
3.3.6. - Residential Multi-Family - 6 (RM-6) 3- 12
3.4. - Business Zoning Districts 3- 13
3.4.1. - General Purpose and Intent 3- 13
3.4.2. - Office & Institutional (OI) 3- 14
3.4.3. - Neighborhood Commercial (NC) 3- 15
3.4.4. - Central Business (CB) 3- 16
3.4.5. - General Commercial (GC) 3- 17
3.4.6. - Light Industrial (LI) 3- 18
3.4.7. - Heavy Industrial (HI) 3- 19
3.5. - Special Zoning Districts 3- 20
3.5.1. - General Purpose and Intent 3- 20
3.5.2. - Agricultural/Rural (AGR) 3- 20
3.6. - Conditional Zoning Districts 3- 21
3.6.1. - Purpose and Intent 3- 21
3.6.2. - Classification 3- 21
3.6.3. - Districts Established 3- 21
3.6.4. - Applicable Standards 3- 21
3.6.5. - Conditional Zoning Plan 3- 22
3.6.6. - Relationship to Overlay District Standards 3- 22
3.7. - Planned Development Zoning Districts 3- 22
3.7.1. - Purpose and Intent 3- 22
3.7.2. - General Provisions 3- 23
3.7.3. - Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts 3- 23
3-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.7.4. - Amendments to Approved Planned Development Master Plan Map or
Statement of Intent and Development Standards 3- 27
3.8. - Overlay Zoning Districts 3- 27
3.8.1. - Purpose 3- 27
3.8.2. - Establishment 3- 27
3.8.3. - Classification 3- 27
3.8.4. - Relationship to Underlying Zoning Districts 3- 28
3.8.5. - Reserved 3- 28
3.8.6. - Reserved 3- 28
3.8.7. - Gateway Corridor Overlay (GCO) 3- 28
3.8.8. - Local Historic Overlay (LHO) 3- 30
3.8.9. - Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO) 3- 32
3.8.10. - Reserved 3- 33
3.8.11. - Reserved 3- 33
3.8.12. - Watershed Overlay (WSO) 3- 33
3-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.1. - General Provisions
3.1.1. - Types of Zoning Districts
Land within the Town is generally classified by this Unified Development Ordinance to
be in one of a number of general zoning districts. Land may be reclassified to one of a
number of comparable conditional zoning districts in accordance with Section 2.5.5,
Conditional Zoning. Land in any general or conditional district may also be classified into
one or more overlay zoning districts, in which case regulations governing development
in the overlay district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in
the underlying general zoning district or conditional zoning district.
3.1.2. - Compliance with District Standards
Land in the Town shall not be developed except in accordance with the zoning district
regulations of this chapter and all other regulations of this Unified Development
Ordinance, including but not limited to: Chapter 4: Uses, Chapter 5: Development
Standards, Chapter 6: Environmental Standards, and Chapter 7: Subdivision Standards.
3.1.3. - Conflict
I n the event of a conflict between the standards in Chapter 5: Development Standards,
and the district standards in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts, the standards in Chapter 3:
Zoning Districts, shall control.
3.1.4. - Maximum Density May be Increased
Unless otherwise indicated in this Ordinance, the maximum density for a zoning district
may be increased beyond the amount listed in Section 3.3, Residential Zoning Districts,
Section 3.4, Business Zoning Districts, and Section 3.5, Special Zoning Districts, in
accordance with the standards and procedure in Section 2.6.2, Administrative
Adjustment.
3.1.5. - Official Zoning Map
A. General
1. T he Official Zoning Map designates the location and boundaries of the
various zoning districts established in this Unified Development Ordinance.
The Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the Planning and
Inspections Department and is available for public inspection during
normal business hours. It is maintained solely in digital form. It shall be the
final authority as to the status of the current zoning district classification of
3-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
land in the Town’s planning jurisdiction, and shall only be amended in
accordance with Section 2.5.20, Zoning Map Amendment.
2. T he Planning and Inspections Director shall maintain digital or printed
copies of superseded versions of the Official Zoning Map for historical
reference.
B. Incorporated by Reference
1. T he Official Zoning Map is incorporated herein by reference and made part
of this Unified Development Ordinance.
2. T he Town of Aberdeen Water Supply Watershed Map is incorporated
herein by reference and made a part of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
3. T he Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the associated Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) are incorporated herein by reference and made part
of this Unified Development Ordinance.
C. Interpretation of Official Map Boundaries. T he Planning and Inspections
Director shall be responsible for determination of boundaries on the Official
Zoning Map in accordance with the standards in Section 2.6.4, Determination,
and the following standards:
1. B oundaries shown as approximately following a utility line or a street, alley,
railroad, or other public access way shall be interpreted as following the
centerline of the right-of-way or easement for the utility line or access way.
2. If a street, alley, railroad, or utility easement forming the boundary
between 2 separate zoning districts is abandoned or removed from
dedication, the district boundaries shall be construed as following the
centerline of the abandoned or vacated roadbed or utility easement.
3. B oundaries shown as approximately following a lot line shall be
interpreted as following the lot line as it existed when the boundary was
established. If a subsequent minor adjustment (such as from settlement of
a boundary dispute or overlap) results in the lot line moving 10 feet or less,
the zoning boundary shall be interpreted as moving with the lot line.
4. B oundaries shown as approximately following a river, stream, canal, lake, or
other watercourse shall be interpreted as following the centerline of the
watercourse as it actually exists, and as moving with that centerline to the
extent the watercourse moves as a result of natural processes (flooding,
erosion, sedimentation, etc.).
5. B oundaries shown as approximately following shorelines of a river, stream,
or lake shall be interpreted to follow the shoreline, even in the event of
change.
6. B oundaries shown parallel to or as extensions of features indicated in this
subsection shall be interpreted as such.
7. If the specific location of a depicted boundary cannot be determined from
application of the above standards, it shall be determined by using the
3-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
Official Zoning Map's scale to determine the boundary's distance from
other features shown on the map. In the case of flood hazard boundaries,
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers work maps, if available, shall be used for
scaling.
8. W here the actual location of existing physical or natural features vary from
that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances are not
covered by this subsection, the Planning and Inspections Director shall
have the authority to determine the district boundaries (see Section 2.6.4,
Determination).
9. I nterpretations of the floodplain boundary shall be made by the Planning
and Inspections Director, in accordance with the standards in Section 6.4,
Flood Damage Prevention.
10. O uter boundaries of a Watershed Overlay District shall be construed to
follow actual drainage basin boundaries. In cases of conflicts between the
boundaries as they appear on the Watershed Map and detailed
engineering studies, the TRC may rely on the more detailed study in
approving watershed development plans.
11. L ocations of perennial and intermittent streams within General Watershed
Area shall be construed to be as depicted on the Watershed Map. In case
of conflicts between the locations as they appear on the Watershed Map
and detailed engineering studies, the TRC may rely on the more detailed
study in approving watershed development plans.
12. W herever a single lot is located within 2 or more different zoning districts,
each portion of the lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to
the zoning district where it is located.
D. Changes to Official Zoning Map. C hanges made in zoning district boundaries on
the Official Zoning Map shall be considered an amendment to this Unified
Development Ordinance and are made in accordance with Section 2.5.20, Zoning
Map Amendment. Changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map by the
Planning and Inspections Director promptly after the amendment is approved by
the Board of Commissioners. Where the ordinance enacting a zoning district
boundary change contains wording explaining or clarifying the location of the
new boundary, the Planning and Inspections Director shall enter the boundary on
the Official Zoning Map in accordance with the ordinance wording.
3.2. - General Zoning Districts Established
Table 3.2, General Zoning Districts Established, sets out the general zoning districts
established by this Unified Development Ordinance. General zoning districts are
grouped into Residential, Business, Special, and Planned Development districts.
A. Classification of General Zoning District s. Land shall be classified or reclassified
into a zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements
3-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
set forth in Section 2.5.20, Zoning Map Amendment, Section 2.5.5, Conditional
Zoning, or Section 2.5.9, Planned Development, as appropriate.
B. Relationship to Overlay Zoning Districts. Regulations governing development in
an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing
development in the underlying general or conditional zoning district
classification. If the standards governing a general zoning district expressly
conflict with those governing an overlay zoning district, the standards governing
the overlay zoning district shall control.
C. Organization of General Zoning District Regulations
1. Sections 3.3 through 3.5 set out the general purposes of each group of
zoning districts and contain subsections that set out the specific purpose,
density, bulk, and dimensional standards for each individual zoning district.
2. The range of allowable uses for each general zoning district are identified
in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table.
Table 3.1 : General Zoning Districts Established
District Name Abbreviation
Residential Districts
Residential Single-Family - 30 R-30
Residential Single-Family - 20 R-20
Residential Single-Family - 15 R-15
Residential Single-Family - 10 R-10
Residential Multi-Family - 6 RM-6
Business Districts
Office & Institutional OI
Neighborhood Commercial NC
Central Business CB
General Commercial GC
Industrial Districts
Light Industrial LI
Heavy Industrial HI
Special Districts
Agricultural/Rural AGR
3-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.3. - Residential Zoning Districts
3.3.1. - General Purpose and Intent
The residential zoning districts established in this section are intended to provide a,
healthy and safe environment in which to live and recreate. More specifically, they are
intended to:
A. Provide appropriately located lands for residential development
that are consistent with the Town’s adopted policy guidance;
B. Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and recreation and open space
areas for each dwelling;
C. Provide for residential housing choice, affordability, and diversity
with varying housing densities, types, and designs, including
accessory dwelling units where appropriate;
D. Provide for safe and efficient vehicular access and circulation and
pedestrian-friendly neighborhoods;
E. Provide for public services and facilities needed to serve residential
areas while protecting residential areas from incompatible
nonresidential development;
F. Create neighborhoods and preserve existing community character
while accommodating new development and redevelopment
consistent with the Town’s goals and objectives.
G. Preserve the unique character and historic resources of the town's
traditional neighborhoods and the community.
3-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.3.2. - Residential Single-Family - 30 (R-30)
R-30 Residential District
A. District Purpose:
The R-30 district is established to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings
developed at a density of 30,000 square feet per lots, in developments served by public water and
sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions, and
recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations discourage any use that interferes with the
development of single-family detached dwellings or that is detrimental to the residential nature of the
district.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard SF Detached Duplex SF Attached &
Multi-family All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 30,000 [1] N/A 30,000
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)[2]
Interior Lot 100 N/A 100
Corner Lot 100 N/A 100
Minimum Street Setback
(feet)
Front 35 N/A
35
Side 25 N/A
Minimum Side Setback (feet) 15 N/A N/A
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 30 N/A N/A
Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) N/A N/A 35
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35 N/A 35
[1] : Lots in projects 2 acres or greater in area may be between 80% and 120% of the district minimum lot area,
provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum
(See Section 10.2.3.c.2 Lot Area Averaging)
[2] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
3-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.3.3. - Residential Single-Family - 20 (R-20)
R-20 Residential District
A. District Purpose:
The R-20 district is established to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings
developed at a density of 30,000 square feet per lots, in developments served by public water and
sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions, and
recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations discourage any use that interferes with the
development of single-family detached dwellings or that is detrimental to the residential nature of the
district.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard SF Detached Duplex SF Attached &
Multi-family All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 20,000 [1] N/A 20,000
Minimum Development Size (Acres) N/A 5 N/A
Maximum Density (units/acre) N/A 5 [2] N/A
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)[3]
Interior Lot 90
N/A
90 [4]
100
Corner Lot 100 100
Minimum Street Setback
(feet)
Front 35
20 25
Side 20
Minimum Side Setback (feet) 15
N/A
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 30
Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) N/A 20
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35 35
[1] : Lots in projects 2 acres or greater in area may be between 80% and 120% of the district minimum lot area,
provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum
(See Section 10.2.3.c.2 Lot Area Averaging)
[2] : The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure is 2.
[3] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[4] : For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum
width of 120 feet.
3-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.3.4. - Residential Single-Family - 15 (R-15)
R-15 Residential District
A. District Purpose:
The R-15 district is established to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings
developed at a density of 15,000 square feet per lots, in developments served by public water and
sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions, and
recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations discourage any use that interferes with the
development of single-family detached dwellings or that is detrimental to the residential nature of the
district.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard SF Detached Duplex SF Attached &
Multi-family All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 15,000 [1] N/A 15,000
Minimum Development Size (Acres) N/A 5 N/A
Maximum Density (units/acre) N/A 5 [2] N/A
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)[3]
Interior Lot 80
N/A
80 [4]
90
Corner Lot 90 90
Minimum Street Setback
(feet)
Front 30
20 25
Side 20
Minimum Side Setback (feet) 15
N/A
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 25
Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) N/A 25
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35 35
[1] : Lots in projects 2 acres or greater in area may be between 80% and 120% of the district minimum lot area,
provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum
(See Section 10.2.3.c.2 Lot Area Averaging)
[2] : The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure is 2.
[3] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[4] : For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum
width of 120 feet.
3-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.3.5. - Residential Single-Family - 10 (R-10)
R-10 Residential District
A. District Purpose:
The R-10 district is established to accommodate principally single-family detached dwellings
developed at a density of 10,000 square feet per lots, in developments served by public water and
sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space, schools, utilities, religious institutions, and
recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations discourage any use that interferes with the
development of single-family detached dwellings or that is detrimental to the residential nature of the
district.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard SF Detached Duplex SF Attached &
Multi-family All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 10,000 [1] N/A 10,000
Minimum Development Size (Acres) N/A 5 N/A
Maximum Density (units/acre) N/A 5 [2] N/A
Minimum Lot Width (feet)[3]
Interior Lot 75
N/A
75 [4]
85
Corner Lot 85 85
Minimum Street Setback
(feet)
Front 25
20 25
Side 20
Minimum Side Setback (feet) 15
N/A
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 25
Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) N/A 20
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35 35
[1] : Lots in projects 2 acres or greater in area may be between 80% and 120% of the district minimum lot area,
provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum
(See Section 10.2.3.c.2 Lot Area Averaging)
[2] : The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure is 2.
[3] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[4] : For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum
width of 120 feet.
3-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.3.6. - Residential Multi-Family - 6 (RM-6)
RM-6 Residential District
A. District Purpose:
The RM-6 district is established to accommodate a mix of residential development at densities of 5
units an acre, that are served by public water and sewer. Complimentary uses such as open space,
schools, utilities, religious institutions and recreational facilities are also allowed. District regulations
discourage any use that interferes with the development of residential development or that is
detrimental to the residential nature of the district.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard SF Detached Duplex SF Attached &
Multi-family All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 6,000 [2] 12,000 26,000 [3] 15,000
Maximum Density (units/acre) N/A 5 5 [1]
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)[4]
Interior Lot 50
75 [5]
50
Corner Lot 60 70
Minimum Street Setback
(feet)
Front 25
25
Side 15
Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5
N/A
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 20
Minimum Perimeter
Setback (feet)
Adjacent to
Residential
District
N/A 20
Adjacent to
Non-Residen
tial District
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35 35
[1] : Mixed-used development is subject to the maximum density standards.
[2] : May be between 80% and 120% of the district minimum lot area, provided the development as a whole
maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum (See Section 10.2.3 C.2 Lot Area
Averaging).
[3] : Minimum development size.
[4] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[5] : For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum
width of 120 feet.
3-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.4. - Business Zoning Districts
3.4.1. - General Purpose and Intent
The business zoning districts are established for the general purpose of ensuring there
are lands in the Town that provide a wide range of office, retail, service, industrial, and
related uses to meet household and business needs. More specifically they are intended
to:
A. Provide appropriately located lands for the full range of business uses needed by
the Town’s residents, businesses, and workers, consistent with the Town’s
adopted policy guidance;
B. Strengthen the Town’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities
close to home for residents of the Town and surrounding communities;
C. Create suitable environments for various types of business uses, and protect them
from the adverse effects of incompatible uses;
D. Create suitable environments for various types of mixed-use development, where
business, office, retail, and residential uses are designed and integrated in
compatible ways;
E. Preserve the unique character and historic resources of the Central Business
District; and
F. Minimize the impact of business development on residential districts and uses
and sensitive natural environments.
3-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.4.2. - Office & Institutional (OI)
Office & Institutional District
A. District Purpose:
The OI district is established to primarily accommodate a wide variety of moderate and high intensity
office, institutional, and residential uses. In addition, the district accommodates health care, personal
services, and retail uses. Supporting services are permitted provided they are located in multi-tenant
buildings and limited in floor area.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard SF Detached Duplex SF Attached &
Multi-family All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 6,000 [2] 12,000 10,000 [3] 12,000
Maximum Density (units/acre) N/A 12 12 [1]
Minimum Lot Width (feet)[3]
Interior Lot 75
75 [4] 60
Corner Lot 85
Minimum Street Setback
(feet)
Front 25
20
Side 20
Minimum Side Setback (feet) 10
N/A
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 20
Minimum Perimeter
Setback (feet)
Adjacent to
Residential
District
N/A
20
Adjacent to
Non-Residen
tial District
10
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35 35
[1] : Lots in projects 2 acres or greater in area may be between 80% and 120% of the district minimum lot area,
provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum
(See Section 10.2.3.c.2 Lot Area Averaging)
[2] : The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure is 2.
[3] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[4] : For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum
width of 120 feet.
3-14
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.4.3. - Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
Neighborhood Commercial District
A. District Purpose:
The NC district is established to primarily accommodate low to moderate intensity office, retail, and
personal service uses adjacent to and within residential neighborhoods. In addition to commercial
uses, the district also allows a variety of residential and institutional uses in stand-alone structures as
well as in mixed-use developments.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard SF Detached Duplex SF Attached &
Multi-family All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 6,000 [2] 12,000 10,000 [3] 10,000
Maximum Density (units/acre) N/A 12 12 [1]
Minimum Lot Width (feet)[3]
Interior Lot 80
80 [4] 65
Corner Lot 90
Minimum Street Setback
(feet)
Front 20
20
Side 15
Minimum Side Setback (feet) 5
N/A
Minimum Rear Setback (feet) 15
Minimum Perimeter
Setback (feet)
Adjacent to
Residential
District
N/A
20
Adjacent to
Non-Residen
tial District
10
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35 35
[1] : Lots in projects 2 acres or greater in area may be between 80% and 120% of the district minimum lot area,
provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum
(See Section 10.2.3.c.2 Lot Area Averaging)
[2] : The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure is 2.
[3] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[4] : For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum
width of 120 feet.
3-15
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.4.4. - Central Business (CB)
Central Business District
A. District Purpose:
The CB district is established and intended to encourage the urban form and architectural character
found in the traditional downtown area as well as promote redevelopment that will make the
downtown area, a more diverse and vibrant mixed-use urban center. The CB district is intended to
accommodate a well-balanced mix of uses (e.g., office, retail, service, high-density residential, and
market showroom development), promote a strong pedestrian-oriented environment (with a reduced
need for parking), and preserve and protect the downtown's historical and architectural scale and
character. The district is subject to flexible standards intended to support a mixed use urban context.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) N/A
Maximum Density (units/acre) N/A
Minimum Lot Width (feet)[3]
Interior Lot
N/A
Corner Lot
Minimum Street Setback (feet) 0, 10 from back of curb [1]
Maximum Street Setback (feet)[2][3] 20
Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) 0/5 [4]
Maximum Building Height (feet) 50
[1] : All buildings shall be at least 10 feet from the back of the curb.
[2] : For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of the front building facade shall be
located parallel to and within the required setbacks.
[3] : Buildings are exempt from the maximum street setback, if they provide a civic space (see Section 5.8.4 B
Exemption from Maximum Setback).
[4] : No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet.
3-16
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.4.5. - General Commercial (GC)
General Business District
A. District Purpose:
The GB district is established to accommodate a wide range of general retail, business, and service
uses that serve groups of neighborhoods. GB districts are generally located at major street
intersections and along major thoroughfares. Residential uses are encouraged as stand-alone uses
and on the upper floors of retail and office buildings as a part of mixed-use development. Uses in the
district are subject to standards intended to ensure development is compatible with adjacent
residential neighborhoods.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard SF Attached & Multi-family All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) 8,000 [2] 10,000
Maximum Density (units/acre) 12 12 [1]
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)[4]
Interior Lot
60 [4] 75
Corner Lot
Minimum Street Setback (feet) 25
Maximum Street Setback (feet)[2][3] 75
Minimum Perimeter
Setback (feet)
Adjacent to
Residential
District
30
Adjacent to
Non-Residen
tial District
10
Maximum Building Height (feet) 35 55 [5]
[1] : Lots in projects 2 acres or greater in area may be between 80% and 120% of the district minimum lot area,
provided the development as a whole maintains an average lot area that equals or exceeds the district minimum
(See Section 10.2.3.c.2 Lot Area Averaging)
[2] : The maximum number of attached dwelling units per structure is 2.
[3] : Buildings are exempt from the maximum street setback, if they provide a civic space (see Section 5.8.4.B
Exemption from Maximum Setback).
[4] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[4] : For developments with more than 3 units, minimum lot width is increased by 5 feet per unit up to a maximum
width of 120 feet.
[5] : For each additional foot of height beyond 35 feet up to 55 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1
foot.
3-17
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.4.6. - Light Industrial (LI)
Light Industrial District
A. District Purpose:
The LI district is established to accommodate light manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing,
distribution, storage, wholesales sales, research and development, and other industrial uses that are
small-scale and result in minimal exterior movement of vehicles, materials, and goods, and have
minimal visual impacts. The district also allows commercial activities intended to serve the primary
businesses in the districts and their employees as well as multi-family, retail, and personal services
establishments as adaptive re-uses of existing buildings.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard All Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) N/A
Minimum Lot Width (feet)[3]
Interior Lot
60
Corner Lot
Minimum Street Setback (feet) 25
Minimum Perimeter
Setback (feet)
Adjacent to
Residential
District
40
Adjacent to
Non-Residen
tial District
0/5 [2]
Maximum Building Height (feet) 55 [3]
[1] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[2] : No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet.
[3] : For each additional foot of height beyond 35 feet up to 50 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1
foot.
3-18
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.4.7. - Heavy Industrial (HI)
Heavy Industrial District
A. District Purpose:
The HI district is established to accommodate heavy manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing,
distribution, storage, research and development, and other industrial uses that may be large-scale or
otherwise have extensive exterior movement of vehicles, materials, and goods, and greater potential
for adverse environmental and visual impacts.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard All Uses
Minimum Lot Area (square feet) N/A
Minimum Lot Width (feet)[3]
Interior Lot
100
Corner Lot
Minimum Street Setback (feet) 25
Minimum Perimeter
Setback (feet)
Adjacent to
Residential
District
50
Adjacent to
Non-Resident
ial District
0/5 [2]
Maximum Building Height (feet) 55 [3]
[1] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[2] : No setback is required, but if provided, it shall be at least 5 feet.
[3] : For each additional foot of height beyond 35 feet up to 55 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1
foot.
3-19
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.5. - Special Zoning Districts
3.5.1. - General Purpose and Intent
The special zoning districts established in this section are intended to achieve specific
planning and design objectives in defined areas of the Town and to create suitable
environments for distinct uses and development outside the established residential and
business districts.
3.5.2. - Agricultural/Rural (AGR)
Agricultural/Rural District
A. District Purpose:
The AGR district is established to accommodate agricultural and agricultural -related uses as well as
very low density residential development on large lots (minimum lot size of 5 acres), that are not served by public water or sewer.
The district is intended to preserve land for agricultural or forest uses, to provide for the orderly
transition to urban use, and protect environmentally-sensitive lands. It encourages residential
development that preserves farmland and other open space through flexibly-designed conservation
subdivisions.
B. Dimensional Standards
Standard All Uses
Minimum Lot Area (acres) 5
Minimum Lot Width (feet)[3]
Interior Lot
150
Corner Lot
Minimum Street Setback
(feet)
Front 30
Side 15
Minimum Perimeter Setback (feet) 30
Maximum Building Height (feet) 50 [2]
[1] : All development shall comply with the Town's Driveway Ordinance requirements.
[2] : For each additional foot of height beyond 35 feet up to 55 feet, the perimeter setbacks shall be increased by 1
foot.
3-20
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.6. - Conditional Zoning Districts
3.6.1. - Purpose and Intent
The rezoning of land to a conditional zoning district is intended to provide a landowner
and the Town an alternative to rezoning the land to a general zoning district, where the
general zoning district allows certain uses and development that may be appropriate
but also allows uses and development that may not conform to adopted policy guidance
or would have adverse impacts on public facilities or surrounding lands. Reclassification
of land to a conditional zoning district allows a landowner to propose, and the Board of
Commissioners to consider, additional conditions or restrictions on the range of
allowable uses, use standards, development intensities, development standards, and
other regulations applicable in the parallel general zoning district. This enables the Town
and the landowner to tailor a zoning classification to accommodate desirable
development while avoiding or addressing anticipated problems that may arise from
development otherwise allowed by the general zoning district.
3.6.2. - Classification
Land shall be classified into a conditional zoning district only in accordance with the
procedures and requirements set forth in Section 2.5.5, Conditional Zoning.
3.6.3. - Districts Established
The following conditional zoning districts, each bearing the designation “CZ”, are hereby
established:
A. Residential Conditional Zoning Districts. The residential conditional zoning
districts include: CZ-R-30, CZ R-20, CZ R-15, CZ R-10 and CZ RM-6.
B. Business Conditional Zoning Districts. The business conditional zoning districts
include: CZ OI, CZ NC, CZ CB and CZ GB.
3.6.4. - Applicable Standards
Development in a conditional zoning district shall be subject to all the use and
development standards and requirements that apply to development in the parallel
general zoning district, plus any conditions imposed as part of the conditional zoning
approval (including a conditional zoning plan, if provided), which may not be less
restrictive than the regulations for the parallel general zoning district.
3-21
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.6.5. - Conditional Zoning Plan
Applications for establishment of a conditional zoning district may include a conditional
zoning plan as part of the application for a conditional zoning. The primary purpose for a
conditional zoning plan is to illustrate conditions that are difficult to describe with text. A
conditional zoning plan shall be of sufficient detail to depict the conditions proposed by
the applicant.
3.6.6. - Relationship to Overlay District Standards
Regulations governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition
to the regulations governing development in the conditional zoning district. If the
standards governing a conditional zoning district expressly conflict with those governing
an overlay zoning district, the more restrictive standards shall control.
3.7. - Planned Development Zoning Districts
3.7.1. - Purpose and Intent
The Planned Development (PD) districts are established to allow development under
unified control to occur utilizing more flexible standards and procedures than would
otherwise result from a strict application of general district and development standards.
Planned development districts are intended to encourage innovative land planning and
site design concepts that will produce a high quality, unified project that will not
negatively impact adjacent land. More specifically, the intent of the PD districts is to:
A. Promote quality design and reduce or diminish the inflexibility of design that
sometimes results from strict application of zoning and development standards
designed primarily for individual lots;
B. Allow greater freedom in selecting the means of providing access, open space,
and design amenities;
C. Allow greater freedom in providing a well-integrated mix of residential and
non-residential uses in the same development, including a mix of housing types,
lot sizes, and densities;
D. Provide for efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and
streets and thereby lowering development and housing costs;
E. Enhance pedestrian orientation and make greater accommodations for
alternative forms of transportation such as walking, bicycling, and transit; and
F. Promote environmentally sensitive development that respects surrounding
established land use character and respects and takes advantage of a site's
natural and man-made features, such as trees, wetlands, special flood hazard
area, and historic resources.
3-22
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.7.2. - General Provisions
A. Classification of Planned Development Districts. L and shall be classified as a
planned development zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and
requirements set forth in Section 2.5.9, Planned Development, and this section.
B. Organization of Planned Development District Regulations. S ection 3.7.3,
Standards Applied to All Planned Development Districts, sets out general
standards applicable to all planned development districts.
3.7.3. - Standards Applied to All Planned Development
Districts
Before approving a PD zoning district, the Board of Commissioners shall determine that
the application, as well as the master plan map, the statement of intent and
development standards document, and the common signage plan if included as part of
the application, comply with the following standards, unless expressly stated otherwise.
A. Planned Development Master Plan Map. A master plan map shall be included
with the application and shall be a part of the planned development approval. It
shall:
1. Identify the general location and acreage of individual development areas
by land use(s) and/or development density or intensity;
2. Depict the general configuration and relationship of the principal elements
of the proposed development;
3. Identify the general location, amount and type (active or passive) of open
space;
4. Identify the general configuration of the on-site transportation network,
including public and private vehicular, transit, and pedestrian facilities and
how they will connect with existing and planned Town systems;
5. Identify the general location of on-site potable water, sanitary sewer, and
stormwater management facilities and how they will connect to Town
systems;
6. Identify the general location of any other on-site public facilities serving
the development, such as schools, police or fire protection, EMS, and solid
waste management; and
7. Identify the general sequence or phases in which development of the
district is proposed to occur.
B. Statement of Intent and Development Standards. The statement of intent and
development standards document shall incorporate by reference or include, but
not be limited to:
3-23
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
1. A written statement of intent for the development, including a description
of planning objectives and overall vision for the development at build-out;
2. A listing of all permitted uses;
3. Residential and non-residential dimensional standards, which include at a
minimum, lot area, lot width, setbacks, building height, and setbacks from
adjoining residential development or residential zoning districts;
4. For the entire PD district and each development area, acreage, types, and
mix of land uses, number of residential units (by use type), non-residential
acreage (by use type), residential development density, and non-residential
intensity standards;
5. Identification of all areas where a modification from the required
development standards or use standards is proposed, description of the
proposed modification, and explanation of why it is needed;
6. The master plan map and specific development standards related to its
approval, including any standards related to the form and design of
development shown on the master plan map;
7. Provisions addressing how transportation, potable water, sanitary sewer,
stormwater management and other infrastructure will be provided to
accommodate the proposed development;
8. Provisions related to environmental protection and monitoring;
9. A phasing narrative, including how residential and non-residential
development will be timed, how infrastructure, transportation
improvements, and open space will be timed, and how the development
will be coordinated with any planned Town capital improvements; and
10. Any other provisions the Board of Commissioners determines are relevant
and necessary to the development of the PD in accordance with applicable
standards and regulations.
C. Allowable Uses
1. Every planned development district shall establish permitted uses by use
category and use type as appropriate, from those listed in Table 4.1.9,
Principal Use Table.
2. Proposed uses shall be consistent with the Town’s adopted policy
guidance, the purpose of the particular type of PD district, and are subject
to any additional requirements set forth in Section 3.7 for the particular
type of PD district.
3. Uses are subject to all applicable use standards for the use type in Section
4.3, Use Standards, unless modified by the statement of intent and
standards document.
D. Mandatory Use Mix. Unless exempted by the Board of Commissioners, a PD
district shall include at least one use type from 2 of the following four use
classifications or at least 2 different use types from the use types listed in the
Residential Use Classification, in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table:
1. Residential uses;
3-24
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
2. Institutional uses;
3. Commercial uses; and
4. Industrial uses.
E. Prohibited Uses. The following use categories and use types are prohibited in a
PD district:
1. Extractive industry;
2. Asphalt plants;
3. Major manufacturing use types; and
4. Waste related services.
F. Development Standards
1. General
(a) Unless indicated otherwise, all development in a PD district shall
comply with the development standards of Chapter 5: Development
Standards, the environmental protection standards in Chapter 6:
Environmental Standards, and the subdivision and infrastructure
design standards of Chapter 7: Subdivision Standards.
(b) Except where otherwise indicated, nothing shall limit the ability of a
planned development to modify the development standards of
Chapter 5, provided the planned development master plan map
and statement of intent and standards document demonstrates
how and why the proposed modification is needed.
2. Open Space. All development within a PD district shall comply with the
standards in Section 5.12, Open Space, which shall not be modified as part
of the approval of a PD district.
3. Fences. In no instance shall a PD master plan modify compliance with the
standards in Section 5.11.4, Locational Requirements.
4. Exterior Lighting. Development around the perimeter of a PD district shall
comply with the standards in Table 5.10.6.A, Maximum Illumination Levels,
which shall not be modified as part of the approval of a PD district.
5. Screening. Development in a PD district shall comply with the standards
in Section 5.6, Screening, which shall not be modified as part of the
approval of a PD district.
6. Subdivision Standards. A planned development shall not modify the
subdivision standards in Chapter 7 of this Ordinance.
G. Maximum Allowable Density. Dwelling units within a PD district may be
concentrated or evenly distributed throughout the development, provided the
maximum allowable density for the development as a whole is not exceeded.
H. Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for all buildings in a
PD district shall be specified on the planned development master plan map or
the statement of intent and development standards document, but in no
3-25
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
instance shall the maximum building height exceed 35 feet within 50 feet of a
single-family residential district.
I. Signs
1. All signs in any PD district shall meet the requirements of Section 5.7,
Signage, except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
2. A common signage plan, prepared in accordance with the Development
Guide shall be submitted and approved by the Planning & Inspections
Director prior to issuance of the first building permit within the planned
development.
3. In preparing the common signage plan, sign specifications shall be as
restrictive or more restrictive than the regulations of Table 3.7.3.I, Planned
Development Signage Standards.
Table 3.7.3.I : Planned Development Signage Standards
Predominant Use Type Signage Standards No Less Restrictive Than Those In:
Residential (other than live/work) RM-6 District
Live/Work NB District
Office OI District
Commercial GB District
Industrial LI District
4. Within a PD district, Table 5.7.8.B, Requirements For A Sign Not Requiring
A Sign Permit, shall be interpreted to mean "use" where the word "district"
is noted.
5. Directional signs pointing the way to specific named sections of a planned
development may be permitted along interior streets, provided:
(a) Signs shall be not more than 12 square feet in area and 6 feet in
height;
(b) The number of signs and their location shall be shown and
approved with the PD common signage plan; and
(c) Illumination shall be by indirect methods only.
6. All indirect lighting of signs shall be concealed from view and oriented
away from adjacent properties and roadways.
J. Final Plat Approval. No final plat for a phase of a planned development shall be
approved unless:
1. All open space and common elements and public improvements included
in previous phases have been conveyed, completed, or subject to a valid
financial guarantee;
2. There is no violation of the PD master plan map or any provision or
condition of the PD district in any previous phase; and
3-26
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3. When a development contains common areas, owners' association
documents have been prepared and reviewed, and are ready for
recordation, or have been recorded, with the Moore County Register of
Deeds.
3.7.4. - Amendments to Approved Planned Development
Master Plan Map or Statement of Intent and
Development Standards
A mendments or modifications to a planned development master plan map or to the
statement of intent and development standards shall be considered in accordance with
the standards in Section 2.5.9, Planned Development.
3.8. - Overlay Zoning Districts
3.8.1. - Purpose
Overlay zoning districts are superimposed over either all or a portion of 1 or more
underlying general zoning districts or conditional zoning districts with the intent of
supplementing generally applicable development regulations with additional
development regulations that address special area-specific conditions, features, or plans
while maintaining the character and purposes of the underlying zoning district.
3.8.2. - Establishment
Table 3.8.2, Overlay Zoning Districts Established, sets out the overlay zoning districts
established by this Unified Development Ordinance.
Table 3.8.2 : Overlay Zoning Districts Established
District Name Abbreviation
Gateway Corridor Overlay GCO
Local Historic Overlay LHO
Manufactured Housing Overlay MHO
Watershed Overlay WSO
3.8.3. - Classification
Land shall be classified or reclassified into an overlay zoning district only in accordance
with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 2.5.20, Zoning Map
Amendment.
3-27
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.8.4. - Relationship to Underlying Zoning Districts
A. Regulations governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in
addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying zoning
district, unless otherwise expressly stated.
B. If the standards governing an overlay zoning district expressly conflict with those
governing an underlying zoning district, the standards governing the overlay
district shall control, unless otherwise stated.
C. Where land is classified into multiple overlay zoning districts and the standards
governing one overlay zoning district expressly conflict with those governing
another overlay district, the more restrictive standard shall apply.
3.8.5. - Reserved
3.8.6. - Reserved
3.8.7. - Gateway Corridor Overlay (GCO)
A. Purpose. T he Gateway Corridor Overlay (GCO) district regulations are intended to
enhance the visual appeal of certain thoroughfares in the Town, and to:
1. P reserve and enhance the appearance and operational characteristics of
certain designated roadways that serve as gateways to the Town; and
2. A ddress development issues of special concern along these gateways, with
specific requirements which relate to use, development form, traffic
movement, access, environment, landscaping, visual quality, image, and
aesthetics.
B. Procedure for Establishment of Gateway Corridor Overlay (GCO) Districts.
P rior to establishment of a GCO district for a specific gateway corridor, a gateway
corridor plan for the specific gateway shall be adopted by the Board of
Commissioners. The gateway corridor plan shall describe the conditions,
boundaries, development goals, and standards for the proposed GCO district. The
plan shall, at a minimum, address the following
1. T he arrangement of uses along the corridor which shall create a visually
pleasing impression.
2. T he unique qualities of the corridor, such as significant buildings, views
and vistas, and natural features which lend themselves to special
consideration.
3. T he value of the corridor as an entryway to the Town which can influence
the perception of citizens and persons or businesses considering
investment in the Town.
3-28
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
4. T ransportation conditions on the corridor, including vehicular access,
dedication of right-of-way, driveway limitations, and traffic impact.
5. T he vision and general goals for development along the corridor, and
specific recommendations for regulatory changes to achieve the vision and
development goals.
C. Gateway Corridor Plan Approval. The gateway corridor plan shall be forwarded
to the PB for its review and recommendations. Upon completion of its review, the
plan along with the recommendations of the PB shall be forwarded to the Board
of Commissioners for review. A gateway corridor plan shall be approved by the
Board of Commissioners for a specific gateway corridor before establishment of a
GCO district for the specific corridor.
D. Establishment. The specific GCO district shall be established in accordance with
Section 2.5.20, Zoning Map Amendment, and Section 2.5.15, Text Amendment (as
appropriate), and included as a district in this section.
E. General Standards. GCO district standards for a specific gateway corridor shall
follow the policy direction in the gateway corridor plan approved by the Board of
Commissioners. The GCO district shall, at a minimum, address the following
elements:
1. The name and boundaries of the overlay district.
2. The development along the corridor to which the overlay district applies
(typically all new development and certain expansions and remodels).
3. Any variations from the requirements of the underlying general zoning
district(s).
4. The uses allowed in the district, if appropriate.
5. The development and form standards of the overlay district, including
some or all of the following:
(a) Dimensions (height, setbacks, build-to-lines, etc.);
(b) Streetscape landscaping;
(c) Sidewalks and pedestrian circulation features;
(d) Off-street parking;
(e) Landscaping and tree preservation/reforestation;
(f) Open space set-asides;
(g) Signage;
(h) Exterior lighting;
(i) Building design and form; and
(j) Road access and traffic circulation.
6. The extent to which a general or district-specific standard may be
modified.
3-29
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3.8.8. - Local Historic Overlay (LHO)
A. Purpose. T he purpose of the Local Historic Overlay (LHO) district is to maintain
the historic integrity of certain areas within the town and to:
1. P rotect, safeguard, and conserve the heritage of the town; and
2. P romote the sound and orderly preservation of historic areas within the
town which embody important elements of the social, economic, political
or architectural history of the town, region, state or nation, for the
education, pleasure and enrichment of all citizens.
B. Establishment and Applicability. T he following actions shall occur prior to the
Town’s initial designation of a LHO district, or any amendment of Official Zoning
Map boundaries affecting an existing LHO district.
1. Local Designation Report. T he local HPC shall prepare and adopt a local
designation report which shall:
(a) D escribe the boundaries of the newly proposed or amended LHO
district; and
(b) D escribe the significance of the buildings, structures, features, sites,
or surroundings in terms of their historic, prehistoric, architectural
or cultural importance, integrity of design, setting, workmanship,
materials, feeling and/or association.
2. Local Designation Report Recommendations
(a) Local Historic Preservation Commissioner. T he local HPC shall
forward the local designation report and its recommendation to the
North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources (NCDCR) for its
review and comment.
(b) NCDCR
1. B ased on the local designation report, the NCDCR, acting
through the State Historic Preservation Officer, or a designee,
shall make an analysis of, and recommendation concerning
the proposed LHO district, and shall submit its
recommendation to the Board of Commissioners.
2. F ailure of the NCDCR to submit its recommendation to the
Board of Commissioners within 30 calendar days after receipt
of a written request for such from the Town, shall relieve the
Board of Commissioners of its responsibility to await the
recommendation.
(c) Planning Board. P rior to action by the Board of Commissioners, the
Planning Board shall review the recommendations of the HPC and
the NCDCR, and forward its comments and recommendation to the
Board of Commissioners.
(d) Other Reviewers. T he Board of Commissioners may, prior to taking
any action, refer the local designation report and proposed
3-30
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
boundaries to other local preservation groups or other interested
parties for comment and recommendation.
3. Action by Board of Commissioners
(a) A fter receipt of the comments and recommendations of the HPC,
NCDCR - if received in accordance with the procedures set forth in
this section - and the PB, the Board of Commissioners, at its
discretion, may determine whether to proceed with the initiation of
an application for a zoning map amendment for a LHO district, in
accordance with Section 2.5.20, Zoning Map Amendment.
(b) T he Board of Commissioners shall decide a zoning map
amendment application to classify land as a LHO district only after
determining that the proposed district is of special significance in
terms of its historic, prehistoric, architectural or cultural importance,
and possesses integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials,
feeling and/or association.
4. Architectural and Historic Guidelines
(a) Purpose. A rchitectural and historic guidelines provide a framework
from which recommendations may be offered about the
appropriateness of exterior treatment in an LHO.
(b) Adoption. F ollowing the adoption of an LHO by Board of
Commissioners and prior to the effective date of the LHO, the HPC
shall adopt detailed architectural and historic guidelines applicable
to proposals within a designated LHO. Review and comment by
Board of Commissioners shall be required before the HPC adopts
any such guidelines.
(c) Contents
1. T hese guidelines shall take into account the historic,
architectural, and visual elements of the district.
2. T he guidelines should give consideration to exterior form and
appearance including, but not limited to:
(a) Height;
(b) Setback, orientation, and lot coverage;
(c) Construction materials;
(d) Architectural detailing;
(e) Roof shapes, forms, and materials;
(f) Fenestrations (arrangement of doors and windows);
(g) General form and proportions;
(h) Appurtenant fixtures and features such as lighting;
(i) Structural condition and soundness;
(j) Use of local or regional architectural traditions; and
(k) The effect of trees and other landscape elements.
(d) Amendments. The guidelines may be amended in accordance with
the procedures and standards established for their original
approval.
3-31
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
C. Certificate of Appropriateness Required. A certificate of appropriateness shall
be required in accordance with Section 2.5.4, Certificate of Appropriateness,
whether a building permit is required or not.
D. Dimensional Standards and Exceptions.
1. Buildings erected or altered in a LHO district may use the average setbacks
of existing buildings on the same block face.
2. Variances shall be decided following a recommendation from the HPC and
may be granted only if it is found that the request complies with the intent
of the architectural and historic guidelines of the LHO District.
3. Where the HPC, in considering an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness, finds the number of off-street parking spaces and/or
design standards for parking specified by this Unified Development
Ordinance would render the site incompatible with the historic district
design guidelines and the historic character of the LHO District, it may
provide a recommendation for an Administrative Adjustment in
accordance with Section 2.6.2, Administrative Adjustment.
E. Boundaries of Designated LHO Districts. The exact boundaries of all LHO
Districts are as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
3.8.9. - Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO)
A. Purpose and Intent. T he Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO) district is
established as a means of providing reasonable opportunities for the placement
of manufactured dwellings in the Town’s zoning jurisdiction. More specifically, the
district is intended to:
1. Provide alternative, affordable housing opportunities for low and
moderate-income residents in residential areas by allowing for the use of
manufactured dwellings.
2. Establish requirements designed to assure acceptable similarity in exterior
appearance between manufactured dwellings and single-family dwellings
constructed on adjacent or nearby lots.
3. Protect property values and preserve the character and integrity of the
community or individual neighborhoods within the community
4. Require new manufactured dwellings to meet the minimum requirements
for manufactured dwellings in Section 4.3.2.B.4, Manufactured Dwelling.
B. Establishment.
1. Manufactured Housing Overlay (MHO) districts shall be established in
accordance with Section 160A-383.1 of the North Carolina General Statutes
and Section 2.5.20, Zoning Map Amendment.
2. MHO districts are permitted in accordance with Table 4.1.9, Principal Use
Table.
3-32
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
3. In requesting the establishment of an MHO district, an applicant shall
present factual information to ensure, in the discretion of the Board of
Commissioners, that property values of surrounding lands are protected,
that the character and integrity of the neighborhood are adequately
safeguarded, and the proposed MHO district is consistent with these
standards.
4. To assure acceptable similarity in exterior appearance between proposed
manufactured dwellings and dwellings that are constructed on adjacent or
nearby land, an applicant may, for illustrative purposes only, present
examples of the types and design of such proposed dwellings.
C. Overlay District Standards. Land to be designated with a MHO district
classification shall consist of:
1. 10 contiguous lots occupying at least 90,000 square feet in total area,
excluding public street rights-of-way; or
2. Unsubdivided land occupying at least 120,000 square feet in total area,
excluding public street rights-of-way.
D. Development Authorized.
1. Land within an MHO district may accommodate the following types of
uses:
(a) A single manufactured home on an individual lot configured in
accordance with Section 4.3.2.B.4, Manufactured Dwelling;
(b) A principal use authorized in the underlying zoning district in
accordance with Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table;
(c) An accessory or temporary use associated with an allowed principal
use.
2. Manufactured homes located on lots or sites outside of a MHO district shall
be considered nonconforming in accordance with Section 8.2,
Nonconforming Uses.
3.8.10. - Reserved
3.8.11. - Reserved
3.8.12. - Watershed Overlay (WSO)
A. Purpose. T he purpose of a Watershed Overlay (WSO) district is to ensure the
availability of public water supplies at a safe and acceptable level of water quality,
to ensure protection of public water supplies for recreational and aesthetic
purposes, to minimize sedimentation of streams, and to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of Aberdeen. More specifically, these standards
are intended to:
3-33
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 3 : Zoning Districts (v3a)
1. E nsure compliance with all applicable federal and state laws governing the
protection of water supply watersheds and the provision of stormwater
management to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety,
environment and general welfare.
2. P rotect those portions of designated water supply watersheds which lie
closest to existing and proposed water supply reservoirs from activities
which could degrade water quality in the reservoirs;
3. M inimize pollution entering municipal reservoirs to assure the public
health and the public provision of a continued supply of safe drinking
water thereby protecting the water quality of these water supply reservoirs
and promoting public awareness; and
4. E ncourage a low intensity of land development in the most sensitive
portions of the water supply watersheds (Watershed Critical Areas) thereby
reducing the risks to water quality posed by higher density residential and
nonresidential uses.
B. Standards. S ee Section 6.2, Watershed Protection, for the WSO district standards.
3-34
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
Chapter 4 : Uses
4.1. - Principal Use Table 4- 2
4.1.1. - Use Table Structure 4- 2
4.1.2. - Uses Permitted By-Right 4- 2
4.1.3. - Uses Requiring Special Use Review 4- 2
4.1.4. - Uses Requiring Overlay District 4- 2
4.1.5. - Prohibited Uses 4- 2
4.1.6. - District Use Prohibition 4- 3
4.1.7. - Additional Standards 4- 3
4.1.8. - Unlisted Uses 4- 3
4.1.9. - Principal Use Table 4- 3
4.2. - Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types 4- 10
4.2.1. - Purpose 4- 10
4.2.2. - Organization of Uses 4- 10
4.2.3. - Agricultural Use Classification 4- 11
4.2.4. - Residential Use Classification 4- 12
4.2.5. - Institutional Use Classification 4- 17
4.2.6. - Commercial Use Classification 4- 27
4.2.7. - Industrial Use Classification 4- 35
4.3. - Use Standards 4- 42
4.3.1. - Agriculture Uses 4- 42
4.3.2. - Residential Uses 4- 42
4.3.3. - Institutional Uses 4- 47
4.3.4. - Commercial Uses 4- 55
4.3.5. - Industrial Uses 4- 59
4.4. - Accessory Structures and Uses 4- 64
4.4.1. - Accessory Structures and Uses 4- 64
4.4.2. - Procedure for Establishment 4- 64
4.4.3. - General Standards 4- 64
4.4.4. - Standards for Accessory Structures 4- 65
4.4.5. - Standards for Specific Accessory Uses 4- 66
4.5. - Temporary Uses 4- 72
4.5.1. - Purposes 4- 72
4.5.2. - Applicability 4- 73
4.5.3. - Standards for Specific Temporary Uses 4- 74
4-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
4.1. - Principal Use Table
4.1.1. - Use Table Structure
A. General. T able 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, lists principal use types and indicates for
each zoning district whether the principal use type is permitted by right,
permitted as a special use, or permitted only with an overlay district. Also, the
principal use table references district use prohibitions and additional standards
that are applicable to a specific use type.
B. Conditional Zoning Districts. The range of permitted uses in a conditional
zoning district shall be the same as the range of permitted uses within the
corresponding general zoning district unless the conditions associated with the
approved conditional zoning district further limit them. In no instance shall the
range of permitted uses in a conditional zoning district exceed the range of
permitted uses in the corresponding general zoning district.
4.1.2. - Uses Permitted By-Right
A "P" in a cell of the principal use table indicates that the specific use type is permitted
by right in the corresponding zoning district, subject to compliance with the additional
standards referenced in the principal use table.
4.1.3. - Uses Requiring Special Use Review
An "S" in a cell of the principal use table indicates that the specific use type is permitted
in the corresponding zoning district only upon approval of a special use in accordance
with Section 2.5.12, Special Use, and any additional standards referenced in the principal
use table.
4.1.4. - Uses Requiring Overlay District
An "O" in a cell of the principal use table indicates the specific use type is permitted in
the corresponding zoning district only upon approval of an overlay district and any
additional standards referenced in the principal use table.
4.1.5. - Prohibited Uses
A. A blank cell in the principal use table indicates that the specific use type is
prohibited in the corresponding zoning district.
B. The following principal uses are prohibited throughout the Town’s zoning
jurisdiction in all zoning districts:
4-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
a. Explosive manufacturing;
b. Leather and leather products manufacturing involving tanning; and
c. Slaughter or rendering of animals.
C. Section 6.2.13, Standards Applicable in the WSO , identifies uses prohibited within
general watershed areas of the WSO.
4.1.6. - District Use Prohibition
Regardless of whether the principal use table lists a specific use type as a permitted use,
the specific use type may be prohibited in accordance with the overlay district or
sub-district provisions in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts. The principal use table references
prohibitions for a specific use type in the column titled "District Use Prohibitions."
4.1.7. - Additional Standards
A. W hen a specific use type is permitted in a zoning district, there may be additional
standards that are applicable. Such additional standards are referenced in the
principal use table column titled "Additional Standards." These standards shall
apply to a specific use type regardless of the zoning district, unless otherwise
specified.
B. In addition, use types are also subject to the district standards listed in the
applicable zoning district in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts.
4.1.8. - Unlisted Uses
For land uses not listed in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, not listed as a part of a use
category or use type, and not listed as a prohibited use in Section 4.1.5, Prohibited Uses,
the Planning and Inspections Director shall determine which use category or use type to
which the land use belongs in accordance with Section 2.6.4, Determination.
4.1.9. - Principal Use Table
4-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
Table 4.1.9 : Principal Use Table
P : Permitted | S : Permitted with Special Use | O : Overlay | D : Development Type
Permitted uses may be subject to additional zoning district standards in Chapter 3
Use Category Use Type
Residential Business Special Additional
R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10 RM-6 OI NC CB GC LI HI AGR Standards
Agricultural Use Classification
Agriculture
Agriculture production (crops) P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.1.A.1
Agriculture production (livestock) P P P P
Residential Use Classification
Common elements
recreation Common Elements Recreation P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.2.A.1
Household Living
Duplex Dwelling P P P P P 4.3.2.B.1
Family Care Home P P P P P P P 4.3.2.B.2
Live/Work Dwelling P P P 4.3.2.B.3
Manufactured Dwelling O P 4.3.2.B.4
Multi-family Dwelling P P P 4.3.2.B.5
Single-family Attached Dwelling P P P P P P P 4.3.2.B.6
Single-family Detached Dwelling P P P P P
Triplex/Quadplex P P P P P 4.3.2.B.7
Group Living
Dormitory, private P P 4.3.2.C.1
Fraternity or Sorority House
Rooming House S S S
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) S S S 4.3.2.C.2
Social Service Facility, Major S S S 4.3.2.C.3
4-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
P : Permitted | S : Permitted with Special Use | O : Overlay | D : Development Type
Permitted uses may be subject to additional zoning district standards in Chapter 3
Use Category Use Type
Residential Business Special Additional
R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10 RM-6 OI NC CB GC LI HI AGR Standards
Group Living Social Service Facility, Minor S P P 4.3.2.C.3
Life Care
Assisted Living Facility P P P 4.3.2.D.1
Continuing Care Retirement Community P P P 4.3.2.D.2
Long-term Care/Skilling Nursing Facility P P P
Institutional Use Classification
Civic
Assembly, Major P P 4.3.3.A.1
Assembly, Minor P P P P 4.3.3.A.1
Cemetery, Columbarium, Mausoleum P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3.A.2
Cultural Facility, Major P P
Cultural Facility, Minor P P P P
Correctional Facility S S S
Government Facility P P P P P P P
Public Recreation Facility P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3.A.3
Public Safety Facility, Major P P P P P P P
Public Facility, Minor P P P P P P P P P P P P
Day Care Day Care Center S S S S S P P P P P P 4.3.3.B.1
Education
College or University P P
Other Post-Secondary Educational
Facility
P P P 4.3.3.C.1
School, Major S S S S S S 4.3.3.C.2
4-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
P : Permitted | S : Permitted with Special Use | O : Overlay | D : Development Type
Permitted uses may be subject to additional zoning district standards in Chapter 3
Use Category Use Type
Residential Business Special Additional
R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10 RM-6 OI NC CB GC LI HI AGR Standards
Education
School, Minor S S S S S P P P S 4.3.3.C.2
Truck Driving School P P
Health Care
Hospital P
Medical Care Facility, Major S P P P
Medical Care Facility, Minor P P P P
Specialty Hospital P
Religious Institution Religious Institution P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3.D.1
Transportation
Airport S S
Park and Ride Facility P P P P P P P 4.3.3.E.1
Passenger Terminal, Surface
Transportation
P P P P P P
Taxi or Limousine Service Facility P P P
Utilities
Communication or Broadcasting
Facilities
P P P P P
Solar Array P P P 4.3.3.F.1
Utility Facility, Major P P 4.3.3.F.2
Utility Facility, Minor P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3.F.2
Wireless Telecommunication Facility,
Major
S S S S S S S S S S S S 4.3.3.F.3
Wireless Telecommunication Facility,
Minor
P P P P P P P P P P P P 4.3.3.F.3
4-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
P : Permitted | S : Permitted with Special Use | O : Overlay | D : Development Type
Permitted uses may be subject to additional zoning district standards in Chapter 3
Use Category Use Type
Residential Business Special Additional
R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10 RM-6 OI NC CB GC LI HI AGR Standards
Commercial Use Classification
Adult Entertainment Adult Entertainment P 4.3.4.A
Animal Care
Animal Care, Major P P P P 4.3.4.B.1
Animal Care, Minor P P P P P P P
Eating
Establishments
Bar or Nightclub P P P 4.3.4.C.1
Restaurant, Major P P 4.3.4.C.2
Restaurant, Minor P P P P
4.3.4.C.2 &
5.14.3
Offices
Office, Major P P P P P
Office, Minor P P P P P
Parking, Commercial Parking, Commercial P P P P P P
Personal Services
Personal Service, Major P P
Personal Service, Minor D D P P P 5.14.3
Repair Establishment P P P P 4.3.4.D.1
Tattoo/Body Piercing P P 4.3.4.D.2
Recreation and
Leisure
Amusement and Entertainment P P
Amusement Parks P P 4.3.4.E.1
Sports and Fitness Centers P P P P P 4.3.4.E.2
Retail Sales
Bulky Item Sales P 4.3.4.F.1
Convenience Store with Fuel Sales S P
4-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
P : Permitted | S : Permitted with Special Use | O : Overlay | D : Development Type
Permitted uses may be subject to additional zoning district standards in Chapter 3
Use Category Use Type
Residential Business Special Additional
R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10 RM-6 OI NC CB GC LI HI AGR Standards
Retail Sales
Flea Market/Antique Mall, Indoor P 4.3.4.F.2
Pawnshop P P P
Retail Sale, Large P P 5.14.4
Retail Sales, Major P P 4.3.4.F.3
Retail Sales, Minor P P P P
4.3.4.F.3. &
5.14.3
Truck Stop P P 4.3.4.F.4
Vehicle
Establishments
Vehicle Establishment, Major P P 4.3.4.G.1
Vehicle Establishment, Minor P P P 4.3.4.G.1
Visitor
Accommodation
Bed & Breakfast S S S S P P P P P 4.3.4.H.1
Hotels or Motels P P P
Industrial Use Classification
Extractive Industry Extractive Industry S 4.3.5.A.1
Industrial Services
Industrial Service, Major P
Industrial Service, Minor P P
Manufacturing and
Production
Asphalt Plants S 4.3.5.B.1
Manufacturing, Major P
Manufacturing, Minor P P
Microbrewery, Micro Distillery or Micro
Winery
P P P P P
4-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
P : Permitted | S : Permitted with Special Use | O : Overlay | D : Development Type
Permitted uses may be subject to additional zoning district standards in Chapter 3
Use Category Use Type
Residential Business Special Additional
R-30 R-20 R-15 R-10 RM-6 OI NC CB GC LI HI AGR Standards
Manufacturing and
Production
Motion Picture Production P P P
Warehousing and
Freight Movement
Freight Movement P P P
Self-storage, External Access P P 4.3.5.C.1
Self-storage, Internal Access P P P 4.3.5.C.2
Warehouse and Distribution P P 4.3.5.C.3
Waste Related
Service
Hazardous Waste Disposal S
Landfill, Major S S 4.3.5.D.1
Landfill, Minor S S 4.3.5.D.1
Recycling Center (Major and Minor) P P S 4.3.5.D.2
Salvage or Junk Yard S 4.3.5.D.3
Transfer Station S 4.3.5.D.4
Wholesale Trade
Toxic Chemicals or Substances,
Pesticides or Fertilizers
S 4.3.5.E.1
Wholesale, Major P 4.3.5.E.2
Wholesale, Minor P P S 4.3.5.E.2
4-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
4.2. - Use Classifications, Use Categories, and
Use Types
4.2.1. - Purpose
This section is intended to provide a systematic framework for identifying, describing,
categorizing, consolidating, and distinguishing land uses to determine how a specific
land use activity, or combination of activities, is to be considered when applying the
principal use table and other provisions in this Unified Development Ordinance.
4.2.2. - Organization of Uses
Section 4.2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types, organizes principal uses
by use classifications, use categories, and use types to provide a systematic basis for
identifying, describing, categorizing, consolidating, and distinguishing land uses to
determine whether a specific use is permitted in a particular zoning district.
A. Use Classifications. The use classifications identify broad classifications of land
use and include agricultural uses, residential uses, institutional uses, commercial
uses, and industrial uses. Use classifications are further broken down into a series
of general "use categories" and specific "use types."
B. Use Categories. The use categories describe the major sub-groups of the
respective use classifications and are based on common functional, product, or
physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of
customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered, and site
conditions. For example, the Residential Use Classification is divided into the
Common Elements Recreation, Household Living, Group Living, and Life Care use
categories. Use categories are further broken down into a series of individual "use
types".
C. Use Types. The specific use types are included in the respective use category.
They identify the specific principal uses that are considered to fall within
characteristics identified in the use category. For example, family care homes,
live/work dwellings, manufactured dwellings, multi-family dwellings, single-family
attached dwellings, single-family detached dwellings, and duplex dwellings are
use types in the Household Living Use Category.
D. Development with Multiple Principal Uses. When all principal uses of a
development fall within one use category, the entire development is assigned to
that use category. A development that contains a coffee shop, bookstore, and
4-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
bakery, for example, would be classified in the Retail Sales Use Category because
all of the development's principal uses are in that use category. When the
principal uses of a development fall within different use categories, then each
principal use is classified in the applicable use category and each use is subject to
applicable regulations for that use category. Developments with multiple
principal uses, such as shopping centers, shall incorporate only those use types
allowed in the applicable zoning district.
E. Table Organization. The characteristics, use types, and exceptions of each of the
use categories in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table, are listed in the following tables.
Table 4.2.2.E, Use Classification, below shows how the information is organized.
Table 4.2.2.E : Use Classification
Use Category
1. Characteristics:
Listing of use category characteristics
2. Use Types:
(a) Use Type Use type description
1) Major/minor use type description
3. Exceptions
Listing of uses that are not included in the use category
4.2.3. - Agricultural Use Classification
Table 4.2.3, Agricultural Use Classification, sets out the use categories and use types
included in the agricultural use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.3
describes the characteristics of the agriculture use category and defines the use types
included within the use category.
Table 4.2.3 : Agriculture Use Classification
A. Agriculture
1. Characteristics:
The Agriculture Use Category includes use types related to the production of
field crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental and flowering plants, and the
breeding, or raising of livestock, poultry, swine, or other animals for food or
other marketable products. The Agriculture Use Category also includes
forestry activities related to the planting, management, protection, and
harvesting of trees for timber or other forest products. Examples include
animal confinement facilities (the raising of livestock, dairy cattle, swine, or
poultry in confined areas), animal production and dairying other than in
animal confinement facilities (including fish farms and hatcheries), crop
production (including the raising of grains, vegetables, fruits, nuts, cotton,
and tobacco), community gardens, forestry and logging, and greenhouse,
nursery, and floriculture production.
4-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
2. Use Types:
(a) Agricultural production (crops)
Active and ongoing agricultural
activities, including agronomy,
biotechnical agriculture (including
education parks for biotechnical
agriculture or a demonstration farm),
community gardens, forestry, and
similar uses.
(b) Agricultural production (livestock)
Active and ongoing agricultural
activities related to the raising and
breeding of livestock, including cows,
horses, goats, pigs, fowl, and other
forms of domesticated animals
typically associated with farming
uses.
3. Exceptions
a) The Agriculture Use Category does not include the processing of animal
or plant products for wholesale or retail sale purposes, which is generally
considered a manufacturing and production use.
b) Retail nurseries are considered Retail Sales.
4.2.4. - Residential Use Classification
Table 4.2.4, Residential Use Classification, sets out the use categories and use types
included in the residential use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.4
describes the characteristics of the common elements recreation, household living,
group living, and life care use categories and defines the use types included within each
use category.
Table 4.2.4 : Residential Use Classification
A. Common Elements
Recreation
1. Characteristics:
Common Elements Recreation includes recreational facilities that are
located in common elements provided in areas of common ownership
under the control of an owners association.
2. Use Types:
(a) Common Elements Recreation
A recreational facility that is located
in common elements provided in
areas of common ownership under
the control of an owners association.
3. Exceptions
a) None
B. Household Living 1. Characteristics:
4-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
Household Living includes use types that provide for the residential
occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Tenancy is arranged on a
month-to-month or longer basis. Accessory uses commonly associated with
household living are recreational activities, raising of pets, hobbies, and
parking of the occupants' vehicles.
2. Use Types:
(a) Duplex Dwelling
A single structure comprised of 2
dwelling units that share common
vertical walls or horizontal
floors/ceilings. Both dwelling units
are on the same lot.
(b) Family Care Home
A home for 6 or fewer persons that
provides room and board, personal
care, and habilitation services in a
family environment for the residents,
who have a temporary or permanent
physical, emotional, or mental
disability (including, but not limited
to, mental retardation, cerebral palsy,
epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight
impairments, emotional
disturbances, and orthopedic
impairments, but not including
mentally ill persons who are
dangerous to others as defined in
North Carolina General Statutes
Section 122C-3(11)b.) See North
Carolina General Statutes Section
168-21.
(c) Live/Work Dwelling
A structure or portion of a structure
combining a dwelling unit with an
integrated nonresidential work space
typically used by 1 or more of the
residents. The nonresidential work
space is found on the building's
ground floor.
(d) Manufactured Dwelling
A dwelling constructed after June 15,
1976 that is composed of one or more
components, each of which was
substantially assembled in a
manufacturing plant and designed to
be transported on its own chassis. It
bears a valid seal indicating
conformance with the construction
standards promulgated by the US
Department of Housing and Urban
Development that were in effect at
the time of its construction.
4-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(e) Multi-family Dwelling
A dwelling comprised of more than 4
dwelling units that share common
vertical walls or horizontal
floors/ceilings (or both) that are not
on individual lots. Examples include
apartments and condominiums.
(f) Single-family Attached Dwelling
A dwelling unit that is physically
attached to 1 or more dwelling units,
each on its own lot. Individual lots
may or may not be surrounded by a
larger tract that incorporates shared
parking, recreation features, or
access. The larger tract may or may
not be owned in common by the
landowners of individual lots.
Examples include townhouses, patio
homes, and row houses.
(a) Single-family Detached Dwelling
A dwelling containing 1 dwelling unit
that is occupied by 1 family and that
is not physically attached to any other
principal structure on an individual
lot. For regulatory purposes, this term
includes modular residential
buildings meeting North Carolina
State Building Code, and does not
include manufactured dwellings,
recreational vehicles, or other forms
of temporary or portable housing.
(h) Triplex/Quadplex Dwelling
A type of residential structure that
includes 3 or 4 individual dwelling
units located on 1 lot or configured so
that each unit is on its own individual
lot.
3. Exceptions
a) None
B. Group Living
1. Characteristics:
Group Living includes use types that provide for the residential occupancy of
a building by a group. The occupancy of the building may be larger than
found in Household Living. Tenancy is arranged on a monthly or longer
basis. Generally, group living development has a common eating area for
residents. The residents may receive care, training, or treatment. Accessory
uses may include recreational facilities, dining facilities, and parking of
vehicles for occupants and staff.
2. Use Types:
4-14
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(a) Dormitory, Private
A residential facility, not located on a
campus, which is established directly
or indirectly in association with a
college, business college, trade
school, or university for the purpose
of housing students registered and
attending the institution. Typically it
includes bedrooms with shared
bathrooms and other shared living
spaces. A private dormitory may
contain food preparation and eating
facilities primarily for the use of its
occupants.
(b) Fraternity or Sorority House
A building used as group living
quarters for students of a college,
university, or seminary, who are
members of a fraternity or sorority
that has been officially recognized by
the college, university, or seminary
but is not located on the campus
with which it is associated. Accessory
uses may include sleeping areas,
cooking facilities, and areas for
meeting and socializing.
(c) Rooming House
A dwelling that provides rental
accommodations to tenants in up to
5 individual rooms for periods of 1
week or longer. The dwelling is
accessed by a shared entry with a
common kitchen. Meals may be
provided to the tenants.
(d) Single Room Occupancy (SRO)
A building that provides rental
accommodations to tenants in more
than 5 individual rooms for periods of
1 week or longer. The rooms may
have cooking facilities and private
bathrooms.
(a) Social Service Facility
A residential facility with support and
supervisory personnel that provides
temporary room and board,
housekeeping, personal care, or
rehabilitation services for those
needing emergency services,
post-incarceration services, or drug or
alcohol rehabilitation assistance (but
not including those with mental
illness who are dangerous to others).
Examples include homeless shelters,
4-15
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
orphanages, shelters for victims of
domestic abuse, crisis centers,
halfway houses, and drug and alcohol
treatment facilities.
1) Major - Social service facilities that
provide assistance for 7 or more
patrons.
1) Minor - Social service facilities that
provide assistance for 6 or fewer
patrons.
3. Exceptions
a) Extended stay hotels are considered Visitor Accommodations.
b) Family care homes are considered Household Living.
B. Life Care
1. Characteristics:
The life care use category includes use types that provide services for elderly
people, including a wide range of services for aging or disabled residents,
including room and board, housekeeping, personal care, medical care, and
end-of-life care. Such uses may include a spectrum of housing options from
independent living to assisted living to dependent living for residents.
Accessory uses may include common dining facilities, laundries,
transportation, recreation, and on-site retail or personal services intended
solely for residents, their guests, or employees.
2. Use Types:
(a) Assisted Living Facility
A residential facility with support and
supervisory personnel for the elderly
that provide rooms, meals, personal
care, and supervision of
self-administered medication. They
may provide other services such as
recreational and social activities,
financial services, transportation,
laundry, and other services
appropriate for the residents and
designed to provide a relatively
independent lifestyle. Examples
include congregate care and rest
homes.
(b) Continuing Care Retirement
Community (CCRC)
A CCRC is a retirement community
configured as a single unified
campus that includes independent
living dwellings, assisted living
facilities, and skilled nursing facilities
that are owned and operated by a
private company that provides a
continuum of care to residents of the
community. A CCRC may include
4-16
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
on-site dining, medical care, and
recreation and social facilities in
addition to guest lodging and
employee housing.
(c) Long-term Care/Skilled Nursing
Facility
An institution that is licensed or
approved to provide health care
under skilled medical supervision for
24 or more consecutive hours.
Examples include restorative services,
nursing homes, and hospice homes.
3. Exceptions
a) None
4.2.5. - Institutional Use Classification
Table 4.2.5, Institutional Use Classification, sets out the use categories and use types
included in the institutional use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table
4.2.5 describes the characteristics of the civic, day care, education, health care, religious
institutions, transportation, and utilities use categories and defines the use types
included within each use category.
Table 4.2.5 : Institutional Use Classification
A. Civic
1. Characteristics:
The Civic Use Category includes use types of a public, nonprofit, or charitable
nature that provide a local service to people of the community in a variety of
facilities. Uses include meeting areas for civic or fraternal club activities, as
well as indoor facilities used primarily for business or professional
conferences, seminars, and training programs. Generally, such uses are open
to or provide services to members of the general public. This includes, but is
not limited to, assembly facilities, public safety facilities, community and
cultural facilities, and government facilities. Accessory uses may include
parking, training facilities, kitchens/cafeterias, recreation areas, offices,
meeting rooms, storage, food sales or consumption.
2. Use Types:
(a) Assembly
A facility for assembly, including
buildings that primarily provide
meeting areas for civic, fraternal,
business or professional
organizations for conferences,
seminars, recreation, training
programs, sports, or entertainment.
Examples include private clubs or
lodges, YMCA, YWCA, swim and
tennis club, country club, boys and
girls club, meeting facilities,
4-17
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
auditoriums, banquet halls, dinner
theaters, convention centers,
amphitheaters, stadiums, coliseums,
and conference centers
1) Major - An assembly use with more
than 15,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
2) Minor - An assembly use with
15,000 square feet of gross floor area
or less.
(b) Cemetery, Columbarium,
Mausoleum
Uses intended for the burial of the
dead that are dedicated for cemetery
purposes. They may include a
mausoleum or columbarium (a
structure or vault lined with recesses
for cinerary urns).
(c) Cultural Facilities
A use that provides education,
training, or resources of a public,
nonprofit, or charitable nature.
Examples include community
centers, libraries, art galleries, and
museums. Accessory uses may
include offices, meeting rooms, food
preparation, parking, health, and
therapy areas.
1) Major - A cultural facility with more
than 15,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
2) Minor - A cultural facility with
15,000 square feet of gross floor area
or less.
(d) Correctional Facility
Publicly or privately operated
facilities housing persons awaiting
trial or persons serving a sentence
after being found guilty of a criminal
offense. Accessory uses may include
cafeterias, housing for facility staff,
outdoor storage and maintenance
areas, recreational areas, agricultural
facilities, and facilities for the
production of goods or materials
produced for sale by the inmates.
4-18
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(e) Governmental Facility
A facility that provides for the general
operations and functions of local,
state, or federal governments.
Examples include government
operations or maintenance facilities,
school administration offices, and
government offices. Accessory uses
may include offices, maintenance,
storage (indoor and outdoor), fueling
facilities, auditoriums,
communications equipment, and
parking areas.
(f) Public Recreation Facility
A facility that provides recreation
services to the general public.
Examples include recreation centers,
senior centers, community centers,
parks and gardens, and golf courses.
(g) Public Safety Facility
A facility that provides public safety
services to the general public.
Examples include fire stations, police
stations, EMS stations, and
governmental training facilities such
as an outdoor shooting range or fire
training facility. Accessory uses may
include offices, teaching rooms,
meeting areas, food preparation and
consumption areas, sleeping
quarters, communications
equipment, storage, parking, and
maintenance facilities.
1) Major - A public safety facility with
more than 15,000 square feet of gross
floor area, or that includes
maintenance facilities or outdoor
facilities.
2) Minor - A public safety facility with
15,000 square feet of gross floor area
or less.
3. Exceptions
a) Crematoriums are considered Personal Services.
b) Parking lots and structures owned and operated by the government are
considered Commercial Parking.
c) Wastewater treatment plants, potable water treatment plants, utility
substations, water towers and other similar facilities are considered Utilities.
B. Day Care 1. Characteristics:
4-19
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
The Day Care Use Category includes use types that provide care, protection,
and supervision for children or adults on a regular basis away from their
primary residence, and for less than 24 hours a day. Care can include
education and development activities. Care can be provided during daytime
or nighttime hours. Accessory uses include offices, food preparation,
recreation areas, and parking.
2. Use Types:
(a) Day Care Center
A facility, other than an occupied
dwelling, that provides for the care of
more than 5 preschool age, or a
combination of preschool and school
age children under 13 years of age
totaling 9 or more, or 9 or more
adults, who do not reside in the
facility, at least once per week for at
least four hours, but less than 24
hours per day.
3. Exceptions
a) Home day care is considered an accessory use.
b) Drop-in or short-term day care provided in connection with employment
or at a shopping center, recreational facility, religious institution, hotel, or
other principal uses are not considered in the Day Care Use Category.
C. Education
1. Characteristics:
The Education Use Category includes use types that provide for all levels of
education. Examples include elementary, secondary, post-secondary,
technical, and specialized instructional schools.
2. Use Types:
(a) College or University
A public or private institution for
post-secondary education offering
courses in general or technical
education, which operates within
buildings on land owned or leased by
the institution for administrative and
faculty offices, classrooms,
laboratories, chapels, auditoriums,
lecture halls, libraries, student and
faculty centers, athletic facilities,
dormitories, fraternities and
sororities, residential units, and other
facilities which further the
educational mission of the institution
in a campus setting. In no event shall
this definition prohibit a college or
university from engaging in an
activity historically conducted by the
institution.
4-20
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(b) Other Post-Secondary Educational
Facility
A post-secondary school other than a
college or university that provides
on-site training for business,
commercial, and/or trade skills such
as accounting, data processing,
automobile repair, construction skills,
and computer repair. This use type
includes satellite classrooms for
larger colleges and universities.
(c) School
An educational institution that
provides elementary or secondary
education. Accessory uses may
include offices, play areas, cafeterias,
recreational and sport facilities,
auditoriums, and before- or
after-school day care.
1) Major - Any high school or a middle
school designed for 800 or more
students.
2) Minor - A middle school designed
for less than 800 students or an
elementary school, or any
combination thereof designed for
less than 800 students.
(d) Truck Driving School
A specialized instructional school that
provides on-site and on the-road
training in the operation of heavy
trucks, tractor trailers, and transport
vehicles.
3. Exceptions
a) None
D. Health Care
1. Characteristics:
The Health Care Use Category includes use types that provide medical or
surgical care and treatment to patients as well as laboratory services
Accessory uses may include offices, laboratories, laundry facilities, teaching
facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, parking, maintenance facilities, housing
for staff or trainees, and limited accommodations for family members.
2. Use Types:
4-21
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(a) Hospital
An inpatient facility specializing in
giving clinical, temporary, and
emergency services of a medical or
surgical nature to human patients
and injured persons, that is licensed
by State law to provide facilities and
services in surgery, obstetrics, or
general medical practice. Such
facilities may include outpatient
medical or surgical care for the sick or
injured, and related facilities such as
laboratories, training facilities and
central services facilities. Accessory
uses may include staff offices,
cafeterias, parking, and maintenance
facilities.
(b) Medical Care Facility
An outpatient facility where patients
are admitted for examination and
treatment by 1 or more physicians,
dentists, opticians, psychiatrists, or
psychologists. Patients receive
outpatient care only, which may be
provided overnight (as in the case of
sleep disorder centers). Accessory
uses may include sleeping rooms for
care workers and members of
patient's families.
1) Major - A medical care facility with
more than 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
2) Minor - A medical care facility with
10,000 square feet of gross floor area
or less.
(c) Speciality Hospital
A hospital with highly specialized
personnel, equipment, procedures, or
facilities for the treatment of unique
conditions, patients, or specific
ailments. Examples include
psychiatric hospitals, hospitals for
children, hospitals that specialize in
cancer care, or hospitals that focus on
treating particular conditions such as
burns.
3. Exceptions
a) A use type that involves provision of residential care for the elderly is
classified as Life Care.
4-22
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(b) A use type that provides exclusive care and planned treatment or
training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug issues, where patients are residents
and participants in a program are classified as Group Living.
E. Religious Institutions
1. Characteristics:
The Religious Institutions Use Category includes use types that provide
meeting areas for religious activities. Accessory uses may include
kitchens/cafeterias, recreation areas, offices, meeting rooms, and parking.
2. Use Types:
(a) Religious Institution
A place in which worship,
ceremonies, rituals, and education
are held, together with accessory
uses (including locations used for
education and recreation activities),
operated and maintained under the
direction of the religious group.
Examples include churches,
mosques, synagogues, and temples.
Accessory uses may include parking,
caretaker's housing, pastor's housing,
day care, and group living facilities for
persons associated with the religious
organization, such as convents.
3. Exceptions
a) None.
F. Transportation
1. Characteristics:
The Transportation Use Category includes use types that provide for the
landing and takeoff of airplanes and helicopters, and passenger terminals for
surface transportation. Accessory uses may include freight handling areas,
concessions, offices, parking, maintenance, and fueling facilities.
2. Use Types:
(a) Airport
A facility that provides for the landing
and take-off of aircraft, including
helicopters, and all necessary facilities
for the housing, maintenance and
repair of aircraft, passenger services,
security, baggage and freight
movements.
(b) Park and Ride Facility A facility that provides mass
transportation from a parking lot.
(c) Passenger Terminal, Surface
Transportation
A facility where the principal use is
the handling, receiving, transfer, and
discharging of passengers of various
modes of surface transportation.
Examples include terminals for bus,
trolley, railroad, shuttle van, or other
4-23
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
similar vehicular services.
(d) Taxi or Limousine Service Facility
A facility that provides transportation
service via a taxi, limousine, or shuttle,
and includes storage and
maintenance of vehicles.
3. Exceptions
a) Transit route facilities such as bus stops and bus shelters are exempt from
this Ordinance.
G. Utilities
1. Characteristics:
The Utilities Use Category includes both major and minor utilities as well as
wireless telecommunications facilities. Major utilities are infrastructure
services that provide regional or community-wide service. Minor utilities are
neighborhood or subdivision infrastructure services that need to be located
in or near the neighborhood or subdivision where the service is provided.
Communication or broadcasting facilities and wireless telecommunication
facilities are also types of utilities. Services may be publicly or privately
provided. Accessory uses may include offices, parking, monitoring, storage
areas, or data transmission equipment.
2. Use Types:
(a) Communication or Broadcasting
Facilities
A radio, television, or other digital
signal broadcasting facility engaged
in the distribution of audio and/or
video content to a dispersed
audience via any audio or visual mass
communications medium.
(b) Solar Array
A group or series of photovoltaic (or
solar) panels placed to convert solar
radiation into usable direct current
electricity and provide that electricity
to a use on-site or to the larger
electrical network.
(c) Utility Facility
All facilities and equipment related to
the provision, distribution, collection,
transmission, or disposal of water,
stormwater, sanitary sewage, natural
gas, electricity, cable television,
telephones, and wired
telecommunications.
1) Major - A utility providing regional
or community-wide service that
normally entails the construction of
new buildings or structures.
Examples include wastewater
treatment plants, potable water
treatment plants, electrical
generation plants, utility equipment
4-24
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
and storage yards, and wind and
energy facilities.more than 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.
2) Minor - A utility providing a
localized service or network function
that is small in scale and impact.
Examples include natural gas border
stations, utility substations, water
towers, water and sewage pump
stations, stormwater management
facilities, and telephone exchanges.
(d) Wireless Telecommunication
Facility
(d) Wireless telecommunication
facility
A facility engaged in the transmission
or reception of wireless
communications signals consisting of
digital or analog voice and data
information. Wireless
telecommunications facilities include
free-standing towers, antenna, and
ground-based equipment. Antenna
may also be placed on buildings and
other structures such as water
towers, electrical transmission
towers, church steeples, and other
vertical projections. Accessory uses
typically include equipment buildings
and parking areas. Additional
definitions related to concealed
wireless facility (stealth wireless
facility) uses are included in Section
10.4, Definitions.
1) Major - Any application for wireless
facilities and/or wireless support
structures other than those meeting
the definition of a minor wireless
telecommunications facility.
2) Minor - Any application for a
wireless facility and/or wireless
support structure that:
a) Is a new wireless support structure
that is 60 feet or less in height or
collocated on an existing building in
accordance with Section 4.3.3
F.3(e)(4), Collocation of Antennae on
an Existing Building, located in any
zoning district, or
4-25
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
b) Is a new wireless support structure
that is 200 feet or less in height in any
LI or HI zoning district, or
c) Is a concealed wireless facility that
is 80 feet or less, in any residential
zoning district, or
d) Is a concealed wireless facility that
is 150 feet or less in height in any
zoning district except residential, or
e) Is a monopole or replacement pole
located on public property or within
an electrical transmission line
easement or right-of-way, in any
zoning district, or
f) Is considered a substantial
modification, as defined in this
ordinance, of an existing wireless
facility or support structure.
3. Exceptions
a) Distribution poles, transmission poles, ground-based
electrical/telephone/cable vaults, and transmission lines are exempt from
this ordinance.
b) Landfills, recycling and salvage centers, and waste composting uses are
considered Waste-Related Services.
4-26
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
4.2.6. - Commercial Use Classification
Table 4.2.6, Commercial Use Classification, sets out the Use Categories and use types
included in the commercial use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.6
describes the characteristics of the adult entertainment, animal care, eating
establishments, offices, commercial parking, recreation and leisure, retail sales and
services, vehicle establishments, and visitor accommodations use categories; and
defines the use types included within each use category.
Table 4.2.6 : Commercial Use Classification
A. Adult Entertainment
1. Characteristics:
The Adult Entertainment Use Category includes use types that sell,
distribute, or present material or feature performances or other activities
that emphasize the depiction or display of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas as defined by the North Carolina General
Statutes.
2. Use Types:
(a) Adult Entertainment
An adult entertainment use is a
commercial establishment involved
in the provision of services,
entertainment, or sales of goods at
retail intended solely for
consumption by persons over the age
of 18. Adult entertainment means
adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult
video store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude
model studio, sexual encounter
center, or any combination of the
foregoing. Additional definitions
related to adult entertainment uses
are included in Section 10.4,
Definitions.
3. Exceptions
a) None.
B. Animal Care
1. Characteristics:
The Animal Care Use Category is characterized by use types related to the
provision of medical services and treatment to animals, including veterinary
services, animal hospitals, and the boarding of animals related to the
provision of these services.
2. Use Types:
4-27
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(a) Animal Care
A facility for the provision of medical
services and treatment to animals,
including veterinary services, animal
hospitals, and the boarding of
animals related to the provision of
these services. Examples include
animal shelters, kennels, grooming
facilities, animal hospitals, veterinary
offices, and veterinary clinics.
1) Major - Animal care uses that
include outdoor kennels, runs, or
exercise areas.
2) Minor - Animal care uses that do
not include outdoor kennels, runs, or
exercise areas.
3. Exceptions
a) None.
B. Eating
Establishments
1. Characteristics:
The Eating Establishments Use Category includes use types that prepare
and sell food and beverages for immediate or direct on- or off-premise
consumption. Examples include restaurants (including brewpubs) with
indoor and outdoor seating, bars or nightclubs, caterers, restaurants with
drive-through service, specialty eating establishments (ice cream parlors,
bakery shops, dessert shops, juice or coffee houses). Accessory uses may
include bars or cocktail lounges associated with the establishment, decks
and patios for outdoor seating, drive-through facilities, facilities for live
entertainment or dancing, customer and employee parking areas, and valet
parking facilities.
2. Use Types:
(a) Bar or NIghtclub
An establishment primarily devoted
to the sale of alcoholic beverages for
on-site consumption, where the sale
of food is incidental. Activities may
include dancing or other forms of
entertainment (including live
performances that are not
considered adult entertainment uses)
such as billiard tables, darts, and
karaoke.
(b) Restaurant
An establishment that prepares and
sells food and beverages for
immediate or direct on- or
off-premise consumption.
1) Major - A restaurant with a
drive-through.
4-28
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
2) Minor - A restaurant with no
drive-through.
3. Exceptions
a) Banquet halls and dinner theatres are considered Civic.
C. Offices
1. Characteristics:
The Office Use Category includes use types that provide for activities that are
conducted in an office setting and generally focus on business, professional,
or financial services. Examples include offices for conducting the affairs of a
general business establishment, financial services or sales of real estate or
other personal property, investment banking, stock brokerage, investment
services, real estate sales, offices for lawyers, accountants, engineers,
architects, planners, and similar professions. Accessory uses may include
cafeterias, day care facilities, recreational or fitness facilities, parking, or other
amenities primarily for the use of employees in the office.
2. Use Types:
(a) Office
A use where the affairs of a business
professional, or financial service
establishment is conducted.
1) Major - An office with more than
10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
2) Minor - An office with 10,000
square feet of gross floor area or less.
3. Exceptions
a) An office that is part of and located with a principal use in another use
category is considered accessory to the establishment's primary activity. A
headquarter office that is located in conjunction with or adjacent and
related to a principal use in another use category and on the same site is
considered part of the other use category.
(b) Contractors and others who perform services off-site are included in the
Offices Use Category if equipment and materials are not stored outside and
no fabrication, service, or similar work is carried on at the site; otherwise they
are considered as Industrial Service.
(c) Government offices are considered as Government Facilities.
(d) Banks, saving and loans, or credit unions are considered as Personal
Services.
e) Medical care facilities, including doctor and dental offices, are considered
Health Care.
D. Parking, Commercial
1. Characteristics:
The Commercial Parking Use Category includes use types that provide
parking lots and structures that are not accessory to a specific principal use.
A fee may or may not be charged for the right to park at the facility. A
parking facility that provides both accessory parking for a specific principal
use and regular fee parking for persons not connected to the principal use is
4-29
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
also classified as Commercial Parking. Accessory uses may include small
shelters for parking attendants.
2. Use Types:
(a) Parking, Commercial
A parking lot or structure on a site or
portion of a site dedicated to
vehicular ingress and egress,
off-street parking, parking aisles,
internal travel ways, fire lanes, and
other areas dedicated to vehicular
use, but not necessarily including
vehicular storage areas. This
definition includes parking garages
and deck parking.
3. Exceptions
a) Parking facilities that are accessory to a principal use, even if the principal
use leases the parking lot, are considered as an accessory use.
b) Park-and-ride facilities are considered Transportation.
c) Parking structures located on a lot with nonresidential, residential, or
mixed use development are considered as an accessory use.
E. Personal Services
1. Characteristics:
The Personal Service Use Category is characterized by use types related to
the provision of services or product repair for consumers.
2. Use Types:
(a) Personal Service Establishment
An establishment meeting frequent
or recurrent service needs of a
personal nature, including the repair
of small personal items such as shoes,
watches, jewelry, and clothing.
Examples include laundromats,
massage therapy and day spas,
laundry and dry-cleaning pick-up and
drop-off establishments, banks,
savings and loans, credit unions,
photography studios, funeral homes
and crematoriums, mailing or
packaging services, photocopy
services, screen printer,
barber/beauty shops, and tanning
and nail salons.
1) Major - A personal services
establishment with more than 4,000
square feet of gross floor area.
2) Minor - A personal services
establishment with 4,000 square feet
of gross floor area or less.
4-30
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(b) Repair Establishments
An establishment engaged in the
provision of repair services of durable
consumer and households goods,
computers, yard equipment, lawn
mowers, lamps, and small household
appliances.
(c) Tattoo/Body Piercing
Establishment
An establishment whose principal
business activity is the inserting of
permanent markings or coloration, or
the producing of scars, upon or under
human skin or the creation of an
opening in the body of a person so as
to create a permanent hole for the
purpose of inserting jewelry or other
decoration.
3. Exceptions
a) Travel agencies are considered Offices.
(b) Repair of heavy equipment is considered Industrial Services.
F. Recreation and
Leisure
1. Characteristics:
The Recreation and Leisure Use Category is characterized by use types that
provide recreational, amusement, and entertainment opportunities that are
commercial in nature.
2. Use Types:
(a) Amusement and Entertainment
A commercial use that is typically
indoors and that provides
recreational, amusement, and
entertainment opportunities.
Examples include billiards, bingo,
bowling, fortune tellers, sweepstakes,
skating rinks, movie theaters and
coin-operated games.
(b) Amusement Parks
A commercial facility that is typically
outdoors and that provides
entertainment, recreational, and
amusement opportunities. Examples
include water parks, miniature golf,
sports stadiums, commercial golf
courses, horse tracks, vehicle
competition venues, go-kart tracks,
and shooting ranges.
(c) Sports and Fitness Centers
A commercial facility that focuses on
physical fitness, and sports training
and instruction. Examples include
dance and yoga studios, fitness
centers, sports instructional schools,
4-31
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
and martial arts instruction.
3. Exceptions
a) None.
G. Retail Sales
1. Characteristics:
The Retail Sales Use Category includes use types involved in the sale, lease,
or rent of new or used products primarily intended for the general public.
Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, limited assembly,
processing, or repackaging of goods for on-site sale, concessions, ATM
machines, outdoor display/sales areas, and parking. Use types within this use
category are categorized based on their intensity, scale, and function.
2. Use Types:
(a) Bulky Item Sales
An establishment engaged in the
retail sale and display of large or
bulky consumer goods for sale,
including but not limited to truck
camper tops, bed liners,
prefabricated outdoor buildings,
manufactured homes, modular
homes, play equipment, portable
storage containers, or hot tubs.
(b) Convenience Store with Fuel Sales
A small retail establishment selling
items that include but are not limited
to food products, household items,
newspapers and magazines, candy
and beverages, a limited amount of
freshly prepared foods such as
sandwiches and salad for on- or
off-site consumption, and gasoline
sales.
(c) Flea market/Antique Mall, Indoor
Where goods are offered for sale to
the general public by individual
sellers from open or rented sales
areas. Accessory uses may include
parking, concessions, restrooms, and
indoor storage.
(d) Pawnshop
An establishment engaged in loaning
money upon deposit of personal
property. Such uses also store
personal property on site and sell
retail goods.
4-32
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(e) Retail Sales Establishment
An establishment that sells goods
directly to the consumer, where such
goods are available for immediate
purchase and removal by the
purchaser. Examples include stores
selling, leasing, or renting consumer,
home, and business goods, whether
new or used, including art and art
supply stores, audio/video stores,
bicycle sales, book stores, clothing
stores, convenience stores,
department stores, dry good sales,
electronic equipment stores, fabric
shops, furniture stores, florist shops,
garden supply centers, gift shops,
grocery stores, hardware stores,
stores that sell household products,
jewelry stores, office supply stores,
pet and pet supply stores, and
pharmacies. Accessory uses may
include storage of products for sale,
offices, concessions, seating areas,
areas for testing of products prior to
purchase, and provision of
product-related service or repair.
1) Large - A retail sales establishment
with more than 50,000 square feet of
gross floor area on the ground floor
for a single tenant, or more than
150,000 square feet on the ground
floor serving multiple tenants,
including outparcels.
2) Major - A retail sales establishment
between more than 4,000 and
50,000 square feet of gross floor area.
3) Minor - A retail sales establishment
with 4,000 square feet of gross floor
area or less.
(f) Truck stop
An establishment typically engaged
in fuel sales that serve commercial
truck drivers. The use may provide
food, maintenance services,
overnight parking, showering rooms,
laundry facilities, basic convenience
retail items and other services related
to the use.
3. Exceptions
4-33
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
a) Laundry and dry-cleaning plants are considered Industrial Services.
b) Building trade contractors with on-site storage that sell primarily to
contractors and do not have a retail orientation are considered Industrial
Services.
c) Repair and service of automobiles, motorcycles, and light and medium
trucks are considered as Vehicle Establishments.
d) Bars, nightclubs, and similar establishments, as well as bakeries are
considered Eating Establishments.
e) An establishment that provides financial, professional or business services
in an office setting are considered Office.
f) An establishment that involves the sale, distribution, or presentation of
materials or activities emphasizing sexually explicit content are considered
Adult Entertainment.
G. Vehicle
Establishments
1. Characteristics:
The Vehicle Establishments Use Category includes use types involving the
direct sale; rental; storage; and servicing of automobiles, trucks, boats,
motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and other consumer motor vehicles
intended to transport persons or goods over land or water or through the air,
whether for recreation, commerce, or personal transport. Accessory uses
may include offices, sales of parts, maintenance facilities, parking, outdoor
display, and vehicle storage.
2. Use Types:
(a) Vehicle Establishment
Uses involving the direct sales and
service of motorized vehicles.
1) Major - Establishments that are
primarily engaged in vehicle sales,
rental, storage, towing, and major
repair such as transmission, engine
repair and bodywork and repainting.
2) Minor - Establishments that are
primarily engaged in washing cars,
tire sales, minor repair such as
diagnostic work, lubricating, wheel
alignment and inspections, but no
vehicle sales or rental.
3. Exceptions
a) Auto parts and supply sales are considered Retail Sales.
b) Refueling and maintenance facilities for vehicles belonging to a specific
principal use (fleet vehicles) are considered accessory uses if located on the
site of the principal use.
c) Storage of salvage or junk vehicles or parts is considered a Waste-Related
Service.
J. Visitor 1. Characteristics:
4-34
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
Accommodations The Visitor Accommodations Use Category includes use types that provide
lodging units or space for short-term stays for rent, lease, or interval
occupancy. Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational
facilities, limited storage, restaurants, bars, supporting commercial, meeting
facilities, offices, and parking.
2. Use Types:
(a) Bed and Breakfast
A private residence, typically a
single-family detached structure
engaged in the renting of 1 or more
rooms on a daily basis to tourists,
vacationers, or business people
where the provision of meals is
limited to guests only.
(b) Hotel or Motel
A building or group of buildings in
which sleeping accommodations are
offered to the public and intended for
temporary occupancy on an
overnight or short term basis.
Accessory uses may include
restaurants, bars, offices, and onsite
recreational facilities. Some rooms
may include in-room kitchen, dining,
and laundry facilities.
3. Exceptions
a) None.
4.2.7. - Industrial Use Classification
Table 4.2.7, Industrial Use Classification, sets out the use categories and use types
included in the industrial use classification in Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table. Table 4.2.7
describes the characteristics of the extractive industry, industrial services, manufacturing
and production, warehousing and freight movement, waste-related service, and
wholesale trade, and defines the use types included within each use category.
Table 4.2.7 : Commercial Use Classification
A. Extractive Industry
1. Characteristics:
The Extractive Industry Use Category includes use types involving the
extraction, removal, or basic processing of minerals, liquids, gases, or other
natural resources. Such uses also include quarrying, well operation, drilling,
mining, or other procedures typically done at an extraction site. Accessory
uses may include offices, limited wholesale sales, security or caretakers
quarters, outdoor storage, and maintenance facilities. Examples include
quarries, borrow pits, mining, and sand and gravel operations.
2. Use Types:
4-35
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
a) Extractive Industry
A use involving the extraction,
removal, or basic processing of
minerals, liquids, gases, or other
natural resources.
3. Exceptions
a) None.
B. Industrial Service
1. Characteristics:
The Industrial Service Use Category includes use types involving the repair or
servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery equipment,
products, or byproducts. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly
providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and
building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off-site.
Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Examples
include machine shops; tool repair; heavy equipment servicing and repair;
and general industrial service uses. Accessory uses may include limited retail
or wholesale sales, offices, parking, warehousing, and outdoor storage.
2. Use Types:
a) Industrial Service
Establishments engaged in the repair
or servicing of agriculture, industrial,
business, or consumer machinery,
equipment, products, or by-products.
Few customers, especially the
general public, come to the site.
1) Major - Uses that include, but are
not limited to, heavy equipment
sales, rental, or storage; heavy
equipment servicing and repair;
building, heating, plumbing, or
electrical contractors; fuel oil or
bottled gas distributors; septic tank
services; and well drilling.
2) Minor - Uses that include, but are
not limited to tool repair, electric
motor repair; repair of scientific or
professional instruments; and
laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet
cleaning plants, that typically are, or
can be, contained within an enclosed
building.
3. Exceptions
a) Contractors and others who perform services off-site are considered
Offices if equipment and materials are not stored outside and no fabrication,
services, or similar work is carried on at the site.
b) Drop-off and pick-up dry cleaners are considered Personal Services.
C. Manufacturing and 1. Characteristics:
4-36
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
Production The Manufacturing and Production Use Category includes use types
involving the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or
assembly of goods. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are
generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to
order for firms or consumers. This use category also includes custom
industries (establishments primarily engaged in on-site production of goods
by use of hand tools and small-scale equipment). Goods are generally not
displayed or sold on site, but if so, such sales are a subordinate part of total
sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site. Accessory
uses may include retail or wholesale sales, offices, cafeterias, parking,
employee recreation facilities, warehouses, storage yards, repair facilities,
truck fleets, fueling facilities, security and caretaker's quarters.
2. Use Types:
a) Asphalt Plant
An industrial establishment engaged
in the production of asphalt,
macadam, or blacktop for use in the
construction and repair in roadways
and vehicular use areas. The use
involves the stockpiling of sand,
binder and filler, as well as a heater to
mix the ingredients. Accessory uses
may include the storage and
maintenance of paving equipment as
well as the stockpiling of used
asphalt for re-use.
b) Manufacturing
An establishment involved in the
manufacturing, processing,
fabrication, packaging, or assembly of
raw materials, or partially finished
goods.
1) Major - Uses that tend to require
large amounts of bulk or unrefined
materials which are typically
processed and stored outdoors on
the site. These uses require a
significant amount of energy for the
processing of raw materials, and are
likely to generate significant noise,
vibration, dust, glare, heat, odor,
smoke, truck traffic, in the immediate
vicinity of the use. Examples include
manufacturing and assembly of
machinery; manufacturing of
petroleum or petroleum-related
products; rubber and plastics
manufacturing; and adhesives,
coatings, or paint manufacturing.
4-37
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
2) Minor - Uses that involve indoor
processing or assembly of finished or
partially finished goods and do not
require large stockpiles of raw
material. Processing and storage
activities take place within enclosed
buildings, which limit the creation of
noise, vibration, dust, glare, heat,
odor, and smoke. Minor
manufacturing examples include
production or repair of small
electronic parts and equipment;
sewing or assembly of textiles into
consumer products; computer and
electronics assembly; furniture
assembly; and the assembly of
pre-fabricated parts.
c) Microbrewery, Microdistillery, or
Micro Winery
An establishment engaged in the
production and packaging of malt
beverages, wine or spirits for
distribution, retail, or wholesale both
on and off-premise. A microbrewery
is a facility that produces less than
15,000 barrels of beer per year and
sells the majority of the beer it
produces for off-site resale and
consumption. A micro winery
produces less than 100,000 gallons of
wine per year. A micro distillery
produces less than 15,000 gallons of
alcoholic spirits per year. Accessory
uses may include a taproom, seating
areas, ancillary sales of related
merchandise, event space, and
warehouse space for stored product.
d) Motion picture production
An activity involving the design,
production and recording of a
specific type of audiovisual work
wherein the images, when displayed,
give the impression of motion.
Audiovisual works include movies, as
well as slide shows, and video games.
3. Exceptions
a) Manufacturing and production of goods from salvage or composting
material is classified as Waste-Related Services.
D. Warehouse and
Freight Movement 1. Characteristics:
4-38
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
The Warehouse and Freight Movement Use Category includes use types
involving the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms or
businesses. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final
consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales
activity with the customer present. Examples include separate storage
warehouses (used for storage by retail stores such as furniture and appliance
stores); distribution warehouses; cold storage plants; and self-service
storage. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking, outdoor
storage, and maintenance areas.
2. Use Types:
(a) Freight Movement
Uses involved in the short-term
storage and movement of goods for
individuals or businesses. Goods are
generally delivered to other firms or
the final consumer. Accessory uses
may include offices, truck parking, rail
yards, outdoor storage, maintenance
areas, and security facilities.
(b) Self-storage, External Access
A storage building or buildings that
are divided into sections or
compartments for the storage of
business or personal items on a
temporary or long-term basis only
where all units have individual
exterior access.
(c) Self-storage, Internal Access
A storage building or buildings that
are divided into sections or
compartments for the storage of
business or personal items on a
temporary or long-term basis only
where all units have common
internal access.
(d) Warehouse and Distribution
A use engaged in the temporary or
long-term storage and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies,
products for sale or resale,
equipment, or personal goods.
Accessory uses may include offices
and service operations.
3. Exceptions
a) Contractors and others who perform services off-site are considered
Offices if equipment and materials are not stored outside and no fabrication,
services, or similar work is carried on at the site.
b) Use types that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are
considered Waste-Related Services.
E. Waste-Related 1. Characteristics:
4-39
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
Service The Waste-Related Service Use Category includes use types that receive
solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to
another location, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from
the composting of organic material or processing of scrap or waste material.
Examples include recycling centers, salvage and junk yards, transfer stations,
major and minor landfills. Accessory uses may include offices, outdoor
storage, recycling of materials, and repackaging and trans-shipment of
by-products.
2. Use Types:
(a) Hazardous Waste Disposal
The systematic control of the
collection, source separation, storage,
transportation, processing,
treatment, recovery, and disposal of
hazardous wastes. Examples include
halogenated and non-halogenated
solvents, wastewater treatment
sludge, plating bath solutions, metal
heat treating solutions, pesticide
derivatives, distillation residues and
tars, incineration residues, chemicals
from the wood preservation process,
petroleum refinery by-products,
leachate liquids, purification solids,
slags, slurry, or any material listed on
the EPA's F-, K-, P-, or U-lists of listed
hazardous wastes.
(b) Landfill
A site for solid waste disposal.
1) Major - A solid waste or sanitary
landfill designed to collect and store
non hazardous household waste.
2) Minor - A construction and
demolition debris landfill that also
accepts vegetative debris, or Land
Clearing and Inert Debris (LCID).
These facilities could also include a
recycling center as part of the
operation. Accessory uses include
stockpiled bricks and concrete
available for use as inert fill material
and mulch generated on site for
resale.
(c) Recycling Center
A facility used for collection and
processing of recyclable materials.
Processing means the preparation of
materials for efficient shipment, or to
an end-user's specifications, by such
means as baling, briquetting,
4-40
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
compacting, flattening, grinding,
crushing, sorting, shredding, and
cleaning.
1) Major - A recycling center that
handles construction and demolition
debris or LCID.
2) Minor - A recycling center that
handles household recyclables such
as glass, plastic, metal, cardboard,
and paper.
(d) Salvage or Junk Yard
An establishment where junk, waste,
discarded, salvaged, or similar
materials such as old metals, wood,
lumber, glass, paper, rags, cloth,
bagging, cordage, barrels, containers,
appliances, and the like, are brought,
sold, exchanged, baled, packed,
disassembled, stored, or handled.
Examples include automobile
wrecking or automobile wrecking
yards; heavy equipment wrecking
yards; and yards where salvaged
structural steel materials are stored,
handled, and sold.
(e) Transfer Station
A storage or collection facility where
solid waste from collection vehicles is
consolidated and temporarily stored
for subsequent transport to a
permanent disposal site
3. Exceptions
a) Wastewater treatment plants and potable water treatment plants are
considered Utilities.
b) Temporary LCID landfills are considered a temporary use.
F. Wholesale Trade
1. Characteristics:
The Wholesale Trade Use Category includes use types involving the sale,
lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, trade
or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or taking of
orders and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open
to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited. Products
may be picked up on-site or delivered to the customer. Accessory uses may
include offices, product repair, warehouses, minor fabrication services,
outdoor storage, and repackaging of goods.
2. Use Types:
4-41
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(a) Toxic Chemicals or Substances,
Pesticides, or Fertilizers
Establishments primarily engaged in
selling toxic chemicals or substances,
pesticides or fertilizers to retailers,
professional business owners, or to
other wholesalers.
(b) Wholesale
Establishments primarily engaged in
selling merchandise to retailers,
professional business owners, or to
other wholesalers.
1) Major - A wholesale use located in
a building of more than 10,000
square feet of gross floor area, or that
includes outdoor storage, and does
not sell toxic chemicals or
substances, pesticides, or fertilizers.
2) Minor - A wholesale use located in
a building of 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area or less that does not
include outdoor storage and does not
sell toxic chemicals or substances,
pesticides, or fertilizers.
3. Exceptions
a) Establishments that engage primarily in sales to the general public or on a
membership basis are considered Retail Sales.
(b) Establishments that are primarily storing goods with little on-site
business activity are considered Warehousing and Freight Movement.
4.3. - Use Standards
4.3.1. - Agriculture Uses
A. Agriculture
1. Agriculture Production (Crops). S ale of produce grown on-site or on an
adjacent lot that is part of the same agricultural operation is permitted
provided they take place outside the right-of-way.
4.3.2. - Residential Uses
A. Common Elements Recreation
1. Common Elements Recreation. O utdoor courts, swimming pools, and
athletic fields shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line abutting a
residential district.
4-42
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
B. Household Living
1. Duplex Dwelling. D uplex dwellings shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) I t shall face the street from which the dwelling derives its street
address; and
(b) I t shall be limited to a maximum of 1 driveway on a block face in the
R-15 and R-10 districts. Circular driveways are excluded from this
requirement.
2. Family Care Home. A family care home shall not be located within
one-half mile (2,640 feet) of an existing family care home.
3. Live/Work Dwelling. A live/work dwelling shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) T he residential portion of the building shall occupy at least 50
percent of the gross floor area.
(b) T he non-residential portion of the building is limited to an office,
personal service, retail sales, or restaurant, minor use type.
(c) D rive-through facilities are prohibited.
(d) Si gnage for the non-residential portion of the building is allowed in
accordance with the standards in Section 5.7, Signage. In the RM-6
district wall signs shall be allowed in accordance with the OI district,
except that the size shall be limited to a 25 square foot minimum
and maximum of 5 percent of the wall area of the first floor facade.
The sign height shall be limited to the top of the first floor facade.
4. Manufactured Dwelling. A manufactured dwelling shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) I t shall be located on a parcel of land in an MH district;
(b) I t shall be occupied only as a single family dwelling;
(c) I t shall be served by public water and sewer;
(d) I t shall be set up in accordance with the standards established by
the North Carolina Department of Insurance and the most current
version of the State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured/Mobile Homes;
(e) I t shall maintain a minimum width of 16 feet;
(f) I t shall be oriented with the longest axis parallel to the lot frontage,
to the maximum extent practicable;
(g) T owing apparatus, wheels, axles, and transporting lights shall be
removed;
(h) I t shall include a continuous, permanent masonry foundation or
masonry curtain wall of solid brick or brick veneer, unpierced except
for required ventilation and access, installed under the perimeter;
(i) I t shall include stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps, and other
means of entrance and exit that are installed or constructed in
accordance with the standards set by the North Carolina Building
Code. They shall be attached firmly to the primary structure and
anchored securely to the ground;
4-43
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(j) I t shall maintain exterior siding comparable in composition,
appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in
standard residential construction, which consists of one or more of
the following:
(1) V inyl or aluminum lap siding (whose reflectivity does not
exceed that of flat white paint);
(2) C edar or other wood siding;
(3) S tucco siding;
(4) B rick or stone siding.
(k) I t shall maintain a roof pitch with a minimum vertical rise of 3 feet
for each 12 feet of horizontal run;
(l) I t shall include a roof finished with a Class C or better roofing
material that is commonly used in standard residential
construction; and
(m) I t shall provide an eave projection of no less than 6 inches, which
may include a gutter.
5. Multi-Family Dwelling. M ulti-family development shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) In the GC District. Multi-family dwelling is prohibited when
accompanying a mixed use development.
(b) Building Placement
(1) A minimum 10 feet of separation shall be maintained
between all buildings in the development.
(2) B uildings must be set back from private drives and parking
lots a minimum of 10 feet as measured from back of curb or
edge of pavement, if no curb is provided.
(c) Building Length
(1) T he maximum length of a multi-family building shall be 250
linear feet, except in the CB district, where no maximum
length is applied.
(2) N o maximum building length shall be applied if the building
is designed for occupancy by the elderly and it has central
facilities for dining and recreation.
(3) I n no instance shall the provision of a firewall between
different building sections constitute 2 separate buildings for
the purpose of meeting the building length requirement.
(d) Open Space. T he development shall comply with the open space
standards of Section 5.12, Open Space.
(e) Recreation Facilities. A ctive recreation facilities must be placed a
minimum of 50 feet from adjacent land used for single-family
residential purposes.
(f) Pedestrian Connections. P edestrian connections shall be:
(1) P rovided between building entrances, parking lots, public
sidewalks, and recreational facilities;
4-44
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(2) A t least 4 feet in width and constructed of a dustless
all-weather surface; and
(3) C onfigured to connect to parks and greenways that abut the
development, to the maximum extent practicable.
(g) Utilities Underground. A ll electric, communications, water, and
sewer utility lines shall be installed underground.
6. Single-family Attached Dwelling. S ingle-family attached development
shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Building Placement
(1) A minimum ten feet of separation must be maintained
between all buildings in the development.
(2) B uildings must be set back from private drives and parking
lots a minimum of ten feet as measured from back of curb or
edge of pavement, if no curb is provided.
(b) Maximum Number of Units per Building
(1) I n the R-20 and R-15 districts the maximum number of
attached dwellings shall be 2 per building (twin home).
(2) I n the R-10 and RM-6 districts, the maximum number of
attached dwelling units shall be 6 per building.
(3) In the NC and CB districts, the maximum number of
attached dwelling units shall be 8 per building.
(c) Internal Street Setback. O n a street constructed within a
single-family attached development, the street setback may be
reduced to a minimum of 15 feet in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) F or attached units abutting a street or private drive with a
sidewalk, the individual driveways for the units must be a
minimum length of 20 feet as measured from the sidewalk.
(2) F or attached units abutting a street or private drive without a
sidewalk, the individual driveways for the units must be a
minimum length of 20 feet as measured from back of curb or
edge of pavement for streets and drives without a curb.
(d) Open Space. T he development shall be in conformance with the
open space standards of Section 5.12, Open Space.
(e) Recreation Facilities. A ctive recreation facilities must be placed a
minimum of 50 feet from adjacent land used for single-family
residential purposes.
(f) Utilities. A ll electric, communications, water and sewer utility lines
shall be installed underground.
7. Triplex and Quadplex. T riplex and quadplex dwellings shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) T he dwelling shall face the street from which the dwelling derives
its street address.
4-45
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(b) I f a parking lot is provided, it shall be located to the interior side or
rear of the dwelling and not be located between the dwelling and
the street.
(c) W here permitted in the R-10 District, the dwelling shall be limited to
a corner lot.
C. Group Living
1. Dormitory, Private. A private dormitory shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Be located on a lot or site located within a half-mile radius of the
primary college or university it serves.
(b) Calculate density in accordance with Section 10.2.5, Density and
Intensity, (2 bedrooms shall be equivalent to 1 dwelling unit).
2. Single Room Occupancy (SRO). Single room occupancy uses shall comply
with the following standards:
(a) There shall be a minimum of 70 square feet of gross floor area
provided for each rooming unit.
(b) Each building used for a single room occupancy use shall include a
common area in the form of recreation rooms, living rooms,
lounges, dining rooms, or other gathering areas at a rate of 5 square
feet per unit. In no instance shall a single room occupancy use
include less than 250 square feet of common area.
(c) Bathrooms, laundries, hallways, lobby areas, vending areas, and
kitchens shall not be counted as common area.
(d) On site management shall be provided on a 24-hour basis.
(e) Calculate density in accordance with Section 10.2.5, Density and
Intensity: when calculating density for an SRO, a rooming unit of
less than 150 square feet shall be equivalent to ½ a dwelling unit;
and a rooming unit of 150 square feet or more shall be equivalent 1
dwelling unit
3. Social Service Facility (Major and Minor). A social service facility (major
and minor) shall comply with the following standards:
(a) At least 50 square feet of gross floor area shall be provided for each
person being housed or sheltered at the facility.
(b) The facility operator(s) shall provide continuous on-site supervision
during the hours of operation through employee(s) and/or
volunteer(s).
D. Life Care
1. Assisted Living Facility. A major life care facility shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) If provided, shared food preparation, service, and major dining areas
shall be centrally located.
4-46
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(b) Common social and service facilities shall be provided at a
minimum rate of 30 square feet per dwelling or rooming unit in
addition to the minimum amount of required open space.
(c) All facilities and services shall be solely for the use of residents and
their guests.
(d) Facilities for administrative services and limited medical services for
the exclusive use of the residents may be located on the site.
(e) Density should be calculated in accordance with Section 10.2.5,
Density and Intensity: 2 bedrooms shall be equivalent to 1 dwelling
unit.
2. Continuing Care Retirement Community (CCRC). A CCRC shall comply
with the following standards:
(a) Retail, personal service, and institutional uses are intended to serve
residents and their guests, and shall not be located within individual
stand-alone buildings.
(b) The setback requirements of the zoning district are applied only to
the development along the perimeter of the CCRC.
(c) Unless otherwise stated below, a CCRC shall comply with the
development standards in Chapter 5: Development Standards.
(1) The landscaping requirements in Section 5.5, Landscaping
Standards, shall apply to portions of a CCRC within 50 linear
feet of the edge of the development.
(2) A CCRC shall comply with the applicable open space
standards for residential development in Section 5.12, Open
Space, except that the floor area associated with exercise and
rehabilitation facilities shall be credited towards open space
requirements.
(d) Density should be calculated in accordance with Section 10.2.5,
Density and Intensity, (2 bedrooms shall be equivalent to 1 dwelling
unit).
4.3.3. - Institutional Uses
A. Civic
1. Assembly (Major and Minor). A n assembly use (major and minor) shall
comply with the following standards:
(a) H ave street frontage on a street classified higher than a residential
local street.
(b) H ave no access from a residential local street, unless the use is
located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street.
(c) O utdoor courts, swimming pools, and athletic fields shall be located
at least 50 feet from any lot line abutting a residential district.
(d) A ssembly uses in residential districts shall be on a lot of at least 2
acres.
4-47
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(e) A ssembly uses with permanent seating for 1,000 or more shall
require a special use in accordance with Section 2.5.12, Special Use.
(f) An assembly use within the Central Business District shall not be
located within 400 feet of an existing assembly use, measured as a
straight line from lot line to lot line.
2. Cemetery, Columbarium, Mausoleum. A cemetery shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) B e located on a lot or site at least 3 acres in area;
(b) P rovide space for on-site parking and maneuvering of funeral
processions;
(c) H ave street frontage on a street classified higher than a residential
local street;
(d) H ave no access from a residential local street, unless the use is
located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street;
and
(e) E nsure interments take place at least 50 feet from a lot line and
comply with the requirements of State law.
3. Public Recreation Facility. Outdoor courts, swimming pools, and athletic
fields shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line abutting a
residential district.
B. Day Care
1. Day Care Center. A day care center shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Meet all applicable State licensing requirements;
(b) Have street frontage on a street classified higher than a residential
local street;
(c) Have no access from a residential local street; unless the use is
located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street;
(d) Outdoor recreation areas shall:
(1) Be located behind the front building line of the principal
building;
(2) Be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least 4 feet in
height; and
(3) Be safely segregated from parking, loading, or service areas.
(e) Screen outdoor recreation areas adjacent to a residential district
with an opaque fence, wall, or other allowed method in Section
5.6.6., Screening Methods, to a height of 6 feet above grade level;
(f) If located in a residential district, signage is limited to 1 monument
sign with a maximum area of 24 square feet and a maximum height
of 6 feet.
C. Education
1. Other Post-Secondary Educational Facility. Facilities within a
post-secondary school which generate significant noise or fumes, such as
4-48
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
auto body or engine repair, industrial/auto body painting, or
manufacturing processes, and that are adjacent to a residential district
shall be at least 100 feet from any lot line abutting the residential district.
2. School (Major and Minor). A school (major and minor) shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) Have street frontage and gain primary access on a street classified
higher than a residential local street.
(b) Have no access from a residential local street, unless the use is
located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street.
D. Religious Institutions.
1. Residential Districts. A religious institution in a residential district on a lot
of 3 acres in area or larger shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Have street frontage and gain primary access on a street classified
higher than a residential local street.
(b) Have no access from a residential local street, unless the use is
located on a corner lot with street frontage on a thoroughfare street.
2. In the CB District. A religious institution within the Central Business
District shall not be located within 400 feet of an existing religious
institution, measured as a straight line from lot line to lot line.
E. Transportation
1. Park and Ride Facility. A park and ride facility shall not front on or gain
access from a residential local street.
F. Utilities
1. Solar Array. A solar array use shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Be on a site of at least 1 acre in area;
(b) Signage shall be limited to ownership and contact information, and
any other information required by government regulation.
Commercial advertising is prohibited. Notwithstanding, nothing in
this section shall prohibit signage that is legally approved for other
uses on the same lot or site on which the solar array facility is
located;
(c) Be enclosed with a fence of at least 6 feet in height; and
(d) Not create glare or shadows on adjacent lands.
(e) No equipment shall be visible from the public right-of-way.
(f) All equipment shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district.
(g) Screen equipment adjacent to a residential use with an opaque
fence, wall, or other allowed method in Section 5.6.6., Screening
Methods, to a height of 6 feet above grade level;
2. Utility Facility (Major and Minor). Utility facilities (major and minor) shall
comply with the following standards:
4-49
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(a) Setbacks. All facilities, substations and buildings shall meet the
setback requirements of the zoning district.
(b) Height. A water tower may exceed the maximum height of the
zoning district, if 1 foot of additional setback is provided from all
property lines for every 2 feet the tower exceeds the maximum
height limit.
(c) Landscaping. Required landscaping shall be planted between the
building setback line and the lot line, except landscaping material
shall not be required in areas where minimum safety clearances are
required.
(d) Appearance. When located in a residential district, or adjacent to a
residential district, all habitable principal and accessory buildings
shall have a roof pitch with a minimum vertical rise of 3 and one-half
feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, and include materials
compatible with buildings in the vicinity.
3. Wireless Telecommunication Facility (Major and Minor).
(a) Purpose. This section establishes general standards for the siting of
wireless telecommunications facilities that will provide for the
public health, safety, and welfare. The standards are intended to
ensure that residents, businesses, and public safety operations in
the town have reliable access to wireless telecommunications
networks and state of the art mobile broadband communications
services. More specifically, the provisions of this section are intended
to:
(1) Ensure adequate protection of residential areas and uses
from potential adverse impacts of wireless support structures
and antennae, and to generally encourage the location of
these facilities in areas where adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(2) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing wireless
support structures so as to minimize the number of new
towers throughout the town, and establish stealth towers as
the primary option for single user wireless facilities;
(3) Enhance the ability of telecommunications services providers
to provide services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently; and
(4) Encourage wireless support structures that are carefully
engineered, sited, and screened to avoid potential damage to
adjacent properties from tower failure, and to minimize
adverse visual impact.
(b) Applicability. A new wireless telecommunications facility, whether
considered a principal or accessory use, shall comply with the
standards of this section, unless specifically exempted in
accordance with subsection (c) below. All wireless facilities and
support structures shall comply with or exceed current standards
4-50
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and any other agency
of the State or federal government that regulates
telecommunications facilities.
(c) Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the standards of
this section, but shall be required to comply with all other relevant
standards in this Ordinance:
(1) Removal or replacement of transmission equipment on an
existing wireless support structure or base station that does
not result in a substantial modification.
(2) Ordinary maintenance of existing wireless facilities and
support structures.
(3) Wireless facilities placed on utility poles or on electric
transmission line towers with the permission of the utility
owning the pole or tower.
(4) Temporary wireless communication facilities (or "COWs") in
accordance with Section 4.5.3.J, Temporary Wireless
Telecommunications Facility.
(5) Satellite dish antennae, receive-only television or radio
antennae for noncommercial use, and antennae legally
operated by FCC-licensed amateur radio operators in
accordance with Section 4.4, Accessory Structures and Uses.
(d) Facilities Distinguished
(1) Minor Wireless Telecommunications Facility. The following
uses are considered minor wireless telecommunications
facilities that may only be established in accordance with the
standards of this section and Section 2.6.14, Site Plan:
(i) A new wireless support structure of 60 feet in height
or less in any zoning district;
(ii) A concealed or stealth wireless facility of 80 feet in
height or less in a residential district;
(iii) A concealed or stealth wireless facility of 150 feet in
height or less in a business, special, or planned
development district;
(iv) A new wireless support structure of 200 feet in height
or less in a LI or HI district;
(v) Collocation of equipment on an existing wireless
telecommunications facility, support structure, or
building in any district; or
(vi) A substantial modification of an existing wireless
facility or support structure in any district.
(2) Major Wireless Telecommunications Facility. Uses that do
not meet the criteria for a minor wireless communications
facility in subsection (d)(1) above are considered major
wireless telecommunications facilities that may only be
4-51
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
established in accordance with the standards of this section
and Section 2.5.12, Special Use.
(e) General Standards and Design Requirements
(1) Type of Support Structure Permitted
(i) Concealed or Stealth facilities and support structures
shall be permitted in any zoning district.
(ii) Monopole support structures shall be permitted in all
zoning districts EXCEPT: OI, NC, CB, PUD, and any
Gateway Corridor and the Local Historic Overlay
District.
(iii) Lattice or Guyed support structures shall be permitted
ONLY in the LI and HI zoning districts.
(2) Collocation. New wireless support structures shall be
engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum
number of collocations based upon their height.
(i) Support structures 60 to 100 feet in height shall
support at least 2 additional telecommunications
providers.
(ii) Support structures greater than 100 feet and less than
150 feet in height shall support at least 3 additional
telecommunications providers.
(iii) Support structures greater than 150 feet in height shall
support at least 4 additional telecommunications
providers.
(iv) An applicant proposing a new wireless support facility
other than a concealed or stealth wireless facility shall
demonstrate that no suitable existing wireless support
structure, building or other structure within the
coverage area is available for the collocation of
antennae.
(v) The Planning and Inspections Director, upon request
of the applicant, may modify the requirement that
new wireless support structures accommodate the
collocation of other service providers if it is
determined that collocation at the site is not essential
to the public interest, or that the construction of a
shorter support structure with fewer antennae will
promote community compatibility.
(3) Collocation First Right of Refusal
(i) The owner of any new telecommunications support
structure, except stealth structures, shall offer first
right of refusal to the Town for purposes of collocation,
at least 30 days prior to entering into the first
collocation agreement or lease.
4-52
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(ii) The Town shall respond in writing within 30 days of its
receipt of the offer with either a letter of intent or a
waiver of rights. If the Town decides to locate facilities
on the support structure to enhance public safety
communications, the site shall be provided at no cost
to the Town.
(iii) If the Town waives its right of first refusal, or fails to
respond to the owner's notification with the 30 day
period, or has not commenced use of the site as
intended and has not made a good faith effort to do
so within 180 days of communicating its intent to the
owner, the collocation site shall be deemed
abandoned by the Town and the owner shall be under
no further obligation to provide a collocation site to
the Town on that support structure.
(4) Collocation of Antennae on an Existing Building. An
antenna may be attached to a nonresidential or multi-family
residential building in accordance with the following
standards:
(i) The antenna height, including any support structure,
shall not extend more than 20 percent higher than the
height of the building on which it is located.
(ii) The antenna and associated equipment shall comply
with the applicable provisions of this section.
(iii) An antenna visible from an adjacent street shall be
omni-directional, and screened or camouflaged to the
extent practicable to minimize its appearance.
(iv) Equipment shall be located within the building or
screened in some other fashion to prevent off-site
views.
(f) Maximum Height. In residential districts, wireless support
structures, including stealth support structures, shall not exceed
200 feet in height from the base of the structure to the top of the
highest point, including appurtenances. Additional height may be
requested as part of a special use, provided the applicant submits
technical information or other justification to document the need
for the additional height and is in compliance with Section 10.2.6.B,
Structure Height Restrictions.
(g) Setbacks
(1) Except for roof-mounted antenna, all wireless support
structures, including those anchored or attached to existing
buildings or other structures, shall be set back from all lot
lines a distance greater than or equal to the minimum
distance necessary to insure the support structure will
remain on its site following collapse (its fall zone) as certified
4-53
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
by a licensed professional engineer. In the absence of such
certification, the required setback shall be equal to 80
percent of the height of the wireless support structure.
(2) Roof mounted antenna and stealth facilities located within
other structures are exempt from these requirements.
(h) Lighting and Marking. Wireless telecommunications facilities or
support structures shall not be lighted or marked unless required by
the FCC or FAA. Strobe lights shall not be used for nighttime
lighting unless specifically required by the FCC or FAA.
(i) Color. Other than concealed or stealth facilities, wireless support
structures shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or be
painted a neutral, matte color designed to blend with its
surroundings, unless otherwise required by the FCC or FAA.
(j) Signage. Signs located at a wireless telecommunications facility
shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna
registration number (if required) and any other information
required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is
prohibited. Notwithstanding, nothing in this section shall prohibit
signage that is legally approved for other uses on the same lot or
site on which the wireless facility is located.
(k) Fencing
(1) Ground mounted accessory equipment and wireless support
structures shall be secured and enclosed with a fence not
less than 8 feet in height, placed between the equipment
compound and any required landscaping.
(2) Fencing shall not be required for concealed or stealth
wireless facilities, or for support structures.
(l) Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required around the perimeter
of the site or equipment compound when ground equipment
within the compound is visible from a public street. Landscaping
shall be designed to screen such equipment from view in
accordance with the ground-based mechanical equipment
requirements in Section 5.6, Screening.
(m) Accessory Equipment. Accessory Equipment, including any
buildings, cabinets or shelters, shall be used only to house
equipment and other supplies in direct support of the operation of
the wireless facility or support structure. Any equipment not used in
direct support of such operation shall not be stored on the site.
(n) Additional Standards for Concealed or Stealth Wireless Facilities.
A concealed, or stealth, wireless telecommunications facility and
support structure shall be designed and located to complement the
surrounding landscape in accordance with the following standards:
(1) A stealth wireless facility and support structure shall take a
form other than that of a typical wireless facility and support
structure, including but not limited to; bell towers, clock
4-54
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
towers, water towers, silos, chimneys, steeples, evergreen
trees, or flag poles.
(2) The stealth wireless facility and support structure shall take a
form other than that of a typical wireless facility and support
structure, including but not limited to; bell towers, clock
towers, water towers, silos, chimneys, steeples, evergreen
trees, or flag poles.
(3) Stealth wireless facilities are encouraged (but not required)
to be designed to accommodate the collocation of other
antennae whenever technically and economically feasible.
(o) Existing Wireless Facilities and WIreless Support Structures
(1) General
(i) An existing wireless facility or support structure that
was legally permitted on or before the effective date
of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be
considered a lawful permitted use if it complies with
all applicable provisions of this section, or a
nonconforming use if it does not comply with all
applicable provisions of this section.
(ii) An existing and otherwise lawful facility or support
structure that was not permitted by special use that,
as a result of this Unified Development Ordinance,
would now require special use approval shall not be
considered nonconforming.
(2) Activities at Non-conforming Wireless Facilities or Support
Structures
(i) Ordinary maintenance may be performed on a
nonconforming wireless facility or support structure.
(ii) Collocation of wireless facilities on an existing
nonconforming wireless support structure shall not be
construed as an expansion, enlargement, or increase
of a nonconforming structure and/or use and shall be
reviewed and approved in accordance with the Site
Plan process as stated in Section 2.6.14, provided that
the collocation is NOT considered a substantial
modification of the facility or support structure.
4.3.4. - Commercial Uses
A. Adult Entertainment
1. Purpose. An adult entertainment establishment, as listed and defined in
Article 26A of the North Carolina General Statutes, is recognized as having
certain serious objectionable operational characteristics and a deleterious
effect on adjacent areas, particularly when such establishments are
concentrated. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure their
4-55
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
adverse effects do not contribute to degradation or decline of surrounding
areas. The primary intent of the standards in this subsection is to prevent a
concentration of these uses in any one area of the Town’s planning
jurisdiction.
2. Separation Standards
(a) Other Adult Entertainment Establishments. An adult
entertainment establishment shall not be located within 1,200 feet
of any other adult entertainment establishment, measured as a
straight line from lot line to lot line.
(b) Other Uses. An adult entertainment establishment shall not be
located within 650 feet of a religious institution, school, day care,
public park, land in a residential district, or an establishment with an
on premise ABC license, measured as a straight line from lot line to
lot line.
3. Maximum Area. The gross floor area of any adult entertainment
establishment shall not exceed 3,000 square feet.
4. Prohibition of Sleeping Quarters. Except for an adult motel, an adult
entertainment establishment shall not have sleeping quarters.
5. Restriction of Uses
(a) There shall not be more than 1 adult entertainment establishment
in the same building, structure, or portion thereof.
(b) No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same building,
structure, property, or portion thereof with an adult entertainment
establishment .
B. Animal Care
1. Animal Care, Major. Outdoor areas used to house or exercise animals shall
be enclosed by a fence at least 6 feet in height and located 50 feet from a
lot line abutting a residential district.
C. Eating Establishments
1. Bar or Nightclub. A bar or nightclub shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Separation Standards
(1) In the CB District a bar or nightclub establishment shall not
be located within 50 feet of an existing religious institution or
an existing school, measured as a straight line from lot line to
lot line.
(2) In all other Districts a bar or nightclub establishment shall
not be located within 200 feet of an existing religious
institution or an existing school, measured as a straight line
from lot line to lot line.
(b) Building Placement. Not orient the primary entrance toward an
abutting lot in a residential district.
4-56
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(c) Screening. Have a 6-foot high opaque fence or masonry wall along
all lot lines abutting a residential district.
2. Restaurant, Major. A Restaurant, Major shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) A restaurant shall have a 6-foot high opaque fence or masonry wall
along all lot lines abutting a residential district.
(b) Outdoor speakers associated with a drive-through shall be located
at least 50 feet from a residential district.
(c) Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles associated with a
drive-through window, and speakers shall not be located between
the principal building line and the front street right-of-way. For
corner lots, drive aisles shall not be located between the principal
building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum
extent practicable.
3. Restaurant, Minor. A restaurant shall have a 6-foot high opaque fence or
masonry wall along all lot lines abutting a residential district.
D. Personal Services
1. Repair Establishments. Repair activities shall be conducted within an
enclosed building.
2. Tattoo/Body Piercing. A tattoo/body piercing use shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) Be separated from a religious institution or a school by at least 200
feet.
(b) Not orient the primary entrance toward an abutting lot in a
residential district.
(c) Have a 6-foot high opaque fence or masonry wall along all lot lines
abutting a residential district.
E. Recreation and Leisure
1. Amusement Parks. Amusement equipment, machinery, mechanical
devices, or go-kart tracks shall not be operated within 200 feet of a
residential district.
2. Sports and Fitness Centers. A sports or fitness center shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) In All Districts Except OI and NC. Outdoor courts, swimming pools,
and athletic fields shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line
abutting a residential district.
(b) In the OI and NC Districts.
(1) A sports or fitness center shall be a maximum of 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Outdoor facilities are prohibited.
4-57
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
F. Retail Sales
1. Bulky Item Sales. The outdoor display of bulky goods shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) Portable storage containers and dumpsters that are utilized for the
purpose of display and any item that exceeds 10 feet in height shall
not be placed within required setbacks, parking or landscape areas.
(b) Other bulky items that are less than or equal to 10 feet in height
must be located at least 10 feet fro m any public street and shall not
be placed within required parking or landscape areas.
2. Convenience Store with Fuel Sales.
(a) Fuel pumps and canopies shall be located behind the front building
line of the principal building, to the maximum extent practicable.
3. Flea Market/Antique Mall, Indoor. All items for sale at an indoor flea
market/antique mall must be located within an enclosed building.
4. Truck Stop. A truck stop shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Setbacks. All buildings, parking and service areas associated with
the use shall be setback at least 100 feet from an abutting
residential district.
(b) Location. Have frontage on or be located within a ½ mile of an US
Primary Highway exit.
G. V ehicle Establishments
1. Vehicle Establishments
(a) General
(1) Tires shall be stored within an enclosed building or stored
within the outdoor vehicle storage area and under cover in
such a manner as to prevent a violation of the public
nuisance code.
(2) Salvaging and storage of vehicle for parts is prohibited.
(3) Repair of all vehicles and the storage of all parts shall be
within an enclosed building.
(4) In all districts except LI and HI, outdoor vehicle storage is
limited to an area less than 25 percent of the lot. The storage
area shall be located behind the front building line of the
principal building and be screened with an opaque, wall,
fence, or other approved method to a height of 6 feet above
grade.
(5) In the LI and HI districts, outdoor vehicle storage may occupy
up to 50 percent of the lot. The storage area shall be located
behind the front building line of the principal building and be
screened with an opaque fence, wall, or other approved
method, to a height of 6 feet above grade level.
(b) Major
(1) Vehicles for sale or rent shall not be:
(i) Located within the right-of-way,
4-58
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(ii) Less than 10 feet from the edge of the pavement or
the curb,
(iii) In a required planting area,
(iv) In a sight distance easement, or
(v) In an area required for off-street parking.
(2) All vehicles shall be located on an all-weather surface.
(c) Minor. Vehicle washing or detailing shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) The washing operation shall take place within a building.
(2) Buildings shall be setback at least 75 feet from an abutting
residential district.
(3) Specific areas shall be provided for the manual drying,
waxing, polishing and vacuuming of vehicles when these
services are provided. These areas shall not conflict with
on-site circulation patterns.
(4) The use shall be screened with an opaque fence, wall, or by
any other allowed method in Section 5.6.6., Screening
Methods, to a height of 6 feet above grade level along all lot
lines abutting a residential district.
H. Visitor Accommodations
1. Bed and Breakfast. A bed and breakfast shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Be owner-occupied or have a manager who resides on the
premises;
(b) Have no more than 6 sleeping rooms;
(c) Have only 1 kitchen;
(d) Limit meals served on the premises to overnight guests only;
(e) If in a residential district, ensure signage complies with the
identification sign requirements of Table 5.7.8.B, Specific Standards
for a Signs not Requiring a Sign Permit.
4.3.5. - Industrial Uses
A. Extractive Industry
1. Extractive Industry. An extractive industry use (including, mining,
quarrying, or drilling) shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Setbacks
(1) The following features shall be located at least 50 feet from
any lot line:
(i) The edges of a pit where an extraction operation is
located;
(ii) Any equipment used in the processing of rock or
gravel; and
4-59
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(iii) Any asphalt plant or other industrial use operated in
conjunction with an extraction use.
(2) In an instance where the extraction operation site is bounded
by a railroad right-of-way, no setback is required between the
railroad right-of-way and the extraction operation.
(b) Security Fencing. A security fence, a minimum of 6 feet in height,
shall be provided around the perimeter of both an existing and
abandoned extraction operation.
(c) Rehabilitation
(1) Within 1 year of the cessation of the use, all equipment and
stock piles incidental to the operation shall be dismantled
and removed by and at the expense of the landowner;
(2) Except in an instance where redevelopment for another
permitted use is in progress on the site of an abandoned
extractive industry use:
(i) Excavations shall be graded to reduce the surface to
gently rolling topography in substantial conformity to
the land area immediately surrounding the site; and
planted with a cover of sod, trees, shrubs, legumes, or
grasses, which will minimize erosion; and
(ii) The site shall be drained to prevent the accumulation
of standing water, and channelization of the drainage
shall be designed and controlled so as not to cause
erosion or silting of neighboring properties or public
ways, nor to appreciably increase the turbidity of any
natural water course, or to occlude any existing
drainage course.
(d) Operation. An operation involving blasting that is discernible
beyond the exterior property line of the use shall only be conducted
between the hours of 7:00 AM and 6:00 PM.
(e) Access
(1) Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather
surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition;
(2) Access shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any property
line other than a railroad right-of-way line; and
(3) A plan shall be submitted showing truck routes to and from
the site. Such routes shall be designed to minimize impacts
on residential areas, schools, or other uses negatively affected
by truck traffic.
B. Manufacturing and Production
1. Asphalt Plant. An asphalt plant shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Setbacks. An asphalt plant shall be located at least 50 feet from a
property line.
4-60
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(b) Security Fencing. A security fence, a minimum of 6 feet in height,
shall be provided around the use.
(c) Rehabilitation
(1) Within 1 year of the cessation of the use, all equipment and
stock piles incidental to the operation shall be dismantled
and removed by and at the expense of the landowner;
(2) On the site of an abandoned asphalt plant the site shall be
drained to prevent the accumulation of standing water, and
channelization of the drainage shall be designed and
controlled so as not to cause erosion or silting of neighboring
properties or public ways, nor to appreciably increase the
turbidity of any natural water course, or to occlude any
existing drainage course, except in an instance where
redevelopment for another permitted use is in progress.
(d) Access
(1) Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather
surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition.
(2) Access roads shall be located no closer than 15 feet from a
property line.
(3) A plan shall be submitted showing truck routes to and from
the site. Such routes shall be designed to minimize impacts
on residential areas, schools, or other uses negatively affected
by truck traffic.
C. Warehouse and Freight Movement
1. Self-storage, External Access. An external access self-storage
establishment in the GB district shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Prohibited Storage. Outdoor storage and storage of hazardous,
toxic, or explosive substances shall be prohibited.
(b) Use Area
(1) A self-storage use shall be located on a lot or site between 2
and 5 acres in area.
(2) No more than 50 percent of the total site may be occupied by
buildings.
(c) Maximum Height. Self-storage buildings shall not exceed 20 feet or
1 story in height.
(d) Operation. No activity other than storage shall take place within a
storage unit.
2. Self-storage, Internal Access. An internal access self-storage
establishment shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Visibility. No indoor storage material, racks, bins, shelving or other
evidence of the warehouse or wholesale operation shall be visible
from the public right-of-way. Glass doors and windows shall contain
curtains, blinds or other suitable treatment to screen the interior of
the building from view.
4-61
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(b) Transparency Maintained. Windows shall not be boarded or
paneled over from the outside or the inside.
(c) Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.
3. Warehouse and Distribution. A warehouse in the GB district shall comply
with the following standards:
(a) Size. The warehouse shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
(b) Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.
D. Waste-Related Service
1. Landfill. A landfill shall comply with the following standards:
(a) General
(1) Provide a Type A landscape yard around its perimeter (see
Section 5.5.11, Perimeter Landscape Yards).
(2) Access shall be controlled through the use of a fence, wall,
gate, or other suitable device to prevent unregulated
dumping.
(3) Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather
surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition.
(b) Major
(1) Be located at least 500 feet from a residential district.
(2) An existing major landfill located within a WSO may continue
to operate or expand, but no new major landfill shall be
permitted in the WSO.
(c) Minor. Be set back at least 50 from any property line and 300 feet
from any existing residential district.
2. Recycling Center. A recycling center shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) General
(1) Access shall be controlled through the use of a fence, wall,
gate, or other suitable device to prevent unregulated
dumping.
(2) Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather
surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition.
(b) Landfill, Major
(1) Be located at least 300 feet from a residential district, except
that an accessway or weighing station may be located 100 or
more feet from a residential district.
(2) Materials may be stored outdoors provided they are located
at least 200 feet from all property lines and are screened with
an opaque fence, wall, or by any other allowed method in
Section 5.6.6., Screening Methods, to a height of 8 feet above
grade level.
(c) Landfill, Minor
4-62
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(1) Located at least 150 feet from a residential district and
operated entirely within an enclosed building, except for
loading facilities which may be located outdoors.
(2) Outdoor storage of recyclable materials is prohibited.
(d) Salvage or Junk Yard. A salvage or junk yard shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) Be located on a lot of at least 5 acres.
(2) Be located at least 300 feet from a residential district.
(3) Locate the storage area behind the front building line of the
principal building and be screened with an opaque wall,
fence, or other approved means to a height of 8 feet above
grade level.
(e) Transfer Station. A transfer station shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) Access shall be controlled through the use of a fence, wall,
gate, or other suitable device to prevent unregulated
dumping.
(2) Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather
surface and be maintained in a dust-free condition.
(3) Be located at least 150 feet from a residential district and
operated entirely within an enclosed building, except for
loading facilities which may be located outdoors.
(4) Outdoor storage of waste material is prohibited.
E. Wholesale Trade
1. Toxic Chemicals or Substances, Pesticides, or Fertilizers. Toxic
chemicals, pesticides, and fertilizers establishments shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) Vehicular access shall be constructed with an all-weather surface
and be maintained in a dust-free condition.
(b) Structures, buildings, and mechanical equipment used for the
operation shall be at least 100 feet from a residential district.
(c) Security fencing, a minimum of 6 feet in height, shall be provided
around all outdoor storage areas.
2. Wholesale (Major and Minor). Vehicular access for wholesale
establishments shall be constructed with an all-weather surface and be
maintained in a dust-free condition.
4-63
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
4.4. - Accessory Structures and Uses
4.4.1. - Accessory Structures and Uses
This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses and structures that are
incidental and subordinate to principal uses. The purpose of this section is to allow a
broad range of accessory uses and structures, provided they comply with the standards
set forth in this section in order to reduce potentially adverse impacts on surrounding
lands.
4.4.2. - Procedure for Establishment
Accessory uses or structures may be approved in conjunction with the approval of the
principal use or subsequently following the establishment of the principal use. No
accessory use or structure shall be approved, established, or constructed before the
principal use is approved in accordance with this Unified Development Ordinance.
4.4.3. - General Standards
A. Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. P ermitted accessory uses and
structures include those listed in this section and those that the Planning &
Inspections Director determines meet the following:
1. A re clearly incidental to an allowed principal use or structure;
2. A re subordinate to and serving an allowed principal use or structure;
3. A re subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use or
structure;
4. C ontribute to the comfort, convenience or needs of occupants, business or
industry associated with the principal use or structure.
B. Located on Same Lot as a Principal Use. A ll accessory uses and structures
shall be located on the same lot as the principal use or structure and not located
within any street right-of-way, except as allowed by this Unified Development
Ordinance for specific accessory uses and structures.
C. Compliance with Ordinance Requirements. A ccessory uses and structures
shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Ordinance, including this
section, the district standards in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts, the development
standards in Chapter 5: Development Standards, and the environmental
standards in Chapter 6: Environmental Standards.
4-64
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
4.4.4. - Standards for Accessory Structures
A. Dimensional Standards. Accessory structures, which include accessory buildings,
shall meet the applicable zoning district dimensional standards and district
standards, except as provided in this section and in Section 10.2.4.G, Setback
Encroachments.
B. Easements. Accessory structures may not be located in an easement unless the
easement or easement holder expressly states the allowance in writing.
C. Drive-up Accessory Structures. Drive-up accessory structures, such as
automated teller machines, ice vending, coffee stands, and similar accessory
structures that provide drive-up or walk-up service and which are located within a
surface parking area shall meet the following standards:
1. The accessory structure shall not be placed in any required parking spaces.
2. The location shall be designed so that any access or stacking lanes do not
extend into a primary drive aisle.
3. The surface parking area shall be configured and restriped to maintain
access and circulation to the principal use(s).
4. Any roof-top mechanical equipment shall be screened from the adjacent
streets.
D. Residential Accessory Structures. An accessory structure, including an accessory
building, for a single-family or duplex dwelling shall meet the following:
1. Setbacks
(a) Rear and Side. Accessory structures must setback 5 feet from side
and rear lots lines.
(b) Corner Side. For corner lots, accessory structures must meet the
side street setback of the dimensional standards for the applicable
zoning district.
(c) Through or Reverse Frontage Lots. For through or reverse
frontage lots, all accessory structures shall be setback 10 feet from
the rear lot line abutting the street.
(d) Alleys. For accessory structures that are located along an alley, the
structure must setback a minimum of 10 feet from the rear lot line
abutting the alley.
2. Utilities. Utility service, such as water, sewer and electricity, to the
accessory structure shall be provided by branching service from the
principal structure.
3. Encroachments. See Section 10.2.4.G, Setback Encroachments, for
allowable encroachments into setbacks for specific accessory structures.
4. Accessory Buildings
(a) Locations. In addition to the setback requirements, accessory
buildings shall be located behind the front building line of the
4-65
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
principal structure, except on lots that are greater than 2 acres in
area, for which 1 accessory building may be located in front of the
principal structure provided it meets the street setback.
(b) Size. The maximum total area of all accessory buildings on the lot
shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal
structure or 600 square feet, whichever is greater.
E. Local Historic Overlay District. Accessory structures located in a local historic
overlay district may be subject to a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance
with Section 2.5.4, Certificate of Appropriateness.
4.4.5. - Standards for Specific Accessory Uses
A. Accessory Dwelling Unit. An accessory dwelling unit (ADU) is permitted as
accessory to a single-family detached dwelling if it complies with the following
standards:
1. General
(a) No more than 1 ADU shall be located on a lot with a single-family
detached dwelling.
(b) An ADU shall have a maximum of 2 bedrooms.
(c) An ADU and the principal dwelling shall have the same street
address and mailbox.
(d) An ADU shall not be subdivided or otherwise separated in
ownership from the principal dwelling unit.
(e) An ADU and the principal dwelling shall utilize the same driveway,
unless the ADU is accessed from a right-of-way not used by the
principal dwelling (e.g., a rear alley or separate street access on a
corner or through lot).
(f) An ADU shall be served by water, sanitary sewer, gas and electrical
utilities as part of the principal dwelling.
2. Design. An ADU shall maintain the architectural design, style, appearance
and character of the principal dwelling by incorporating design elements
such as similar materials, facade treatment, colors, window style, roof
design, and roof pitch.
3. Location
(a) Principal Structure
1. If an ADU is located within the principal structure, the ADU
shall not exceed 30 percent of the gross floor area of the
structure.
2. Entrance doors or exterior stairways to the ADU facing
streets shall be prohibited; separate access to the ADU shall
be by means of a side or rear door in the principal structure.
(b) Accessory Structure. If an ADU is located in an accessory structure,
it shall meet the residential accessory structure requirements in
4-66
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures.
B. Caretaker Dwelling. One caretaker dwelling unit is permitted as accessory to a
commercial, institutional or industrial use either within the principal building or in
an accessory building on the lot.
C. Drive-Through. See Chapter 3: Zoning Districts, for the applicable drive-through
standards by zoning district.
D. Exterior Lighting. See Section 5.10, Exterior Lighting, for the applicable standards.
E. Fences. See Section 5.11, Fences, for the applicable standards.
F. Helistop. A helistop is permitted as accessory to an institutional, commercial or
industrial use if it complies with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
regulations.
G. Home Day Care. A home day care is permitted as accessory to a residential
dwelling unit if it complies with the following standards:
1. Care is provided within a dwelling unit, for between 3 and 8 children less
than 13 years of age, not more than 5 of which are preschool age, or up to 8
adults, who do not reside in the dwelling, for at least once per week for at
least four hours, but less than 24 hours per day.
2. It complies with all applicable home occupation requirements, except the
gross floor area requirement.
3. It is licensed by the State of North Carolina and complies with all applicable
State requirements.
H. Home Occupation. A home occupation is permitted as accessory to a residential
dwelling unit if it complies with the following standards:
1. The home occupation shall be located in the residential dwelling unit and
shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the
dwelling unit.
2. The person operating the home occupation shall reside in the dwelling
unit.
3. No more than 1 person shall work in the dwelling unit that is not a resident
of the dwelling unit.
4. The home occupation shall not change the exterior appearance of the
dwelling.
5. The home occupation shall not create traffic, parking congestion, noise,
vibration, odor, glare, vibration, fumes, or electrical or communications
interference beyond what normally occurs in the district where located.
6. No outdoor storage or display of products, materials, or equipment is
permitted.
4-67
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
7. Activities and storage associated with a home occupation shall not take
place in an accessory building, such as a detached garage.
8. No maintenance or repair of commercial equipment may be associated
with a home occupation.
9. Only 1 commercial vehicle with 1 attached trailer associated with the home
occupation may be parked or stored on the lot, but neither the truck nor
the trailer shall exceed 24 feet in length.
10. Tutoring and instruction in music, dance, art, yoga, and other subjects shall
be limited to no more than 5 students during any single class or instruction
period.
11. There shall be no advertising on the property or other signs of the home
occupation, which are visible from outside the dwelling, except for 1 sign
that complies with the standards in Section 5.7.8, Signs not Requiring a
Sign Permit.
I. Livestock. The keeping of livestock is allowed as accessory to a single-family
detached or duplex dwelling if it complies with the following standards:
1. The keeping of livestock shall require a lot of at least 5 acres in area.
2. Animals shall be maintained in a fenced area located at least 100 feet from
all lot lines.
3. Fencing shall be at least 4 feet in height.
4. For large livestock such as horses, cows and other similar large-sized
animals, no more than 1 animal over 6 months in age shall be maintained
for every 20,000 square feet of fenced area.
5. For small livestock such as sheep, goats, and other similar-sized animals,
no more than 1 animal over 6 months in age shall be maintained for every
10,000 square feet of fenced area.
J. Off-Street Parking and Loading. See Section 5.4, Off-Street Parking and Loading,
for the applicable standards.
K. Outdoor Display. Outdoor display is allowed as accessory for retail sales and
wholesale trade uses if it complies with the following standards:
1. The intent of these standards is to allow outdoor display, but not where the
display of such goods is unsightly, impedes the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or creates an unsafe condition.
2. The outdoor display of non-bulky goods is not subject to the requirements
in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures, but shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) Be located adjacent to the storefront or building sides, except for
farmers market, plant nursery, garden center or similar operations;
(b) Not located in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes, or required
landscaping yards; and
(c) Maintain at least 5 feet of space along the side of the display free of
obstruction to allow for pedestrian and handicap movement, such
4-68
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
that handicapped pedestrians and others do not have to enter the
drive aisle to walk around the display.
3. The outdoor display of bulky goods shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Portable storage containers, dumpsters and any bulky item for
display that exceeds 10 feet in height shall meet the requirements in
Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures;
(b) Not located in drive aisles, loading zones, fire lanes, or required
parking spaces or landscaping yards; and
(c) Other bulky items that are less than or equal to 10 feet in height are
not subject to the requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for
Accessory Structures, but shall be located at least 10 feet from any
public street and shall not be placed within any easements,
required parking spaces or landscape yards.
L. Portable Storage Containers. Portable storage containers are allowed as
accessory to the principal use on the same lot, provided they comply with the
following standards:
1. Residential Districts. Portable storage containers located within any
residential district shall comply with the following standards:
(a) A portable storage container is not subject to the requirements in
Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures; however, it must
be located on the lot and outside any street right-of-way.
(b) No more than 2 portable storage containers may be located on a lot
with a single-family or duplex dwelling.
(c) The gross square footage of a portable storage container on a lot
with a single-family or duplex dwelling shall not exceed 150 square
feet.
(d) A portable storage container may remain on a lot up to 14 days in
duration, except when the container is used in association with
construction on the same site, which the container may remain for
the duration of the construction project and shall be removed upon
completion.
2. Business and Special Districts. Portable storage containers located within
any business or special district shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Portable storage containers shall meet the requirements in Section
4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures.
(b) The number, size and duration of portable storage containers on a
lot are not regulated.
(c) Portable storage containers shall not be placed between a principal
structure and a public street, except in the LI and HI districts.
3. Planned Unit Development Districts. Portable storage containers located
within any planned district shall comply with the applicable residential,
business or special district requirements of this section.
4-69
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
M. Renting of Rooms. The renting of rooms is allowed as accessory to a residential
dwelling if it complies with the following standards:
1. An occupant of the dwelling may rent rooms in the dwelling to a
maximum of 2 tenants.
2. The renting of rooms to more than 2 tenants constitutes a rooming house,
which is subject to other standards contained in this Ordinance.
N. Satellite Dishes, Amateur Radio and Television Antenna Towers. Satellite
dishes, amateur radio and television antenna towers are allowed as accessory to
any use allowed by this Unified Development Ordinance if they comply with the
following standards:
1. The accessory structure and all supporting cables and anchors shall be
contained on the lot.
2. The accessory structure is prohibited in easements but is not subject to the
remaining requirements in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory
Structures.
3. The accessory structure shall not exceed 90 feet in height above grade.
4. Tn residential districts, the accessory structure must be located behind the
front building line of the principal structure, except for satellite dishes less
than 40 inches in diameter which are exempt from this requirement.
5. Towers attached to a principal structure shall be located on the principal
structure's side or rear elevation.
O. Small Wind Energy Conversion (WEC) System. A small (WEC) is permitted as
accessory to any agriculture, commercial, institutional or industrial use allowed by
this Ordinance if it complies with the following standards:
1. There shall be no more than 1 small (WEC) on a lot.
2. The maximum extended height of a small (WEC) shall be the maximum
height allowed in the zoning district plus 70 feet.
3. The tower shall be set back from all lot lines a distance greater than or
equal to the minimum distance necessary to insure the structure will
remain on its site following collapse (its fall zone) as certified by a licensed
professional engineer. In the absence of such certification, the required
setback shall be equal to 80% of the height of the structure.
4. Sound produced by the WEC shall under normal operating conditions, as
measured at the lot line, not exceed 55 decibels. The sound level may be
exceeded during short term events that occur, that are beyond the
landowner's control, such as utility outages and/or wind storms.
5. The blade tip or vane of any small (WEC) shall have a minimum ground
clearance of 15 feet, as measured at the lowest point of the arc of the
blades. No blade shall extend over parking areas, public rights-of-way,
driveways, or sidewalks.
6. No illumination of the turbine or tower shall be allowed, unless required by
the FAA.
7. The tower shall be designed to prevent unauthorized climbing.
4-70
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
8. A small (WEC) shall not include signage visible from a public street other
than the manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning
signs, or owner identification.
9. A small (WEC) intended to connect to the electric utility shall not be
installed until evidence is submitted to the Planning and Inspections
Director that the relevant electric utility is informed of the customer's
intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
10. On determining that a small (WEC) is inoperable for 180 days or more, the
Planning and Inspections Director shall send the owner a notice and order
requiring restoration of the system. Failure of the owner to restore the
system to operating condition shall constitute a violation of this Unified
Development Ordinance.
P. Solid Waste Collection. See Section 5.6, Screening, for the applicable standards.
Q. Signage. See Section 5.7, Signage, for the applicable standards.
R. Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs with a
water depth of 24 inches or greater are permitted as accessory to any use allowed
by this Unified Development Ordinance if they are constructed in accordance
with the State Building Code and comply with standards for accessory structures
in Section 4.4.4, Standards for Accessory Structures, if applicable.
S. Vehicles
1. Disabled Motor Vehicles. The parking or storage of disabled motor
vehicles shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Residential Uses
1. One disabled vehicle is allowed on a lot with a single-family
dwelling or duplex dwelling, provided the disabled vehicle is
parked or stored behind the front building line of the
principal structure.
2. Additional disabled vehicles on a single-family or duplex lot
and any disabled vehicle parked or stored on lot with any
other residential use shall be located within a fully enclosed
principal or accessory structure.
(b) All Other Uses
1. A disabled motor vehicle may be parked or stored on a lot
containing an agricultural, institutional, commercial, or
industrial use, provided it is totally screened from view from
any street or residential zoning district.
2. The disabled vehicle shall be stored within a fully enclosed
building or fully screened by a building, opaque fence, wall,
or other approved method, to a height of 6 feet above grade
level.
2. Improved Parking Area
4-71
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(a) Any vehicle located on a lot with a single-family or a duplex dwelling
that is parked, stored, or otherwise located between the principal
structure and the street shall be parked, stored, or otherwise located
on an improved parking area.
(b) An improved parking area shall be a portion of the lot that is
graveled or paved with an all-weather surface (such as asphalt,
concrete, brick, stone or similar material) and provides access to the
street.
3. Large Vehicles. The parking of vehicles in excess of 24 feet in length, or
14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight is prohibited in residential zoning
districts, with the following exceptions:
(a) Temporary loading and unloading;
(b) Emergency and disaster service;
(c) Recreational vehicles, which includes travel trailers;
(d) Large vehicles on a religious institution or school property; and
(e) For use in the operation of a permitted principal use or
nonconforming use that relies on a large vehicle for standard
operation.
4. Recreational Vehicles. The use of recreational vehicles, which includes
travel trailers, for living purposes is allowed only in recreational vehicle
parks and as a permitted temporary use.
T. Wireless Telecommunication Facility. See Section 4.3.3.F.3, Wireless
Telecommunication Facility (Major and Minor) for the applicable standards.
U. Yard Sales. Yard sales are allowed as accessory to a residential dwelling unit if
they comply with the following standards:
1. Yard sales are limited to a maximum of 2 occurrences per dwelling unit per
calendar year, and no more than 2 days per occurrence.
2. Items displayed and sold are limited to household items.
3. The location of signs advertising the yard sale is restricted to the lot or site
where the yard sale is conducted.
4.5. - Temporary Uses
4.5.1. - Purposes
This section allows for the establishment of specific temporary uses of limited duration,
provided that such uses do not negatively affect adjacent land, and provided that such
temporary uses are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary
uses shall not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or
structure.
4-72
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
4.5.2. - Applicability
The standards in this section apply to non-permanent uses that take place on a
temporary basis whether on the same site or in different locations in the jurisdiction. The
activities listed in this section require the issuance of a zoning compliance permit, except
as exempted, in accordance with the standards in Section 2.6.15, Zoning Compliance
Permit.
A. General Standards
1. Secure written permission from the landowner;
2. Obtain the appropriate permits and licenses from the Town and other
agencies;
3. Comply with the requirements for temporary signs in Section 5.7, Signage;
4. Meet public utility and Town requirements for proper connection to water,
sewer, electrical and other utility service connections, as applicable;
5. Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a site or use
on the site;
6. Not result in a situation where the principal use, if present, fails to comply
with the standards of this Unified Development Ordinance;
7. Contain sufficient land area for the temporary use and for the parking and
traffic movement associated with the temporary use, without impacting
environmentally sensitive lands;
8. Not remain in place for more than 90 days if located within a special flood
hazard area;
9. Provide adequate on-site restroom facilities; and
10. Cease all outdoor activities within 500 feet of a residential use by 10:00 pm.
B. General Conditions. In approving a temporary use permit, the Planning and
Inspections Director is authorized to impose any of the following general
conditions upon the premises benefited by the permit as may be necessary to
reduce or minimize any potential adverse impacts upon other property in the
area, as long as the condition relates to a situation created or aggravated by the
proposed temporary use. The Planning and Inspections Director is authorized,
where appropriate, to require:
1. Provision of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular access and
egress;
2. Control of nuisance factors, such as but not limited to, the prevention of
glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise, vibrations, smoke,
dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat;
3. Regulation of placement, height and size, location of equipment and open
spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;
4. Provision of sanitary and medical facilities;
5. Provision of solid waste collection and disposal;
6. Provision of security and safety measures;
7. Use of an alternate location or date;
4-73
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
8. Modification or elimination of certain proposed activities;
9. Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the
duration to a shorter time period than requested or specified in this
subsection; and
10. Submission of a financial guarantee to ensure that any temporary use will
be removed from the lot or site within a reasonable time and the lot or site
will be restored to its former condition.
4.5.3. - Standards for Specific Temporary Uses
A. Construction-Related Uses. A temporary construction-related use is permitted
on a lot in a residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject
to the following standards:
1. Temporary construction-related uses, including construction and business
offices, storage buildings, equipment and outdoor storage lots, and
employee parking areas, may occur on the same lot or site as the
construction activity, or on a lot or site that is adjacent to the construction
site.
2. The temporary use permit shall not be issued until a site plan is approved
or a building permit is issued for a principal structure, except as allowed in
Section 2.4.12, Effect of Development Approval.
3. A temporary construction-related use shall be removed within 30 days of
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure, or removed
immediately if the building permit expires or is revoked.
B. Itinerant Merchant Sales. Itinerant merchant sales, not including mobile food
vendors, are permitted on a lot in a business, special, or planned development
district, subject to the following standards:
1. The sale of merchandise, products, or material must be a permitted
principal use in the zoning district where the sales are temporarily located.
2. Itinerant merchant sales shall be located on a lot with a principal use and
located outside of street rights-of way, required sight distance easements,
required landscape areas, vehicular circulation areas, or areas where
pedestrian access is needed to ensure safe movement through or across a
site.
3. No signage is permitted other than signage that is affixed to the vehicle,
trailer or stand.
4. All merchandise and related materials shall be removed from the site or
properly stored each day following the sale.
5. The maximum period of operation of itinerant merchant sales shall be
from 8:00 AM to 11:00 PM.
6. Permitted itinerant merchant sales shall be limited in duration to a
maximum of 30 continuous days and there shall not be more than 3
itinerant merchant sales on a lot per calendar year.
4-74
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
C. Mobile Food Vendors
1. Exempt Vendors. Mobile food vendors are not subject to the requirements
of Section 4.5, Temporary Uses, if:
(a) They operate for 2 or fewer days within a 180-day period on a lot
with an established principal use;
(b) They operate in the public right-of-way;
(c) They are considered part of a Special Event allowed in accordance
with Section 4.5.4.E, Special Events; or
(d) They are a part of a private event where food is not sold to the
general public.
2. Subject to this Ordinance. Mobile food vendors that are not exempted are
permitted on a lot in a business, special, or planned development district,
subject to the following standards:
(a) The sale of food must be a permitted principal use in the zoning
district where the mobile food vendor is temporarily located.
(b) Mobile food vendors shall be located on a lot located outside of
street rights-of-way, required landscape areas, vehicular circulation
areas, or areas where pedestrian access is needed to ensure safe
movement through or across a site.
(c) Mobile food vendors shall not obstruct visibility for motorists at any
street intersection.
(d) No signage is permitted other than signage that is affixed to the
vehicle, trailer, cart, or stand.
(e) The vendor shall properly dispose of all solid waste, grease and
liquid waste and the vehicle, trailer, cart, or stand shall be removed
from the site each day.
(f) The maximum period of operation of mobile food vendors shall be
from 6:00 AM to 11:00 PM, or until the time the principal use on the
lot closes, whichever is greater.
(g) Permitted mobile food vendors shall be limited in duration to a
maximum of 12 months, except that the temporary use permit may
be renewed.
D. Outdoor Seasonal Sales. Outdoor seasonal sales are permitted on a lot in a
residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the
following standards:
1. Seasonal sales shall be limited to seasonal agricultural products such as
Christmas trees, pumpkins, and living plants.
2. Outdoor seasonal sales shall only be allowed on a lot in a residential, office
or institutional zoning district when operated by and on the site of a
religious institution or nonprofit organization.
3. The maximum hours of operation of an outdoor seasonal sales use shall be
from 8:00 AM to 11:00 PM, except when located in a residential district, then
the seasonal sales use shall cease by 10:00 PM.
4-75
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
4. Exterior lighting shall comply with the requirements in Section 5.10,
Exterior Lighting.
5. One recreational vehicle is allowed as a temporary dwelling for security
purposes in association with the seasonal sales use, provided it meets the
general standards of Section 4.5.4.F, Temporary Dwelling, and is removed
at the end of the sales.
6. Outdoor seasonal sales shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 90
days and there shall not be more than 3 seasonal sales on a lot per
calendar year.
7. The on-site accessory sales of seasonal products by an agricultural use or
retail sales use is not considered outdoor seasonal sales and is not subject
to these standards.
E. Special Events
1. Exempt Events. A special event is not subject to the requirements in
Section 4.5, Temporary Uses, if:
(a) The event lasts 2 or fewer days within a 180-day period on a lot with
an established principal use; or
(b) The event is sponsored by the Town, a county, or the State.
2. Subject to this Ordinance. A special event not exempted from the
standards in this section is permitted on a lot in a business, special, or
planned development district, subject to the following standards:
(a) A special event includes, but is not be limited to arts and crafts
shows, cultural events, musical events, concerts and stage shows,
celebrations, festivals, fairs, carnivals, circuses, or outdoor religious
events.
(b) Circuses, carnivals and similar amusements may be subject to the
applicable provisions of the Town Code of Ordinances.
(c) Temporary dwelling(s) are allowed in association with the special
event provided they meet the general standards of Section 4.5.4.F,
Temporary Dwelling, and are removed at the end of the event.
(d) A special event shall be limited in duration to a maximum of 14 days,
unless otherwise specifically authorized by the Planning and
Inspections Director.
F. Temporary Dwelling. A temporary dwelling is permitted on a lot in a residential,
business, special, or planned development district, subject to the following
standards:
1. General Standards
(a) A temporary dwelling may be either a dwelling that meets all
applicable NC State Building code requirements for a dwelling or a
recreational vehicle.
(b) The temporary dwelling shall be located on a lot and meet the
dimensional standards of the zoning district to the maximum
extent practicable.
4-76
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
2. Temporary Emergency Dwelling
(a) Temporary emergency dwellings operated by a religious institution,
governmental agency, or nonprofit organization may be located on
a lot at least 1 acre in area to provide emergency shelter where fire,
flood, or other natural disaster has displaced persons.
(b) The temporary dwellings shall be limited in duration to a maximum
of 6 months, except that the temporary use permit may be renewed
for good cause shown.
3. Temporary Construction Dwelling
(a) One temporary dwelling may be used to house occupants of the
principal dwelling under construction or subject to repair or
casualty damage.
(b) Temporary dwellings may be used on a construction site and
occupied by persons having construction or security responsibilities
over such construction site.
(c) Temporary dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the
structure under construction.
(d) The temporary use permit shall not be issued until a site plan is
approved or a building permit is issued for a principal structure.
(e) A temporary dwelling shall be removed within 30 days of issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for the structure, or removed
immediately if the building permit expires or is revoked.
G. Temporary Health Care Structure. One temporary health care structure is
permitted on a lot with a single-family detached dwelling, subject to the following
standards:
1. Structure. A temporary health care structure is one that:
(a) Is transportable and primarily assembled at a location other than
the site of installation;
(b) Is located on a lot with an existing single-family detached dwelling;
(c) Is limited to 1 occupant who is a mentally or physically impaired
person related to the caregiver;
(d) Is used by a caregiver or legal guardian in providing care for 1
mentally or physically impaired person on property owned or
occupied as the caregiver's or guardian's residence;
(e) Has no more than 300 square feet of gross floor area;
(f) Is connected with water, sewer and electricity by branching service
from the single-family detached dwelling;
(g) Has the same street address and mailbox as the existing
single-family detached dwelling;
(h) Uses the same driveway as the existing single-family dwelling,
unless the structure is accessed from a right-of-way not used by the
dwelling (e.g., a rear alley or separate street access on a corner or
through lot);
4-77
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
(i) Meets the dimensional standards of the zoning district for a
single-family detached dwelling; and
(j) Meets the applicable provisions in the NC State Building Code;
however, is not located on a permanent foundation.
2. Need and Relationship
(a) The occupant of the structure must be a mentally or physically
impaired person that is a resident of the State who requires
assistance with 2 or more activities of daily living (bathing, dressing,
personal hygiene, ambulation or locomotion, transferring, toileting,
and eating) as certified in writing by a physician licensed to practice
in this State.
(b) The occupant must the property owner or tenant, or a first or
second degree blood relative of the property owner or tenant. A first
or second degree relative is a spouse, linear descendant, sibling,
uncle, aunt or niece, including half, step, and in-law relationships.
3. Permit Conditions
(a) Once the applicant provides sufficient proof that the temporary
health care structure meets all standards, then the temporary
structure shall be permitted for a period of 12 months.
(b) The applicant may renew the zoning compliance permit for a
12-month period and continue to renew it provided the applicant
provides evidence of continued need and compliance with these
standards.
(c) The Town may make permit renewal and periodic inspections of the
temporary structure at reasonable times convenient to the
applicant.
(d) No signage shall be permitted on the exterior of the temporary
structure or on the lot that identifies or promotes the existence of
the structure.
(e) The temporary structure shall not be subdivided or otherwise
separated in ownership from the single-family detached dwelling.
(f) The temporary structure shall be removed within 60 days if the
impaired occupant is no longer receiving or in need of assistance.
(g) The temporary use permit may be revoked or other enforcement
actions taken if these standards are violated.
H. Temporary LCID Landfill. A temporary land clearing and inert debris landfill
(LCID) is permitted on a lot in a residential, business, special, or planned
development district, subject to the following standards:
1. A temporary LCID may not exceed 2 acres in area and shall meet all
applicable State regulations for a LCID.
2. It shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 12 months, except that the
temporary use permit may be renewed for good cause shown.
3. A LCID not meeting these standards constitutes a minor landfill, which is
subject to other standards contained in this Unified Development
4-78
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 4 : Uses (v3a)
Ordinance.
I. Temporary Real Estate Office. A temporary real estate office is permitted on a lot
in a residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the
following standards:
1. The office is located on a lot that is part of the real estate development
being sold or leased.
2. Signage complies with the standards of Section 5.7, Signage.
3. The office complies with the dimensional standards of the zoning district in
which it is located.
4. The temporary office is converted into a dwelling or removed within 30
days after all units are sold or leased.
J. Temporary Wireless Telecommunications Facility. A temporary wireless
telecommunications facility, also known as a COW, is permitted on a lot in a
residential, business, special, or planned development district, subject to the
following standards:
1. A temporary wireless telecommunications facility may be allowed on a lot
after a disaster or other emergency for a period not to exceed 30 days,
except that the temporary use permit may be renewed for good cause
shown.
2. A temporary wireless telecommunications facility may be allowed on a lot
to evaluate the technical feasibility of a site for a period not to exceed 14
days, except that the temporary use permit may be renewed for good
cause shown.
3. A temporary wireless telecommunications facility may be allowed on a lot
in association with an event where the anticipated demand cannot be
handled by existing facilities for a period not to exceed 14 days.
4. A temporary wireless telecommunications facility may be allowed on a lot
with an existing permanent wireless telecommunications facility where
the permanent structure is undergoing reconstruction or maintenance
and the temporary facility is needed to maintain sufficient levels of service.
The temporary facility shall be removed after reconstruction or
maintenance is complete and service restored on the permanent
structure.
5. All temporary wireless telecommunications facilities, including all
supporting cables and anchors, shall be contained on the lot.
4-79
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Chapter 5 : Development
Standards
5.1. - Public Infrastructure 5- 4
5.1.1. - Within Corporate Limits 5- 4
5.1.2. - Within the ETJ 5- 4
5.2. - Zone Lot and Access 5- 4
5.2.1. - Principal Buildings on a Zone lot 5- 4
5.2.2. - Street Access 5- 5
5.2.3. - Cross-Access 5- 6
5.3. - Reserved 5- 8
5.4. - Off-Street Parking and Loading 5- 8
5.4.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 8
5.4.2. - Applicability 5- 8
5.4.3. - Exemptions 5- 8
5.4.4. - Off-Street Parking Requirements 5- 9
5.4.5. - Bicycle Parking Requirements 5- 13
5.4.6. - Off-Street Loading Requirements 5- 13
5.4.7. - Standards for Off-Street Parking Spaces and Loading Areas 5- 14
5.4.8. - Parking Alternatives 5- 17
5.5. - Landscaping 5- 19
5.5.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 19
5.5.2. - Applicability 5- 19
5.5.3. - Exemptions 5- 20
5.5.4. - District Standards 5- 20
5.5.5. - General Requirements 5- 21
5.5.6. - Plant Material Specifications 5- 22
5.5.7. - Limitations on Landscaping Placement 5- 24
5.5.8. - Credit for Existing Vegetation 5- 26
5.5.9. - Time for Installation of Required Landscaping 5- 27
5.5.10. - Parking Lot Landscaping 5- 27
5.5.11. - Perimeter Landscape Yards 5- 30
5.5.12. - Landscape Yards on Slopes 5- 35
5.5.13. - Alternate Landscape Plan 5- 36
5.5.14. - Additional Landscape Yard Flexibility 5- 36
5.5.15. - Landscape Yard Maintenance 5- 37
5.5.16. - Removal or Relocation of Trees and Shrubs 5- 38
5-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.5.17. - Tree Conservation for Residential Uses 5- 39
5.6. - Screening 5- 40
5.6.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 40
5.6.2. - Applicability 5- 40
5.6.3. - Exemptions 5- 41
5.6.4. - General Standards 5- 41
5.6.5. - Specific Standards for Solid Waste Facilities 5- 41
5.6.6. - Screening Methods 5- 42
5.6.7. - Prohibited Screening Materials 5- 42
5.7. - Signage 5- 42
5.7.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 42
5.7.2. - Applicability 5- 43
5.7.3. - Variances 5- 43
5.7.4. - General Standards 5- 43
5.7.5. - Design, Construction, and Maintenance 5- 44
5.7.6. - Prohibited Signs 5- 45
5.7.7. - Exempt Signs 5- 46
5.7.8. - Signs not Requiring a Sign Permit 5- 46
5.7.9. - Freestanding Signs Requiring a Sign Permit 5-4 9
5.7.10. - Attached Sign Requiring a Sign Permit 5- 51
5.7.11. - Reserved 5- 53
5.7.12. - Reserved 5- 53
5.7.13. - Encroachment Agreement for Entrance Sign 5- 53
5.8. - Design Standards 5- 54
5.8.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 54
5.8.2. - Applicability 5- 54
5.8.3. - Exemptions 5- 54
5.8.4. - Site Standards 5- 54
5.8.5. - Building Standards 5- 56
5.9. - Sidewalks 5- 59
5.9.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 59
5.9.2. - Applicability 5- 60
5.9.3. - Exemptions 5- 60
5.9.4. - Standards 5- 60
5.9.5. - Timing of Installation 5- 61
5.9.6. - Fee In-Lieu of Required Sidewalk Installation 5- 61
5.10. - Exterior Lighting 5- 62
5.10.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 62
5.10.2. - Applicability 5- 62
5-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.10.3. - Exemptions 5- 62
5.10.4. - Prohibited Lighting 5- 63
5.10.5. - Lighting Plan 5- 63
5.10.6. - General Standards for On-Site Exterior Lighting 5- 64
5.10.7. - Design Standards for Specific Uses and Site Features 5- 64
5.10.8. - Measurement 5- 65
5.10.9. - Alternate Lighting Plan 5- 65
5.11. - Fences 5- 65
5.11.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 65
5.11.2. - Applicability 5- 66
5.11.3. - Exemptions 5- 66
5.11.4. - Location Requirements 5- 66
5.11.5. - Height Standards 5- 67
5.11.6. - Materials 5- 67
5.11.7. - Finished Side 5- 68
5.11.8. - Maintenance 5- 68
5.12. - Open Space 5- 68
5.12.1. - Purpose and Intent 5- 68
5.12.2. - Applicability 5- 69
5.12.3. - Exemptions 5- 69
5.12.4. - Minimum Open Space Amount 5- 69
5.12.5. - Open Space Standards 5- 70
5.13. - Development Types 5- 71
5.13.1. - General 5- 71
5.13.2. - Multiple Lot Development 5- 72
5-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.1. - Public Infrastructure
5.1.1. - Within Corporate Limits
When development occurs within the corporate limits of the Town, it shall be served by
the Town's public water and sewer systems, unless the Public Works Director
determines that it is not required in accordance with the Town’s Code of Ordinance. All
connections to the Town’s public water and sewer systems shall be built in accordance
with the Town’s Code of Ordinances and Development Guide.
5.1.2. - Within the ETJ
When development occurs within the Town’s ETJ, it shall be served by the Town’s public
water and sewer systems, unless the Public Works Director determines that it is not
required in accordance within the Town’s Code of Ordinances. When determined by the
Public Works Director that connection to the Town’s public water and sewer systems is
not feasible, the Moore County Health Department is authorized to approve private well
and on-site wastewater treatment systems.
5.2. - Zone Lot and Access
5.2.1. - Principal Buildings on a Zone lot
Every building must be located on a zone lot. No more than 1 principal building is
permitted on a zone lot, except as follows:
A. Nonresidential Group Development. Two or more principal nonresidential
buildings are permitted on a zone lot pursuant to a group development plan
approved in accordance with Section 2.6.10, Group Development Permit, and
provided that vehicular access is maintained to each building for service and
emergency vehicles.
B. Residential Group Development. Two or more principal buildings are permitted
on a zone lot in a multi-family, single-family attached, pocket neighborhood or
tiny home neighborhood development pursuant to a group development plan
approved in accordance with Section 2.6.10, Group Development Permit, and
provided that access is maintained to each building for service and emergency
vehicles.
C. Multiple Lot Development. Two or more principal buildings are permitted on a
zone lot pursuant to Section 5.13.2, Multiple Lot Development, and provided that
5-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
vehicular access is maintained to each building for service and emergency
vehicles.
5.2.2. - Street Access
A. General Standards. Except where an alternative configuration is allowed in
accordance with Section 5.2.2.B, Alternative Configuration, all development shall
comply with the following standards:
1. Every zone lot shall abut and have direct access to a publicly-maintained
street.
2. No building or structure shall be constructed or placed on a zone lot that
does not have direct access to a publicly-maintained street.
3. Direct access for a use to a publicly maintained street through another
zoning district is not allowed unless the other zoning district:
(a) Is classified as a business or special district; or
(b) Allows the use; or
(c) Provides the sole means of access for the use.
B. Nonresidential Standards. A zone lot may be allowed not more than one
driveway entrance per 100-feet of road frontage.
1. A zone lot shall never install more than two driveway entrances per road
frontage, unless exempt by the TRC.
2. As determined by the TRC, additional driveway entrances may be granted .
C. Alternative Configuration. As an alternative to compliance with the general
standards in section (A) above, development may incorporate one of the following
alternative street access standards:
1. Dead-End Streets. The terminus of a dead-end street does not provide the
required access to a publicly maintained street unless it is configured as a
circular turnaround or other turnaround approved and constructed in
conformance with Chapter 7: Subdivisions Standards.
2. Private Streets. Private streets may be used to meet the access
requirements for single-family lots in a planned development district,
single-family attached developments, and multiple lot developments,
provided the district or development as a whole abuts and has direct
access to a publicly-maintained street.
3. Single-Family Attached Development
(a) Individual lots shall have rights of access through a common area
containing private streets or private drives that are at least of 24 feet
in width and lead to a publicly-maintained street.
(b) Direct access to a publicly-maintained street from an individual lot
containing a single-family attached dwelling shall require approval
from the TRC.
5-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
4. Multiple Lot Development. Individual lots in a multiple lot development
must have shared rights of access along private streets or private drives
that are at least 24 feet in width and lead to a publicly-maintained street.
5. Access Through Easement. Lots of record established as of January 1,
2007 that do not abut a publicly-maintained street may establish access
through a recorded access easement provided the lot is used for only 1
single-family detached dwelling and meets the following criteria:
(a) The minimum easement width shall be 25 feet.
(b) The minimum separation between the easement and any other
platted access or right-of-way shall be 150 feet.
(c) The location of the easement must be recorded on a plat.
(d) The easement shall permit ingress, egress, and regress and
necessary utilities to serve the lot.
6. Access Through Unimproved Right-of-Way. A single zone lot that has
frontage on an existing unimproved public right-of-way, may obtain access
through such right-of-way, provided that the following minimum criteria
are met:
(a) A site plan, signed and sealed by a professional surveyor, shall be
submitted that shows the lot has no other frontage on an improved
public street;
(b) The unimproved public right-of-way is at least 20 feet in width;
(c) The access shall serve only 1 single-family detached dwelling and its
uninhabited accessory structures;
(d) The access shall serve only 1 zone lot. If the unimproved public
right-of-way is the sole means of access to more than 1 zone lot in
the same block, access pursuant to this subsection shall not be
approved;
(e) If the zone lot contains multiple parcels, they shall be combined into
1 parcel as a condition of approval;
(f) The access shall be maintained by the lot owner; and
(g) Utilities shall be located within the unimproved right-of-way and
extended to the lot in accordance with Town standards. The lot
owner shall maintain water and sewer utility lines from the edge of
the existing street right-of-way to the dwelling. Any proposed
dwelling must be within 500 feet of an approved fire hydrant.
7. Special Purpose Lot. Special purpose lots may establish access through an
easement a minimum of 10 feet in width, in accordance with Section
7.1.6.B.6, Special Purpose Lots.
5.2.3. - Cross-Access
A. Purpose and Intent. The intent of this section is to provide for cross-access
between comparable commercial and industrial land uses that front
thoroughfare streets so that vehicles leaving one lot may access the adjoining lot
without having to re-enter the public street system. It is not the intent of this
5-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
section to reduce the number of driveways beyond what is allowed in the Town’s
Driveway Ordinance.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to commercial and
industrial uses, as defined in Section 4.2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and
Use types, on zone lots that front thoroughfare streets with the following, unless
exempted in accordance with Section 5.2.3.C, Exemptions:
1. New Building or Uses. New principal buildings or new open uses of land.
2. Expansions. Individual or collective expansions of existing principal
buildings, open uses of land, or off-street parking that exceed 50 percent.
C. Exemptions. Cross-access is not required when any of the following conditions
are present:
1. Adjacent lots do not have common frontage along a thoroughfare;
2. Significant topographical differences in existing or proposed conditions are
present;
3. Significant natural features exist in the only viable location for cross-access
connections;
4. Vehicular safety factors including, but not limited to, unsafe turning
movements or pedestrian conflicts;
5. Sufficient cross-access already exists;
6. Residential, institutional, or other incompatible land uses, as defined in
Section 4.2, Use Classifications, Use Categories, and Use Types, are present
on adjacent lots;
7. Bed and breakfast establishments;
8. Existing infrastructure obstructions; or
9. Other safety or security factors.
D. Easement Recordation. A cross-access easement must be recorded on the final
plat for property involving a subdivision, or recorded by separate instrument
when no plat is proposed.
E. No Obstruction of Access. All cross-accessways shall be built to the lot line, to the
maximum extent practicable. An accessway shall not be obstructed unless
approved by the Planning and Inspections Director.
F. Off-street Parking. Where a required cross-accessway eliminates required
off-street parking spaces, replacement spaces shall not be required.
G. Perimeter Landscaping. Where a required cross-accessway eliminates a required
landscape planting area, the landscaping requirements shall be reduced to
accommodate the cross-accessway and replacement landscaping shall not be
required.
H. Connection Required. Development on vacant land subject to these standards
shall install cross-accessways to the shared property line. However, if the abutting
5-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
landowner that does not already have a cross-accessway stub is unwilling to allow
the cross-accessway to be built to the shared property line due to the impact of
the grading equipment or other construction activity on their property, then the
Planning and Inspections Director shall notify the unwilling property owner that
they will be responsible for completing the cross-accessway when their property
is developed.
5.3. - Reserved
5.4. - Off-Street Parking and Loading
5.4.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this section is to ensure the provision of safe off-street parking
and loading facilities for development allowed by this Unified DevelopmentOrdinance.
The standards in this section are intended to avoid requiring an over-supply of parking
that pose economic and environmental impacts while ensuring off-street parking is
provided to mitigate impacts to streets and neighborhoods.
5.4.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to zone lots with the following, unless exempted
in accordance with Section 5.4.3, Exemptions:
A. New Buildings or Uses. New principal buildings or new open uses of land.
B. Changes in Use. Changes in the principal use, except that if the use change
results in an increase of less than 5 percent in the required number of parking
spaces, or less than 5 additional parking spaces, no additional parking spaces area
required.
C. Expansions. Expansions of existing principal buildings or open uses of land.
5.4.3. - Exemptions
A. CB District. Development on land within the CB districts shall comply with the
requirements of this section, except that it is exempt from the minimum
off-street parking requirements of Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking
Standards.
B. Historic Properties. No off-street parking is required for:
5-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
1. Rehabilitation or reuse of a National Register site or locally designated
landmark;
2. Rehabilitation or reuse of a contributing building within a National
Register district or the LHO; and
3. Rehabilitation or reuse of a structure that is on the North Carolina National
Register Advisory Committee's Study List.
5.4.4. - Off-Street Parking Requirements
A. Parking Plan Required. Every application for a site plan, group development
plan, building permit, or zoning compliance permit, shall ensure that adequate
off-street parking is provided for the uses or buildings contained in the
application. Off-street parking must be provided to meet the parking demand
without use of public streets, except as specifically allowed by this section.
B. Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards. The minimum number of off-street
parking spaces required for development shall be in accordance with Table
5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-street Parking Standards.
Table 5.4.4.B : Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards
Use Category Use Type Requirement
Agricultural Use Classification
Agriculture All No minimum spaces required
Residential Use Classification
Common
elements
recreation
Common Elements
Recreation No minimum spaces required
Household
Living
Duplex Dwelling
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Family Care Home
Live/Work Dwelling
Manufactured Dwelling
Single-family Detached
Dwelling
Single-family Attached
Dwelling 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit; except 0.5 spaces per
Multi-family Dwelling dwelling unit for elderly housing developments
Triplex/Quadplex
Group Living Dormitory, private 1 space per bedroom
Life Care
Assisted Living Facility 0.3 spaces per room; minimum of 5 spaces required
Continuing Care
Retirement Community
As required by this table for specific uses (e.g.
household living, assisted living, long-term/skilled
5-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
nursing facilities, etc.)
Long-term Care/Skilling
Nursing Facility 0.3 spaces per room
Institutional Use Classification
Civic
Assembly & Cultural
Facilities, Major
1 space per 6 seats in auditoriums, theaters and similar
places of assembly, and 1.5 spaces per 1000 sf GFA all
other areas
Assembly & Cultural
Facilities, Minor 1 space per 500 sf GFA; minimum of 5 spaces provided
Cemetery, Columbarium,
Mausoleum No minimum spaces required
Correctional Facility 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift
Government Facility As required for the most similar non-governmental use
Public Recreation Facility No minimum spaces required
Day Care Day Care Center 1 space per 400 sf gfa
Education
College or University 1 space per 4 students
Other Post-Secondary
Educational Facility 1 space per 400 sf GFA
School, Major 1.5 space per classroom
School, Minor 1 space per classroom
Truck Driving School 1 space per 400 sf gfa
Health Care
Hospital, Specialty Hospital 1.5 space per bed
Medical Care Facility, Major 1 space per 500 sf GFA
Medical Care Facility, Minor 1 space per 800 sf GFA, minimum of 5 spaces provided
Religious
Institution Religious Institution
1 space per 6 seats in main assembly room or for
institutions without seating, 1 space per 50 sf of area in
the main assembly room
Transportation
Airport No minimum spaces required
Park and Ride Facility No minimum spaces required
Passenger Terminal,
Surface Transportation No minimum spaces required
Taxi or Limousine Service
Facility 1 space per 400 sf GFA of office area
Utilities
Communication or
Broadcasting Facilities 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift
Solar Array No minimum spaces required
Utility Facility, Major 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift
Utility Facility, Minor
No minimum spaces required
5-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Wireless
Telecommunication
Facility, Major
Wireless
Telecommunication
Facility, Minor
Commercial Use Classification
Adult
Entertainment Adult Entertainment 1 space per 200 sf GFA
Animal Care
Animal Care, Major 1 space per 400 sf GFA of office area
Animal Care, Minor 1 space per 100 sf GFA
Eating
Establishments
Bar or Nightclub 1 space per 100 sf GFA
Restaurant 1 space per 200 sf GFA
Offices Office 1 space per 800 sf GFA, minimum of 4 spaces provided
Parking,
Commercial Parking, Commercial No minimum spaces required
Personal
Services All 1 space per 500 sf GFA
Recreation and
Leisure
Amusement and
Entertainment
1 space per 6 seats in theaters and similar places of
assembly, and 1 space per 400 sf GFA all other areas
Amusement Parks 1 space per 600 sf of outdoor areas and 1 per 400 sf GFA
of indoor areas
Sports and Fitness Centers 1.5 spaces per 1000 sf GFA; minimum of 5 spaces
provided
Retail Sales All
1 space per 400 sf GFA up to 400,000 sf and 1 space per
800 sf GFA for areas over 400,000 sf; minimum of 5
spaces provided
Vehicle
Establishments All 1 space per 400 sf GFA of sales and office area;
minimum of 5 spaces provided
Visitor
Accommodation
Bed and Breakfast 1 space per guest room, plus 1 space for owner/operator
Hotels or Motels 1 space per guest room
Industrial Use Classification
Extractive
Industry Extractive Industry 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift
Industrial
Services All 1 space per 400 sf GFA of sales and office area
Manufacturing
and Production
All (except Motion picture
production) 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift
Motion Picture Production 1 space per 2,000 sf GFA
Warehousing
Freight Movement
1 space per 2 employees at peak shift
5-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
and Freight
Movement
Warehouse and
Distribution
Self-storage 1 space per 400 sf GFA of office area
Waste Related
Service All 1 space per 2 employees at peak shift
Wholesale Trade Wholesale 1 space per 400 sf GFA of sales and office area;
minimum of 5 spaces provided
C. Maximum Off-Street Parking Standards. For non-residential uses, the maximum
number of off-street parking spaces allowed for development shall be 150% of the
minimum parking spaces required in accordance with Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum
Off-street Parking Standards.
D. Uses Not Listed. For uses that do not correspond to the use types listed in Table
5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards, the Planning and Inspections
Director shall determine the minimum parking space requirement. In such
instances, the application shall provide adequate information for review, which
includes, but is not limited to the type of use(s), number of employees, the
occupancy of the building, square feet of sales, service and office area, parking
spaces proposed and hours of operation.
E. Other Vehicles Located Off-Street. The following vehicles are not included in
Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards, and shall be parked or
located outside required parking spaces and any public street right-of-way in
accordance with this Unified Development Ordinance:
1. Vehicles for sale or lease;
2. Vehicles being stored, serviced or repaired; or
3. Vehicles belonging to the use, such as company vehicles.
F. Multiple-Use Development. Development containing more than 1 principal use
shall provide parking spaces in an amount equal to the total of all individual
principal uses, except as allowed in Section 5.4.8, Parking Alternatives.
G. Driveways Used to Meet Requirements. Except for multi-family dwellings,
driveways may be used to meet the minimum off-street parking space
requirements for all use types in the Household Living use category, provided that
sufficient space is available to meet the standards of this section.
H. On-Street Parking Credited. The use of on-street parking to meet the minimum
off-street parking space requirements is permitted for nonresidential
development in the CB district, subject to the following standards:
1. On-street parking exists within 500 linear feet of the primary entrance of
the development;
5-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
2. The on-street parking spaces directly abut (not across the street) the lot
containing the development and is served by a sidewalk;
3. There is not a negative impact to existing or planned traffic circulation
patterns; and
4. The on-street spaces shall not be reserved for sole use by the development.
I. Administrative Adjustment. The Planning and Inspections Director is authorized
to grant an administrative adjustment to the minimum required parking spaces
in accordance with Section 2.6.2, Administrative Adjustment.
5.4.5. - Bicycle Parking Requirements
Bicycle parking, in accordance with this section, is required in the OI, NC and all
residential districts for residential developments with 20 or more dwelling units or
nonresidential developments with 10,000 or more square feet of gross floor area.
A. General Standards
1. Bicycle parking shall be provided at the rate of 1 bicycle space for every 30
residential dwelling units or every 5,000 square feet of nonresidential gross
floor area. A minimum of at least 2 bicycle parking spaces shall be
provided.
2. A bicycle rack or other device shall be provided to enable bicycles to be
secured.
3. Bicycle parking shall be located where it does not interfere with pedestrian
traffic and is protected from conflicts with vehicular traffic.
4. Bicycle parking should be accessible to the primary entrances of the
development and in a visible, well-lit area.
B. Shared Bicycle Parking. Adjoining developments may share required bicycle
parking spaces provided:
1. Each use provides or is served by an improved walkway from the bicycle
parking spaces to the primary entrance.
2. The shared bicycle parking spaces and the improved walkway are depicted
on a site plan or group development plan, whichever is appropriate.
5.4.6. - Off-Street Loading Requirements
A. Loading Space Required. Every application for a site plan, group development
plan, building permit, or zoning compliance permit for a nonresidential use shall
ensure that adequate loading space is provided so that loading vehicles do not
occupy required off-street parking spaces, block vehicular access, or prevent
appropriate on-site maneuvering.
B. Minimum Off-Street Loading Space Requirements. A minimum number of
loading spaces is not established; however, off-street loading space shall be
5-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
provided and maintained in sufficient numbers to adequately handle the needs
of a nonresidential use.
5.4.7. - Standards for Off-Street Parking Spaces and
Loading Areas
Off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces along with drive aisles and private drives
are referred to a "vehicular use area". Vehicular use areas shall meet the standards of this
section.
A. General
1. All required off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces shall be
located on the same zone lot as the principal use it serves, except as
allowed in Section 5.4.8, Parking Alternatives.
2. All required off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces shall not be
used for any other purpose, including, but not limited to the storage or
display of goods or the sale, lease, storage, or repair of vehicles.
3. Required off-street parking shall be maintained for the duration of the
principal use and shall not be reduced unless the principal use ceases or
changes.
4. Off-street loading spaces shall be not be located in any required parking
space or protrude into any public street.
B. Easements. A vehicular use area shall not be located within an easement without
approval of the easement holder.
C. Parking Space Access. All off-street parking spaces shall be accessed directly
from drive aisles or private driveways and not directly from public streets.
D. Vehicle Backing
1. Vehicular use areas shall be designed so that a vehicle is not required to
back onto a public street to enter or exit the vehicular use area, a parking
space, or a stacking space.
2. Except in the CB district, off-street loading shall be designed so that no
backing into or from a public street is necessary.
5-14
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
E. Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles. Standards parking
spaces and parking aisles shall comply with the minimum dimensional standards
established in Table 5.4.7.E, Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles.
Table 5.4.7.E : Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles
Parking Angle (Degrees Space Width (Feet) Space Depth (Feet) Minimum Aisle
Width (Feet)
Parallel (0°) 9 20 12
Angled (30°) 9 17.3 11
Angled (45°) 9 19.8 13
Angled (60°) 9 21 18
Perpendicular (90°) 9 20 24
F. Handicapped Accessibility. Development providing off-street parking spaces
must ensure a portion of the off-street parking spaces are designated, located,
and reserved for use by persons with physical disabilities in accordance with the
standards of the State Building Code.
G. Dimensional Standards for Loading Spaces. Except for loading spaces used by
semi-tractor trailers, off-street loading spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide and at
least 25 feet long. Off-street loading spaces used by semi-tractor trailers shall be
at least 60 feet long. Overhead clearance shall be at least 14 feet.
H. Pedestrian Connections. Pedestrian connections between the principal
buildings on a development site and a public street(s) must be provided through
improved walkways with a minimum unobstructed width of 4 feet. Parking
spaces shall be designed to ensure vehicles do not encroach into the walkways.
I. Stacking Spaces
1. General. Uses with drive-through facilities and other auto-oriented uses
where vehicles queue up to access a service shall provide adequate
stacking spaces on-site for the uses or buildings in accordance with this
section. Such uses include but are not limited to: restaurants with
drive-through, convenience store with fuel sales, and other uses with
service bays or drive-throughs.
2. Design. Stacking spaces are subject to the following design and layout
standards:
(a) Size. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of 9 feet wide and 18 feet
long.
(b) Traffic Movements. Stacking spaces shall not impede vehicular
traffic movements or movements into or out of parking spaces,
whether on-site or off-site.
5-15
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
(c) Bicycle and Pedestrian Movement. Stacking spaces shall not
impede onsite or offsite bicycle or pedestrian traffic movements,
whether on-site or off-site.
(d) Separation. Stacking spaces shall be clearly delineated through
such means as striping, landscaping, pavement design, or curbing.
J. Private Drives
1. A vehicular use area shall be connected to a public street in a manner that
affords safe and convenient ingress and egress.
2. A one-way drive shall be at least 12 feet wide and a 2-way drive shall be at
least 20 feet wide.
3. Off-street parking spaces shall not be directly accessible off a private drive,
except as allowed for use types in the Household Living use category in
Section 5.4.4.G, Driveways Used to Meet Requirements.
4. A private drive for vehicular use areas containing 200 or more parking
spaces shall be unobstructed for at least 30 feet in length from the
right-of-way line to a drive aisle or parking space to accommodate the
ingress and egress of at least 2 vehicles without conflict with vehicles
accessing parking spaces or drive aisles and creating an obstruction in the
public street.
5. The design and location of private drives accessing public streets shall be
subject to the Town’s Driveway Ordinance.
K. Surface Material
1. All required parking spaces, drives, and loading spaces in a vehicular use
area shall be paved and maintained with concrete, asphalt, or similar
material of sufficient thickness and consistency to support anticipated
traffic volumes and weights, except as provided in this section.
2. The use of pervious or semi-pervious materials may be approved as an
alternate means of paving provided it is demonstrated that the materials
will function in a similar fashion as required materials.
3. Private drives accessing public streets shall be paved and maintained from
the curb line or edge of pavement to a point at least 10 feet from the public
street right-of-way for all vehicular use areas and at least 30 feet for all
vehicular use areas with 200 or more parking spaces, whether the
vehicular use area is paved or unpaved.
4. Except for required parking facilities for the disabled, required parking may
be constructed with gravel or other approved comparable all-weather
surface for:
(a) Parking used on an irregular basis for religious institutions, private
minor assembly uses, and other similar nonprofit organizations;
(b) Parking for residential uses or a bed and breakfast establishment
where 6 or fewer spaces are required;
(c) Parking for an office use converted from a single-family detached
dwelling where 4 or fewer spaces are required;
5-16
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
(d) Parking for industrial uses in the HI district, or manufacturing and
production uses in the LI district.
5. Required parking facilities and associated access for the disabled shall be
paved in accordance with the State Building Code.
L. Grading and Drainage. The vehicular use area shall be graded, properly drained,
stabilized, and maintained to minimize dust and erosion.
M. Curb and Gutter. Where vehicular use areas are paved, curb and gutter or an
equivalent drainage system shall be provided along the periphery of the area.
N. Markings. All spaces and lanes in vehicular use areas shall be clearly delineated
with paint lines, curbs, or other treatment, whether the vehicular use area is
paved or unpaved.
O. Curbs and Wheel Stops. All parking spaces shall have curbs or wheel stops
located so that no part of the parked vehicle will extend onto a sidewalk or
walkway less than 6-feet in width, adjacent property or landscape area, whether
the vehicular use area is paved or unpaved.
P. Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting in vehicular use areas shall be designed to
prevent glare or illumination exceeding maximum allowable levels on adjacent
land and shall comply with the standards of Section 5.10, Exterior Lighting, as
appropriate.
Q. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 5.5.10,
Parking Lot Landscaping.
5.4.8. - Parking Alternatives
The Planning and Inspections Director is authorized to approve an alternative parking
plan for development that proposes alternatives to providing the number of off-street
parking spaces required by Table 5.4.4.B, Minimum Off-Street Parking Standards, in
accordance with the standards of this subsection. Nothing in this section shall limit the
utilization of one or more of the following off-street parking alternatives by a single use.
A. Shared Parking
1. The required off-street parking for a use may be met off-site with the
required off-street parking spaces of another use in accordance with the
following standards:
(a) The shared parking is located within 1,000 feet as measured from
the entrance of the use to the nearest shared parking space.
(b) An improved walkway is provided to the shared parking area from
the use.
(c) If the shared parking is located across a thoroughfare, then an
adequate and safe pedestrian street crossing, as determined by the
5-17
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Planning and Inspections Director, shall exist to safely manage
pedestrian crossings. If pedestrian improvements are needed for
safe crossings, then the improvements shall be installed prior to use
of the shared parking.
(d) The uses served by the shared parking plan must have different
peak parking demands, differences in hours or days of operation, or
otherwise operate such that the uses have access to the required
minimum parking spaces when in operation.
2. The Planning and Inspections Director may approve up to 100 percent of
the minimum parking requirement of a use through a shared parking
plan.
3. A written agreement allowing the shared use of parking shall be executed
by the owners involved and filed with the Planning and Inspections
Director prior to the use of shared parking facilities. The agreement must
guarantee the long-term availability of parking. Should the agreement
cease, then the use shall be considered to contain nonconforming site
conditions if the required parking is not met and future expansions of the
use shall be prohibited unless the use is brought into compliance with the
minimum parking requirements of this section.
B. Off-Site Parking
1. The required off-street parking for a use may be met off-site in accordance
with the following standards:
(a) The off-site parking is located within 1,000 feet as measured from
the entrance of the use to the nearest shared parking space.
(b) An improved walkway is provided to the off-site parking area from
the use.
(c) If the off-site parking is located across a thoroughfare, then an
adequate and safe pedestrian street crossing shall exist to safely
manage pedestrian crossings. If pedestrian improvements are
needed for safe crossings, then the improvements shall be installed
prior to use of the off-site parking.
2. A written agreement allowing the off-site use of parking shall be executed
by the owners involved and filed with the Planning and Inspections
Director prior to the use of off-site parking facilities. The agreement shall
guarantee the long-term availability of parking. Should the agreement
cease, then the use shall be considered to contain nonconforming site
conditions if the required parking is not met and future expansions of the
use shall be prohibited unless the use is brought into compliance with the
minimum parking requirements of this section.
C. Compact Spaces. Up to 20 percent of the required off-street parking spaces may
be provided as compact car spaces in accordance with the following standards:
1. Each compact car space shall be at least 8 feet wide and 16 feet deep.
5-18
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
2. Compact car spaces shall be clearly marked or posted for compact cars
only.
5.5. - Landscaping
5.5.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this section is to establish minimum requirements for landscaping. These
standards are intended to:
A. Advance the general purposes of this Ordinance;
B. Ensure and encourage the planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of
trees, shrubs, and other plants;
C. Ensure and encourage the preservation of existing significant trees, shrubs, and
other plants.
D. Promote the conservation of existing healthy trees and vegetation, and provide
for the restoration of land denuded as a result of grading and construction;
E. Ensure visual screening of unsightly areas;
F. Establish appropriate landscape yards and screening features to reduce the
negative impacts of glare, noise, trash, odors, lack of privacy, and visual
appearance that can occur when higher intensity land uses locate near lower
intensity land uses;
G. Safeguard and enhance property values and aesthetic qualities, and protect
public and private investment;
H. Encourage the use of low impact development techniques and sustainable
development practices;
I. Protect and improve environmental functions and conditions by providing
ecosystem features such as shade, air purification and oxygen regeneration,
filtering of stormwater runoff, and mitigation of noise, glare, and heat; and
J. Assure that the appearance of Aberdeen positively contributes to its growth and
economic prosperity.
5.5.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to zone lots with the following, unless exempted
in accordance with Section 5.5.3, Exemptions:
A. New Buildings or Uses. New principal buildings or new open uses of land.
B. Changes in Use. Changes in use of one or more in land use intensity (see Table
5.5.11.C.1, Land Use Intensity).
5-19
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
C. Expansions. In the case of an expansion of an existing building, outdoor use area,
or off-street parking lot, the following standards shall apply:
1. For individual or collective expansions of 50 percent or less, the standards
in this section shall apply only to the expanded portion; or
2. For individual or collective expansions that exceed 50 percent, the
standards in this section shall be applied to the entire zone lot.
5.5.3. - Exemptions
The following development is exempted from the standards in this section:
A. Residential Uses.
1. Development on land containing a single-family detached use is exempt
from the requirements of this section, except that it shall comply with the
requirements of Section 5.5.17, Tree Conservation for Residential Uses.
2. No perimeter landscape yard shall be required when single-family
detached and single-family attached dwelling units abut one another
within the same development.
B. CB District. Development in the CB district is exempt from the requirements of
this section, except for the parking areas;
C. Repaving. Repaving or restriping of an existing parking area;
D. Adjacent Development. Where lot lines abut the following forms of
development, no landscape yard is required:
1. Railroad rights-of-way or easements;
2. Utility easements of 60 feet or more in width; and
3. Street right-of-way that has remained unopened for a period of at least 15
years.
E. Outdoor Seating. Where outdoor seating is provided between a building and a
street, no plant material is required in the corresponding portion of the streetyard.
F. Minimal Parking Required. No parking lot landscaping shall be required for
parking lots on the same zone lot as the principal use they serve if they have less
than 5 parking spaces.
5.5.4. - District Standards
Some zoning districts and overlay districts, such as the GCO districts, include additional
district-specific landscaping standards (See Chapter 3: Zoning Districts).
5-20
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.5.5. - General Requirements
A. Conceptual Landscape Plan
1 A conceptual, or generalized landscape plan is required as part of a
submittal for a land disturbance permit. The purpose of the conceptual
plan is to ensure that landscape yard requirements can be met, required
undisturbed areas and buffers can be maintained, and slopes in required
landscape yards will meet the standards of Section 5.5.12, Landscape Yards
on Slopes.
2 Nothing shall prohibit an applicant from filing a revised landscape plan
that differs from a conceptual landscape plan.
B. Landscape Plan Required
1 A landscape plan depicting how required landscaping will be planted on a
development site shall be included with an application for site plan, group
development, or building permit, as appropriate, to ensure compliance
with this section.
2 The landscape plan shall be approved prior to, or concurrent with, the
approval of a site plan, group development plan, or the issuance of a
building permit.
3 A landscape plan shall contain, as a minimum, the following:
(a) Shall be drawn by a certified arborist, professional landscape
architect or similar design professional.
(b) Locate and inventory significant trees and flora to be preserved
(c) Location of required planting material;
(d) Identification of trees and plants, including their scientific names;
(e) Minimum and maximum dimensions of all landscape yard areas
(see Section 10.2, Rules of Measurement);
(f) Calculations determining the number of canopy trees, understory
trees, and shrubs required (see Section 10.2, Rules of Measurement);
(g) Locations, species, and sizes of existing vegetation to be retained
and counted towards minimum landscaping requirements; and
(h) Existing topography, and if proposed topography where site
grading is proposed to occur.
C. Stormwater Detention Pond Landscaping. If landscaping is proposed around or
on the embankment of a stormwater detention pond, a landscape plan must be
submitted for review to determine that the safety and functionality of the device
will not be compromised by the addition of trees and/or shrubs.
D. Landscaping in Bioretention Cells. Trees and shrubs used in bioretention cells or
rain gardens located in parking lots or within landscape yards may be counted
toward tree or shrub requirements provided they meet the minimum
specifications in Section 5.5.6, Plant Material Specifications.
5-21
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
E. Phased Development. Development that is planned in phases may submit a
landscape plan for the entire development, or separate landscape plans for each
phase, which shall be approved prior to approval of the final plat.
5.5.6. - Plant Material Specifications
A. Canopy Tree Size
1. Canopy trees shall have a minimum height at maturity of 40 feet or a
minimum crown width of 30 feet.
2. All canopy trees must be 7-gallon size and shall have a minimum caliper
size of 3 inches at planting.
3. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height at planting.
B. Understory Tree Size
1. Understory trees shall have a minimum height at maturity of 25 to 40 feet,
except that trees to be placed within 20 feet of overhead utility lines may
not exceed a mature height of 20 feet.
2. Drought tolerant, as defined in the Development Guide, understory trees
must have a minimum caliper size of 1 inch at planting.
3. All other understory trees must have a minimum caliper size of 2 inches at
planting.
C. Shrub Size and Type
1. Required shrubs in a Type A landscape yard or shrubs located parallel to
the edge of parking lots, access drives, loading and unloading areas, and
outdoor storage shall be evergreen.
2. Required shrubs in a Type B landscape yard shall be 50 percent or more
evergreen.
3. Required shrubs in a Type C landscape yard shall be 25 percent or more
evergreen.
4. Required shrubs in a streetyard or in a Type D landscape yard may be
evergreen or deciduous.
5. All shrubs must be at least a 3-gallon size and have a minimum height or
spread of 15 inches at the time of planting. Shrubs shall reach a minimum
height of 36 inches and a spread of 30 inches within 3 years of planting.
D. Species. Plant species used in required landscape yards must be native species or
derived from native species. Other species may be approved by the Planning and
Inspections Director. Refer to the Development Guide for listings of acceptable
plant material, which includes drought tolerant species and species suitable for
planting within 20 feet of overhead utilities.
E. Species Diversity. To curtail the spread of disease or insect infestation in a plant
species, new plantings shall comply with the following standards:
5-22
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
1. When fewer than 20 trees are required on a site, at least 2 different species
shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
2. When more than 20 but fewer than 40 trees are required to be planted on
site, at least 3 different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal
proportions.
3. When 40 or more trees are required on a site, at least four different species
shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
4. A larger number of different species than specified may be utilized.
5. In no instance shall invasive species be utilized as landscaping materials to
meet the requirements of this section.
F. Stabilization. Landscape yards shall be stabilized and maintained with ground
cover, mulch, or other approved materials to prevent soil erosion and allow
rainwater infiltration. Landscape yards with slopes of 15 percent or more shall be
stabilized with vegetative cover to minimize erosion and mulch washout. Use of
landscape fabric on slopes of 15 percent or more is discouraged.
G. Grouping of Plant Material
1. Except within a Type A landscape yard, plant material may generally be
grouped or clustered within the required landscape yards, however, the
overall intent of the particular landscape yard must be adequately
addressed. Groupings or clusters shall be depicted on the landscape plan
and be approved by the Planning and Inspections Director.
2. Perimeter landscaping materials adjacent to parking lots, access drives,
loading and unloading areas, and outdoor storage may not be grouped.
3. Required plant material in a Type A landscape yard may not be grouped,
and shall be planted according to the required on-center spacing in Table
5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape Yard Types.
H. Berms
1. Berms may be used independently, or in conjunction with a wall or
fencing, to meet the screening intent of the Type A landscape yard.
2. Berms must be stabilized, have a slope not exceeding 3:1 (horizontal to
vertical), have a crown width at least ½ the berm height, and may be no
taller than 8 feet above the toe of the berm slope.
3. Berms must not add more than 4 inches of soil to the root zone of a tree.
4. A berm may not damage the roots of existing healthy vegetation
designated to be preserved.
5. A berm may not be designed or placed as to interfere with required sight
distances.
I. Fences
1. Opaque fences, a minimum of 5 feet in height, constructed within required
landscape yards, may reduce the minimum and average landscape yard
5-23
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
width requirement in accordance with Table 5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape
Yard Types.
2. If utilized, fences shall be located within the landscape yard and all
required shrubs shall be planted between the fence and the lot line.
Required trees may be planted behind the fence.
J. Planters
1. Planters shall be constructed of masonry, stone, or pressure treated
lumber stamped for ground contact. Other materials may be approved,
based upon their durability, by the Planning and Inspections Director,
2. Planters shall have a minimum height of 30 inches and have an effective
planting area of 7 feet (measured in any direction) if trees are to be planted
and an effective planting area of 4 feet (measured in any direction) if no
trees are to be included.
3. The minimum height of shrubs in the planter, except for ground cover,
shall be 6 inches at the time of planting.
5.5.7. - Limitations on Landscaping Placement
A. Easements
1. Required trees and shrubs planted within a utility or a water quality
conservation easement must be approved by the easement holder
(whether such easement pertains to above or below ground rights).
2. When trees or shrubs are planted in a utility easement or a water quality
conservation easement, the landowner is responsible for replacement of
any required vegetation if maintenance or other utility requirements result
in its removal.
3. When trees or shrubs are planted in a water quality conservation
easement, they shall not impact the easement design or impede the flow
of water through the easement.
4. When required landscaping is permitted to be placed in an easement, the
easement width may be counted toward the minimum landscape yard
width. Additional area outside the easement shall be provided to meet
minimum and average required landscape yard widths.
5. Where an easement and a required landscape yard coincide, and there is a
prohibition on planting within a portion of the easement, and the
remaining width is not sufficient to properly contain required plant
material, then the landscape yard width shall be expanded in an amount
necessary to include all required plant material.
B. Fire Protection System. Minimum clear separation distances required by the
current adopted version of the North Carolina Fire Code shall be maintained for
landscaping near a fire protection system.
5-24
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
C. Obstructions at Intersections. No trees or shrubs shall be planted or maintained
in such a manner as to obstruct visibility for motorists at any street intersection in
accordance with the standards of the Development Guide.
D. Plantings in the Right-of-Way. Required planting materials shall not be located
within a public right-of-way unless
1. Approved in accordance with Section 7.1.6.H, Street Trees, or
2. Approved with Section 5.5.13, Alternate Landscape Plan, and shall be
subject to an encroachment agreement between the landowner and the
Town.
E. Permitted Encroachments. The following are permitted in required landscape
yards as indicated, provided the landscaping requirements are met and there is
no interference with visibility at intersections.
1. The following features may be located entirely within landscape yards
required by this section:
(a) Landscaping features such as, ornamental pools, planting boxes,
sculpture, arbors, trellises, and birdbaths;
(b) Pet shelters;
(c) At-grade patios or decks;
(d) Play equipment;
(e) Outdoor furniture and fireplaces;
(f) Ornamental entry columns, gates, fences, walls, and retaining walls;
(g) Flagpoles of 30 feet in height or less;
(h) Lamp and address posts;
(i) HVAC equipment, well houses, and utility cabinets of 4 feet in
height or less;
(j) Mailboxes and incidental signage;
2. The following features may encroach up to 2½ feet into a required
landscape yard, but no closer than 3 feet from any lot line:
(a) Cornices;
(b) Steps;
(c) Canopies;
(d) Overhanging eaves and gutters;
(e) Window sills, bay windows or similar architectural features;
(f) Chimneys; and
(g) Fire escapes, fire balconies, and fire towers.
3. Up to 15 percent of a required landscape yard may be occupied by
walkways and steps that are not connected to any above-grade structure.
4. A stormwater facility with an approved alternate landscape plan.
5. Handicap ramps, but not porches or landings.
F. Multiple-Lot Development
1. A multiple-lot development, such as a shopping center, that is configured
and developed as a single entity shall be treated as a single zone lot for the
5-25
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
purposes of applying the parking lot, landscape yard, and streetyard
standards.
2. Individual lots within a multiple-lot development shall be subject to the
screening requirements in Section 5.6, Screening.
5.5.8. - Credit for Existing Vegetation
A. General Standards. Existing healthy, well-formed canopy and understory trees
that are in or within 10 linear feet of a required landscape yard and that meet or
exceed the standards of this section may be credited toward the applicable tree
planting requirements of this section, in accordance with the following:
1. The landowner or developer has provided a plan showing the location and
size of canopy and understory trees to be credited, and trees depicted on
the plan have been marked or identified on the site.
2. The canopy and understory trees to be credited are protected before and
during development by tree protection fencing in accordance with the
Development Guide.
3. The location of the existing canopy and understory trees to be credited
contribute to the screening or buffering functions of the landscaping.
4. Any canopy or understory trees for which credit has been received that die
shall be replaced in a manner that ensures the landscaping meets the
requirements of this section.
B. Amount
1. Existing trees meeting the standards in (A) above that are retained during
and after development shall be credited towards the minimum landscape
requirements at a rate of 1.25 times the tree's actual DBH.
2. Trees to be credited shall be verified prior to credit being provided.
C. Credit Determination
1. The amount of credit towards the number of required new trees is
determined by dividing the total DBH of trees to be retained by the
minimum caliper inch size of required plantings (see Section 5.5.6, Plant
Material Specifications). Example: A development site that retains 3 8-inch
DBH canopy trees will be credited for a total of 30 inches DBH of existing
trees ((8x3) x 1.25 = 30 DBH), or 10 newly-planted canopy trees (30/3=10).
2. The Planning and Inspections Director shall verify and approve trees to be
credited in accordance with this section.
D. Streetyard Requirements. Regardless of the number or size of preserved trees in
required streetyards, there shall be at least 1 canopy tree for every 75 linear feet of
required streetyard.
5-26
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.5.9. - Time for Installation of Required Landscaping
A. Timing. Required landscaping (including mulching and seeding) shall be
installed in accordance with this section prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy unless a financial guarantee is established to ensure installation at a
later date.
B. Financial Guarantee. A financial guarantee prepared in accordance with Section
7.2, Financial Guarantees, shall be in place whenever occupancy is desired and
required landscaping has not been completed. The maximum length of time for a
landscaping financial guarantee shall be 6 months, which may be extended one
time for up to 90 days by the Planning and Inspections Director.
C. Multi-Phase Development. Multi-family, nonresidential, and mixed-use
development that is planned and developed in phases shall be required to install
landscaping that is associated with the active phase or phases only, unless an
alternative arrangement is otherwise agreed to by the Planning and Inspections
Director and the developer. An active phase of a development is the one that is
subject to permitted and on-going development activity.
D. Annual Inspection. An inspection of the required landscaping shall be scheduled
and performed by the Planning and Inspections Director. The inspection shall
occur after one year after installation and inspection of required landscaping.
5.5.10. - Parking Lot Landscaping
A. General Standards
1. Two or more parking lots on the same zone lot that are physically
separated by buildings and are not physically connected by internal drives
shall be considered independently.
2. Parking lot landscaping shall include at least 1 canopy tree for every 12
parking spaces.
3. Placement of Canopy Trees
(a) Required interior and perimeter parking lot canopy trees shall be
placed such that no parking space is more than 80 feet from the
trunk of a canopy tree for new or redeveloped nonresidential
parking areas, and 50 feet for new or redeveloped residential
parking areas.
(b) In cases where an approved alternate landscape plan permits
understory trees to be substituted for canopy trees, they shall be
placed such that no parking space is more than 50 feet from the
trunk of an understory tree for nonresidential parking areas, and 30
feet for residential parking areas.
5-27
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
(c) Additional trees above the minimum number required may be used
to meet this standard.
B. Interior Landscaping Standards
1. General Standards
(a) For the purposes of parking lot landscaping, the interior of a parking
lot shall be all of the area within the outer boundary of the parking
lot including interior and corner landscape islands intended to fulfill
the interior parking lot landscaping requirements, but not including
perimeter landscape yards.
(b) These standards shall not apply to parking structures, or vehicle
display areas.
(c) Required interior canopy trees shall be distributed throughout
parking areas and may be located in landscape islands, landscape
divider medians between rows of parking, or in driveway medians.
Trees used to satisfy the general rate requirement in Section
5.5.10.A.2., General Rate, may not be counted toward any landscape
yard requirement.
2. Landscaping Islands and Strips. A parking aisle with more than 12 spaces
in a single row shall provide and maintain landscaping islands or strips in
accordance with the following standards.
(a) Islands for planting canopy trees shall have a minimum dimension
of 10 feet and a minimum area of 200 square feet, including the
curb.
(b) Landscape islands that do not contain canopy trees may contain
understory trees and shall contain 3 or more shrubs. Landscape
islands that do not contain canopy trees shall have minimum
dimension of 5 feet, including the curb.
(c) Landscape strips between adjoining rows of parking spaces or
serving as driveway medians shall have a minimum dimension of 7
feet, including the curb, if canopy trees are included and 5 feet in all
other cases, including the curb. Landscape strips that do not have
canopy trees shall include shrubs planted no more than 10 feet on
center.
3. Separation of Light Poles and Trees. In order to prevent the need to
excessively trim trees within landscape areas and to maintain the
effectiveness of parking area lighting, light poles shall be spaced at least 10
linear feet from a canopy tree trunk, to the maximum extent practicable.
4. Protection of Landscape Islands. Landscape islands shall be protected
from vehicle damage by the installation of curbing, wheel stops or other
comparable methods. The placement of plant material within landscape
islands shall allow for a 2-foot vehicle overhang from the face of the curb or
wheel stop.
5. Stormwater Management. A landscape island may be designed to
function as a stormwater management device.
5-28
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
C. Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping Required. Where a parking lot abuts a
street or other development (other than another parking lot), landscaping shall
be provided and maintained in accordance with the following:
1. Intent. Parking lot perimeter landscaping shall be designed to soften the
view of the parking lot from an abutting street or development and to filter
spillover light from vehicle headlights. Required plant material shall be
planted in such a way as to best achieve this intent.
2. Location
(a) Required plant material shall be placed adjacent to the perimeter of
the parking area.
(b) Depending upon the geometric relationship of the parking lot to
the property lines or to topographic conditions, plant material may
be placed away from the edge of the parking area, if necessary, to
best achieve the intent of this subsection.
3. Planting Rate
(a) Parking lot perimeter landscaping shall be provided in an amount
equivalent to a Type D landscape yard except that plant material
shall be uniformly distributed along the parking lot perimeter.
(b) Parking lot perimeter landscaping shall be credited toward the
perimeter landscape yard planting requirement along the portion
of the lot line parallel to the to the parking lot perimeter
landscaping.
4. Size of Plant Material. Evergreen shrubs used for parking lot perimeter
landscaping shall be in accordance with Section 5.5.6.C, Shrub Size and
Type.
5. Alternative Configuration. An opaque or semi-opaque (50 percent
opaque or more) decorative fence may be provided in-lieu of the shrub
requirement if the fence is 48 inches above grade level, located adjacent to
the perimeter of the parking lot, and is made of brick, stone, wrought iron,
decorative aluminum or steel, painted or stained wood, or composite
material. Upon review, the Planning and Inspections Director may require
up to 50 percent of the required number of shrubs where a semi-opaque
fence is proposed to ensure the parking lot is sufficiently screened. Chain
link fencing, with or without slats, shall not be credited towards
landscaping requirements, but may be incorporated between a perimeter
landscape strip and the parking area.
6. Exemptions. Where parking lots are adjacent to one another, but on
different lots, a perimeter landscape yard is not required along the
common boundary of the parking lots. However, the requirements of
Section 5.5.10, Parking Lot Landscaping, shall be met.
5-29
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.5.11. - Perimeter Landscape Yards
A. General Standards
1. Landscape yards are required along the perimeter, extending inward from
the lot line, of a zone lot or development site in accordance with Table
5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape Yard Types, and Table 5.5.11.C.1, Land Use
Intensity. They are intended to mitigate potential adverse impacts that
may result when higher intensity land uses are located adjacent to lower
intensity land uses.
2. The width of permitted driveways and permitted cross-access easements,
measured at the lot line, shall be excluded from the calculation of required
plant material.
3. A perimeter landscape yard may be located along shared access
easements between parcels in nonresidential development.
4. A perimeter landscape yard in a multiple lot development that is
configured and developed as a single entity, is only required around the
outer perimeter of the development.
5. Stormwater management devices that incorporate vegetation (e.g.,
bioretention cell, rain garden, constructed wetlands, etc.) may be placed
within a perimeter landscape yard provided the screening function of the
landscape yard is maintained. Any plant material meeting the minimum
requirements for the landscape yard may be counted toward the
requirements.
B. Type of Landscape Yards. Table 5.5.11.B, Perimeter Landscape Yard Types,
establishes standards for the following different landscape yards:
1. Streetyard;
2. Type A Opaque Landscape Yard;
3. Type B Semi-Opaque Landscape Yard;
4. Type C Intermittent Landscape Yard; and
5. Type D Basic Landscape Yard.
Table 5.5.11.B : Perimeter Landscape Yard Types
Streetyard
Intent:
This landscape yard functions to distinguish the edge of the street right-of-way
and adjacent private land and to provide continuity of vegetation along public
streets.
Description/Minimum Requirements
Average width (feet) 10
Minimum width (feet)[1] 8
Maximum width (feet) 15
Canopy trees per 100 linear feet 2
5-30
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Shrubs per 100 linear feet 17
Type A : Opaque
Landscape Yard
Intent:
This landscape yard functions as an opaque screen from the ground to a height
of 8 feet. This type of buffer prevents visual and auditory contact between uses
and creates a strong impression of total separation.
Description/Minimum Requirements
Average width (feet) 45
Minimum width (feet)[1] 35
Maximum width (feet) 70
Canopy trees per 100 linear feet / on-center spacing
(feet) 4 / 25
Shrubs per 100 linear feet / on-center spacing (feet) 10 / 10
Evergreen shrubs per 100 linear feet / on-center
spacing (feet) 33% / 3
5-foot Opaque Fence Reduces average and
minimum widths by 10 feet
Type B : Semi
Opaque
Landscape Yard
Intent:
This landscape yard functions as a partially opaque screen from the ground to a
height of 6 feet. This type of buffer prevents visual contact between uses and
creates a sense of spatial separation.
Description/Minimum Requirements
Average width (feet) 25
Minimum width (feet)[1] 20
Maximum width (feet) 45
Canopy trees per 100 linear feet 4
Shrubs per 100 linear feet 6
Evergreen shrubs per 100 linear feet [2] 25%
5-foot Opaque Fence Reduces average and
minimum widths by 5 feet
Type C :
Intermittent
Landscape Yard
Intent:
This landscape yard functions as an intermittent visual screen from the ground to
a height of 5 feet. It is intended to partially block visibility between different uses
but not totally obstruct visual contact from one use to another.
Description/Minimum Requirements
Average width (feet) 15
Minimum width (feet)[1] 10
Maximum width (feet) 35
Canopy trees per 100 linear feet 3
5-31
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Shrubs per 100 linear feet 4
Evergreen shrubs per 100 linear feet [2] 20%
5-foot Opaque Fence Reduces average and
minimum widths by 5 feet
Type D : Basic
Landscape Yard
Intent:
This landscape yard functions as a means to demarcate boundaries between
different uses and provide only a slight visual obstruction between different uses.
Description/Minimum Requirements
Average width (feet) 8
Minimum width (feet)[1] 5
Maximum width (feet) 15
Canopy trees per 100 linear feet None
Shrubs per 100 linear feet 2
Evergreen shrubs per 100 linear feet [2] 15%
5-foot Opaque Fence No Additional Reductions
[1] : If the required principal building setback is less than the required landscape yard width, the principal building
setback controls and the landscape yard width shall be reduced only along the length of the building wall that
encroaches into the landscape yard. Regardless of reduction in streetyard width, the required planting material
must be installed, though its location may be modified in accordance with Section 5.5.13, Alternate Landscape Plan.
[2] : A percentage of the required shrubs must be evergreen. See Section 5.5.6 C, Shrub Size and Type.
C. Landscape Yard Type Application
1. To determine the type of landscape yard required, first identify the land
use intensity of the proposed (new, changed, or expanded) use, then
identify the land use intensity of each existing use on adjacent sites (see
Table 5.5.11.C.1, Land Use Intensity). Then, using Table 5.5.11.C.2, Type of
Landscape Yard Required, the intersection of the row associated with the
proposed use and the column associated with the adjacent use shows the
type of landscape yard required.
2. The land use intensity is a number that corresponds to the intensity of
development.
3. A land use is considered to "exist" on an adjacent property when a building
permit is issued.
4. If a zone lot contains uses with different land use intensities, the higher
numbered land use intensity applies unless an Administrative Adjustment
is approved in accordance with Section 5.5.13, Alternate Landscape Plan.
5-32
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Table 5.5.11.C.1 : Land Use Intensity
Use Category Use Type Land Use Intensity Score
Agricultural Use Classification
Agriculture
Agriculture Production (Crops) 1
Agriculture Production (Livestock) 3
Residential Use Classification
Common elements
recreation Common Elements Recreation 1
Household Living
Duplex Dwelling
1
Family Care Home
Live/Work Dwelling
Manufactured Dwelling
Single-family Detached Dwelling
Single-family Attached Dwelling
Multi-family Dwelling 2
Triplex/Quadplex
Group Living
All (except SRO) 2
SRO 3
Life Care All 2
Institutional Use Classification
Civic
Assembly & Cultural Facilities 3
Cemetery, Columbarium, Mausoleum 1
Correctional Facility 4
Government Facility 3
Public Recreation Facility 3
Day Care Day Care Center 3
All (except Truck Driving School) 3
Truck Driving School 4
Health Care All 3
Religious Institution Religious Institution 3
Transportation
Airport 5
Park and Ride Facility 3
Passenger Terminal, Surface Transportation 4
Taxi or Limousine Service Facility 4
Utilities Communication or Broadcasting Facilities 3
5-33
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Solar Array 3
Utility Facility, Major 4
Utility Facility, Minor 3
Wireless Telecommunication Facility 3
Commercial Use Classification
Adult Entertainment Adult Entertainment 4
Animal Care
Animal Care, Major 4
Animal Care, Minor 3
Eating Establishments All 3
Offices All 3
Parking, Commercial Parking, Commercial 3
Personal Services All 3
Recreation and
Leisure
Amusement and Entertainment 3
Amusement Parks 3
Sports and Fitness Centers 5
Retail Sales All 3
Vehicle
Establishments All 3
Visitor
Accommodation
Bed and Breakfast 1
Hotels or Motels 3
Industrial Use Classification
Extractive Industry Extractive Industry 5
Industrial Services All 4
Manufacturing and
Production
All (except microbrewery, microdistillery, micro
winery, or motion picture production) 5
Microbrewery, micro distillery or micro winery 4
Motion Picture Production 3
Warehousing and
Freight Movement All 4
Waste Related Service All 4
Wholesale Trade Wholesale 4
5-34
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Table 5.5.11.C.2 : Type of Landscape Yard Required
Land Use Intensity of Proposed
Use
Land Use Intensity of Existing Adjacent Use
1 2 3 4 5 Vacant
1 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
2 C N/A C B B D
3 B B N/A C B D
4 A A C N/A C D
5 A A B C N/A N/A
D. Streetyard Standards
1. Streetyard landscaping shall be installed in accordance with Table 5.5.11.B,
Perimeter Landscape Yard Types. Trees associated with streetyard
landscaping shall not be located within 4 feet of the right-of-way line.
2. Off-street parking, storage, or display shall be prohibited within a
streetyard.
3. No streetyard landscaping shall be required along an alley.
5.5.12. - Landscape Yards on Slopes
Slopes over 50 percent shall not be used to meet a landscape yard requirement. Slope
areas of between 33 percent and 50 percent may be used to meet a landscape yard
requirement in accordance with the following:
A. Existing Slope with Adequate Tree Cover. If the required number of trees for the
applicable landscape yard exists on the slope, then the slope area is deemed to
meet the landscape yard requirements, provided that no healthy trees or other
vegetation are removed and no grading or clearing of the slope occurs.
B. Existing Slope without Adequate Tree Cover. If the slope area lacks the required
number of trees for the applicable landscape yard, then additional trees and
vegetation shall be provided to meet the landscape yard requirement. No existing
healthy trees or vegetation may be removed and no grading or clearing of the
slope may occur. Unhealthy or unsuitable trees or vegetation, as determined by
the Planning and Inspections Director, must be removed and replaced.
C. Newly-graded Slope. If the slope area is newly graded, the slope area shall be
replanted to provide tree cover over the entire area. Plans for replanting shall
include a minimum of one canopy tree per 400 square feet of surface area and
may be made up of a mixture of deciduous hardwood and evergreen trees
meeting the minimum standards of Section 5.5.6, Plant Material Specifications.
Immediate installation of soil stabilization material is required. Replanting plans
are subject to the approval of the Planning and Inspections Director, and upon
5-35
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
installation will be deemed to meet the tree requirement for the applicable
landscape yard.
5.5.13. - Alternate Landscape Plan
An alternate landscape plan may be approved by the Planning and Inspections Director,
that allows modifications to the requirements of this section. Natural physical conditions
(such as streams, wetland areas, and topography), lot configuration, utility easements,
desire to retain existing vegetation, and impractical situations that would result from
application of Section 5.5 Landscaping Standards, may justify approval of an alternate
landscape plan.
A. Intent. Any alternate landscape plan approved shall meet the intent of the
applicable landscape yard(s) and the purpose and intent of the landscaping
standards of this section.
B. Allowable Modifications
1. The following landscape standards may be modified by an alternate
landscape plan.
(a) The location of required plant materials;
(b) The configuration of required plant materials; and
(c) The number of required plant materials.
2. The alternative landscape plan shall include justification for the
modifications requested, based upon but not limited to the following:
(a) The presence or planned location of public utilities, infrastructure, or
easements;
(b) The location of existing healthy vegetation or other beneficial site
features to be retained after development;
(c) The size, shape, or topographic elevation of the site relative to the
street(s) it abuts; and
(d) The need to protect solar access or avoid permanently shaded areas
on the site.
5.5.14. - Additional Landscape Yard Flexibility
A. Substitution
1. Canopy trees may be substituted for shrubs at the rate of 1 canopy tree for
8 shrubs, and understory trees may be substituted for shrubs at the rate of
1 understory tree for 5 shrubs if approved by the Planning and Inspections
Director.
2. Understory trees may be substituted for canopy trees at the rate of 2
understory trees for each canopy tree when a conflict exists due to
overhead utility lines.
B. Existing Lots of Record
5-36
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
1. On lots of record that existed prior to January 1, 2007 tha t are less than
55,000 square feet in area, no development is required to landscape more
than 15 percent of the lot. Priority shall be placed on meeting streetyard
requirements first, then on other perimeter landscape yards.
2. Where a required landscape yard is reduced in width by 10 feet or more
than the minimum requirement, and the differential in land use intensity is
2 or more categories, a 5-foot opaque fence may be required by the
Planning and Inspections Director.
C. Plantings in Shaded Areas. Where a building is located less than 10 feet from a
lot line, and the landscape yard would be heavily shaded by buildings on either
side of the lot line, required trees and shrubs may be planted outside the shaded
area to improve their chances of survival.
5.5.15. - Landscape Yard Maintenance
A. General. The landowner is responsible for maintaining all required plant materials
and landscape yards in good health and appearance. Any dead, unhealthy,
severely damaged, or missing plants (whether preserved or installed) must be
replaced with new plant material equal in quantity and quality. Replacement
plant material shall be installed within 180 days of the date of owner notification.
The obligation for continuous maintenance is binding on any subsequent owners
of the land, or any other parties having a controlling interest in the property.
B. Protection of Plant Material. The landowner or developer shall take actions to
protect trees and landscaping from unnecessary damage during all facility and
site maintenance operations. When landscape yards are adjacent to parking lots
or drives, plants shall be protected from damage by vehicles, lubricants, or fuels.
C. Maintain Shape and Function. All required trees (whether canopy or understory)
shall be maintained in their characteristic natural shape, be allowed to reach their
mature size, and shall not be severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as
shrubs. Trees (including, but not limited to crepe myrtles) that have been so
altered, such that they no longer serve their intended function as trees within the
landscaping yard, shall be considered as damaged vegetation and shall be
replaced in accordance with this section.
D. Trimming and Pruning. Trimming and pruning of trees shall be conducted in
compliance with ANSI standards and the Development Guide. Shrubs shall be
maintained in a way that does not obstruct sight distances at public street
intersections, obstruct traffic signs or devices, or interfere with the use of
sidewalks or pedestrian trails.
5-37
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.5.16. - Removal or Relocation of Trees and Shrubs
A. Authorized Removal
1. Once installed and inspected, required landscape material shall not be
removed or relocated without approval of a revised landscape plan.
2. If approved, all plant material removed shall be replaced at a ratio of
one-to-one.
B. Hazardous Trees. If any required tree is determined to be in a hazardous
condition such that it is an immediate danger to the public safety, or it is an
immediate threat to or has caused disruption of public services, the Planning and
Inspections Director may authorize the removal of the tree without prior alternate
landscape plan approval. Following removal, the Planning and Inspections
Director shall determine if tree replacement is necessary in accordance with
section (A)(2) above.
C. Unauthorized Removal
1. Except in accordance with Section 5.5.16.B, Hazardous Trees, if any required
plant material is removed without approval of an alternate landscape plan,
it shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance in accordance with
Chapter 9: Enforcement.
2. In addition to the applicable remedies in Chapter 9: Enforcement,
unauthorized removal of trees and shrubs shall result in the requirement
for landscape material replacement in accordance Table 5.5.16.C,
Replacement of Landscape Material Following Unauthorized Removal. All
replacement landscaping shall be placed in the same yard area from
which it was removed, unless it is approved in accordance with Section
5.5.13, Alternate Landscape Plan.
5-38
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Table 5.5.16.C : Replacement of Landscape Material Following Unauthorized
Removal
Type of Required Landscaping Material Removed [1] Replacement Ration [Amount Replaced :
Amount Removed]
Canopy trees less than or equal to 8 inches DBH 2:1
Canopy trees between 8 inches and 23.9 DBH 3:1
Canopy trees of 24 inches or more DBH 4:1
Understory trees less than or equal to 8 inches DBH 2:1
Understory trees between 8 inches and 14.9 inches DBH 3:1
Understory trees of 15 inches DBH or more 4:1
Shrubs 2:1
[1] : If the size of removed trees cannot be accurately determined, all removed trees shall be replaced in
a 3:1 ratio.
D. Replacement of Dead or Diseased Material. The replacement of dead or
diseased trees and shrubs in a 1:1 ratio in the same location is considered normal
landscape yard maintenance and shall not require approval of an alternate
landscape plan.
5.5.17. - Tree Conservation for Residential Uses
A. Timing. When development of a lot occurs for a residential use, a tree inventory
shall be performed by the Planning and Inspections Director prior to issuance of a
corresponding Building Permit.
B. Tree Inventory. The applicant shall provide, as part of their building permit
application, a plot plan sealed by a licensed surveyor.
1. The plot plan shall indicate the location of the structure, property lines and
any proposed impervious surface associated with the development. The
plot plan shall also show dimensions between the structure and any
proposed impervious surface and the closest property line.
2. The applicant shall have the property corners and structures to be built
easily identified on the lot.
3. The Planning and Inspections Director shall perform a site visit and
indicate on the plot plan which trees shall be conserved by the applicant
during development of the lot.
4. The Planning and Inspections Director shall mark the trees to conserve,
and provide the applicant a signed copy of the tree inventory.
5. Development shall not begin until tree inventory has been issued by the
Planning and Inspections Director.
5-39
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
C. Conservation. All trees within the setbacks shall be conserved unless otherwise
listed in Section 5.5.17.D, Trees to be Removed;
D. Trees to be Removed. The following trees are permitted to be removed with
authorization of the Planning and Inspections Director, according to the signed
tree inventory.
1. Trees less than 12 inches DBH
2. Trees within 15 feet of the proposed structure
3. Trees within 5 feet of any impervious surface shown on the survey
4. Any tree deemed to be in a hazardous condition, as determined by the
Planning and Inspections Director.
(a) A hazardous condition occurs when a tree is an immediate danger
to the public safety, or an immediate threat to or has caused
disruption of public services.
E. Unauthorized Removal. Except in accordance with Section 5.5.17.D, Trees to be
Removed, if any tree marked to be conserved is removed prior to issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy, without approval of the Planning and Inspections
Director, it shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance in accordance with
Chapter 9: Enforcement.
5.6. - Screening
5.6.1. - Purpose and Intent
These screening standards are intended to reduce the impact of necessary site
structures and equipment upon adjacent property and enhance the aesthetics of the
public streetscape.
5.6.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to solid waste collection facilities, loading docks
and loading bays, and ground-based mechanical equipment on zone lots with the
following, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.6.3, Exemptions:
A. New Buildings or Uses. New principal buildings or new open uses of land.
B. Changes in Use. Changes in use of one or more in land use intensity (see Table
5.5.11.C.1, Land Use Intensity).
C. Expansions. Expansions of principal buildings that exceed 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area (GFA) or the total expansions of principal buildings, open uses of
land or off-street parking that individually or collectively exceed 3,000 square feet.
5-40
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.6.3. - Exemptions
The following shall be exempt from the standards in this section:
A. Heavy Industrial (HI) District. Solid waste collection, loading facilities, and
ground-based mechanical equipment in the HI district are exempt from the
requirements of this section, unless the structure or equipment is within 100 feet
of a lot with an existing residential use.
B. Loading Docks
1. Loading docks and loading bays in the CB district are exempt from the
requirements of this section.
2. Loading docks and loading bays in the LI district that face an industrial
street are exempt from the requirements of this section.
C. Areas Hidden from Off-Site View. Screening is not required where site or
topographic features effectively prevent off-site views of equipment and
structures to be screened, as determined by the Planning and Inspections
Director.
D. Single-family Attached and Multi-family. Single-family-attached and
multi-family developments are exempt from the screening requirements for
ground-based mechanical equipment.
5.6.4. - General Standards
A. Screening from Streets and Residential Uses. Applicable structures and
equipment shall be screened from view from any street, and from any adjacent
residential use, as seen from any point on the lot line at a height of 6 feet.
B. Area and Height May Vary. The area and height of required screening depend
upon the location of the structure or equipment relative to any adjacent
residential lot and the view from the street, as determined by the Planning and
Inspections Director.
5.6.5. - Specific Standards for Solid Waste Facilities
In addition to the general standards, solid waste collection facilities:
A. Behind Rear Line of Principal Building. Should be located behind the rear
building line of the principal building; and
5-41
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
B. Enclosed. Shall be enclosed when located within 50 feet of a lot containing a
residential use. Enclosure must be constructed with similar materials as principal
structure.
5.6.6. - Screening Methods
Solid waste collection, loading facilities, and ground-based mechanical equipment may
be screened by any of the following methods, in single use or in combination:
A. Vegetation. Evergreen vegetation meeting the requirements of Section 5.5.6,
Plant Material Specifications, so as to achieve the minimum screening height
within 3 years of planting;
B. Berms. Berms meeting the requirements of Section 5.5.6, Plant Material
Specifications;
C. Fencing. Opaque fence constructed of treated wood, rot-resistant wood (such as
cypress or redwood), plastic, or vinyl;
D. Walls
1. Masonry wall constructed of brick, textured concrete masonry units, or
stuccoed block; or
2. Walls of a principal or accessory structure.
5.6.7. - Prohibited Screening Materials
Chain-link fencing with woven slats of opaque materials is not an allowable method for
screening compliance.
5.7. - Signage
5.7.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this section is to support and complement the various commercial and
nonresidential uses through regulations concerning the placement, number, location,
size, appearance, illumination, and animation of signs. The erection of signs is controlled
and regulated in order to promote the health, safety, welfare, convenience, and
enjoyment of travel on streets. The provisions of this section are more specifically
intended to:
A. Promote the reasonable, orderly, and effective display of signs, displays, and
devices;
5-42
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
B. Protect the public welfare as well as land values by preserving the aesthetic
qualities of the city's environment;
C. Preserve the Town’s environment from excessive and obtrusive signs;
D. Promote the safety of persons and land by providing that signs do not create
traffic hazards or hazards due to collapse, fire, collision, decay, or abandonment;
E. Promote the efficient transfer of general public and commercial identification or
information, and maintain a viable business community throughout the year by
improving the legibility and effectiveness of signs; and
F. Enhance the image, appearance, and economic vitality of the Town.
5.7.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to signs erected, affixed, placed, painted or
otherwise established, unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.7.7, Exempt Signs.
5.7.3. - Variances
The sign height and location standards in this section may only be varied in accordance
with standards and requirements of Section 2.5.16, Variance. The standards in this section
pertaining to sign number, size, illumination, or minimum spacing may not be varied.
5.7.4. - General Standards
A. Area. Sign face area and height shall be measured in accordance with the
standards in Section 10.2.10, Signage.
B. Removal of Signs. A sign for which a sign permit has lapsed or has been revoked,
or for which the time allowed for the continuance of a nonconforming sign has
expired, shall be removed.
C. Multiple-Lot Development. Signage within a multi-lot development shall be
subject to the following standards:
1. A multiple-lot dev elopment shall be considered as a single lot for the
purposes of sign review and permitting;
2. Signage in a multiple-lot development shall be configured in accordance
with Section 5.13.2, Multiple Lot Development;
3. Signage associated with a multiple-lot development shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations governing outparcels and lease lots in the
GB district; and
4. A development entrance or development identification sign shall be
permitted in accordance with the zoning district where it is located.
D. Signs in Right-of-Way. A sign installed or placed on public land or rights-of-way,
except in compliance with this section or under an encroachment agreement
5-43
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
with NCDOT or the Town, shall be forfeited to the public and be subject to
confiscation.
E. Obstructions at Street Intersections. No sign shall be erected or maintained in a
manner that obstructs visibility for mot orists at any street intersection in
accordance with the standards in Town’s Code of Ordinances.
F. Obsolete Sign. A sign which advertises a business no longer conducted on the
premises shall be removed within 90 days of cessation of such business.
G. Unsafe SIgn. A sign which is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public shall
be removed after due notice is given by the Planning and Inspections Director
H. Deteriorated or Abandoned Sign. A sign which is abandoned or which is not
properly maintained, including cleaning and painting of painted surfaces and
replacement of damaged parts, shall be removed after due notice is given by the
Planning and Inspections Director.
I. Sign Installed Without a Permit. A sign which is installed in violation of the State
Building Code or in violation of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be
removed after due notice is given by the Planning and Inspection Director.
J. Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signage shall be subject to the
requirements in Section 8.5, Nonconforming Signs.
K. Nonconforming Uses. New signage for a nonconforming use shall be permitted
provided the signage complies with the standards in this section.
5.7.5. - Design, Construction, and Maintenance
A sign shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following
standards:
A. Other Codes. A sign shall comply with applicable provisions of the State Building
Code and the electrical code.
B. Permanence. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs
conforming with the requirements of this section, all signs shall be constructed of
permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a
building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or
structure.
C. Maintenance. A sign shall be maintained in good structural condition, in
compliance with the building and electrical codes, and in conformance with this
section.
5-44
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
D. Obstruction. A sign shall not be erected so as to obstruct a fire escape, required
exit, window, door opening, or wall opening intended as a means of ingress or
egress.
E. Ventilation Interference. A sign shall not be erected so as to interfere with an
opening required for ventilation.
F. Above Ground Clearance. A sign shall be located in such a way that it maintains
horizontal and vertical clearance from all electrical power lines and
communication lines in accordance with the applicable provisions of the National
Electrical Safety Code (NESC).
G. Ground Clearance. A sign and its supporting structure shall maintain clearance
from surface and underground utilities, conduits or easements for water, sewage,
gas, electricity or communication equipment. In addition, the placement of a sign
and its supporting structure shall not interfere with natural or artificial
drainageways.
H. Interference to Warning or Instructional Sign. A sign shall not be erected so as
to interfere with any existing warning or instructional sign.
I. Minimum WInd Loads. A sign, except a sign attached flat against the wall of a
building, shall be constructed to withstand minimum wind loads as specified by
the State Building Code.
5.7.6. - Prohibited Signs
Unless otherwise allowed under this section or this Unified Development Ordinance, the
following signs are prohibited:
A. A windblown device such as a pennant, banner, streamer, spinner, balloon, gas
filled figure, and other similar device.
B. Any off-premise sign, except as allowed in Section 5.7.8., Signs Not Requiring A
Sign Permit.
C. An animated sign.
D. An electronic changeable copy sign.
E. A video sign.
F. A portable sign legible from the public right-of-way, except as allowed in Section
4.5, Temporary Uses
G. A temporary or A-frame sign legible from the public right-of-way, except as
allowed in Section 5.7.8, Signs Not Requiring A Sign Permit.
H. A sign which projects over a public right-of-way, except that a wall sign may
project not more than 18 inches over a public right-of-way in zoning districts
which permit structures to be built at the lot line adjoining the street.
5-45
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
I. A sign on a vehicle that is parked in a location which is visible to the public, for a
period of time which indicates that the principal use of the vehicle is for
advertising rather than transport.
J. A sign which is affixed to a tree, rock, or other natural feature.
K. A sign of any type which imitates a traffic control device.
L. A sign which extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof of any
structure.
M. A sign on a roadside appurtenance, including but not limited to a roadside bench,
bus stop shelter, planter, utility pole, or refuse container.
N. A series of 2 or more signs placed in a line parallel to a public or private street, or a
series of 2 or more parallel signs carrying a single commercial message.
5.7.7. - Exempt Signs
The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this section except that a
lighted sign requires an electrical permit:
A. A governmental sign.
B. Lights and decorations with no commercial message that are temporarily
displayed on civic, patriotic or religious holidays.
C. A hand carried sign.
D. A sign located on the interior of a building, court, lobby, athletic field, stadium, or
other structure which is not intended to be seen from the exterior of the building
or structure.
E. A sign affixed to a vehicle or trailer used on a regular basis for the normal
transport of goods or persons.
F. A sign affixed to the window of a vehicle which does not exceed the size of the
window.
G. A sign not legible from a public or private street.
H. A flag without a commercial message with an area of not more than 60 square
feet.
I. A window sign painted on or attached to a window, covering a maximum of 25%
of the window area.
J. A sign painted on an active public water tower.
5.7.8. - Signs not Requiring a Sign Permit
Signs not requiring a sign permit are allowed only in accordance with the following
general and specific standards.
A. General Standards for SIgns Not Requiring a Permit. Signs that include lighting
or are illuminated shall be subject to an approved building permit for electrical
service.
5-46
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
B. Specific Standards for Signs Not Requiring a Permit. In addition to the
standards in Section 5.7.8.A, General Standards for Signs Not Requiring a Permit,
signs not requiring a sign permit shall be subject to the following specific
standards.
1. Table of Requirements. Signs subject to the standards in this section shall
comply with the applicable provisions in Table 5.7.8.B, Requirements for a
Signs Not Requiring a Sign Permit.
Table 5.7.8.B : Requirements for a Sign Not Requiring a Sign Permit
Sign Type Number
Permitted
Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Setback
(Feet)
Max. Height
(Feet) Illumination
Warning signs in residential districts N/A 4 N/A 8 Direct
Warning signs in nonresidential
districts N/A 6 N/A 8 Direct
Historical, memorial markers in all
districts 1/lot 4 R/W 6 Indirect
Flags, emblems, insignia of
corporate, political, professional,
fraternal, civic, or educational
organization in all districts
1/frontage
60 R/W 40 Indirect
Temporary real estate, yard sale and
construction signs in residential
districts
6 R/W 12
Temporary real estate and
construction signs in nonresidential
districts
100 R/W 6
Temporary political signs in all
districts 1 16 R/W 6
Identification signs: name and
address plates, home occupations,
and building markers
1/building 2/unit R/W 6
A-Frame in CB district 1/building
entrance 6 R/W 3
Vending machine, gas pump, ice
machine, or similar device signs N/A N/A R/W N/A
2. Additional Specific Standards. In addition to the standards in Table
5.7.8.B, Requirements for a Sign Not Requiring a Sign Permit, signs subject
to the standards in this section shall also comply with the following:
(a) A warning sign shall not contain a commercial message, but it may
contain a business logo or name.
5-47
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
(b) A temporary real estate or construction sign must be removed
within 7 days of the end of the completion of construction, sale, or
lease of land. Any temporary real estate or construction sign must
be placed on the subject property, or in common area of the
subdivision the sign serves.
(c) A temporary yard sale sign shall be posted for no longer than 3 days
per sale.
(d) A temporary political sign shall be located on private land with the
landowner's permission, and be removed within 7 days after the
election.
(e) Temporary religious, philosophical, educational, real estate, yard
sale, construction, and political signs shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) Be located outside the street right-of-way, or at least 6 feet
from the back of curb or edge of pavement where no curb
exists;
(2) Not be placed in public street medians or traffic islands;
(3) Not interfere with or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
or obstruct safe sight distances at intersections;
(4) Not be placed on private land without the consent of the
landowner or occupant.
(f) An A-frame sign in the CB district, if:
(1) It is displayed only during operational hours of the use and is
removed each day at the close of business;
(2) There is 1 sign per building entrance that fronts on the
primary street, and only 1 sign per nonresidential use;
(3) Windblown devices, including but not limited to balloons
and streamers, are not attached or otherwise made part of
the sign;
(4) It does not interfere with safe sight distances for motorists on
the adjacent roadways, does not interfere with or obstruct
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and allows a minimum of 5
feet of clear passage on the sidewalk between the street and
the sign;
(5) It is not be anchored to the sidewalk or affixed to a pole,
vending box, or other structure or appurtenance; and
(6) It may be placed on the public sidewalk portion of the public
street right-of-way directly in front of the use.
(g) A vending machine, gas pump, ice machine, or similar device sign
shall be:
(1) Painted or adhered to the device; and
(2) Indicate only the contents of the machine, the name or logo
of the supplier, the price, or operating instructions.
5-48
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.7.9. - Freestanding Signs Requiring a Sign Permit
A freestanding sign requiring approval of a sign permit in accordance with Section 2.6.13,
Sign Permit, shall comply with the following general and specific standards:
A. General Standards for Freestanding Signs Requiring a Permit
1. Location Standards
(a) It shall be allowed only on a lot with an existing principal use.
(b) If greater than 6 feet in height, it shall not be located within 100 feet
of a residential district.
(c) Where 2 or more establishments at the same location receive
approval of directional signs, the signs shall share the same support
structure.
2. Illumination Standards
(a) Residential Districts
(1) Indirect illumination of a freestanding sign is allowed in all
residential districts.
(2) Direct illumination of a freestanding sign in a residential
district requires a special use and is subject to the following
standards:
(i) It must be for a permitted nonresidential use;
(ii) The nonresidential use and sign must front on a
thoroughfare; and
(iii) Illumination of the sign must be needed for
identification of the nonresidential use due to the
use's non-daylight activities.
(b) Nonresidential Districts
(1) Indirect illumination of a freestanding sign is allowed in all
nonresidential districts.
(2) Direct illumination of a freestanding sign is allowed in the
GB, CB, LI, and HI districts.
(3) In the NC and OI districts, direct illumination of a
freestanding sign is allowed if it is limited to cut-out letter
and shielded silhouette lighting.
B. Specific Standards for Freestanding Signs Requiring a Permit. In addition to
the standards in Section 5.7.9.A, General Standards for Freestanding Signs
Requiring a Permit, freestanding signs requiring a permit shall be subject to the
following specific standards:
1. Table of Requirements. Signs subject to the standards in this section shall
comply with the applicable provisions in Table 5.7.9.B, Requirements for a
Freestanding Sign Requiring a Sign Permit.
5-49
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Table 5.7.9.B : Requirements for a Freestanding Sign Requiring a Sign Permit
Zoning District or Sign Type
Maximum
Number
per Lot
Frontage
Area (Sq. Ft.) Setback
From
ROW
(Feet)
Max.
Height
(Feet)
Area Computation
(Square Feet per
each Linear Foot of
Lot Frontage)
Max Min [1]
Sign Standards By Zoning District
AGR District (nonresidential uses
only) N/A 50 N/A N/A 8 N/A
All R and RM Districts
(nonresidential uses only) 1/lot 50 N/A N/A 6 N/A
OI and NC Districts 1/frontage 100 25 N/A 15 0.25
LI and HI Districts 1 200 75 N/A 30 1.0
GB Districts
Outparcel & Lease Lot 1/parcel 50 N/A N/A 6 N/A
All Other Lots 1 200 75 N/A 20 1.0
CB Districts 1 100 50 N/A 6 1.0
Signs Standards By Sign Type
Banners for special events (all
districts)
1/500 ft
frontage 25 N/A N/A 20 N/A
Development entrance signs (all
districts)
1/building
entrance
50/entra
nce N/A N/A 6 N/A
Identification signs (all districts) 1/building
entrance 20 N/A 15 10 N/A
Instructional signs (all districts) N/A 6 N/A N/A 8 N/A
Portable signs for special events (all
districts) 1/Lot 32 N/A N/A 6 N/A
Special promotion signs (all
districts) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
[1] : "Minimum" sign area refers to the minimum sign size allowed by right, regardless of the size which would be allowed by
compuration
2. Specific Standards by District
(a) CB District
(1) Maximum height may be increased to 15 feet if the sign is a
monument sign;
(2) A maximum of 3 freestanding signs per lot shall be
permitted;
(b) GB District. Under no circumstance shall there be more than 1
freestanding sign per principal building.
3. Specific Standards by Sign Type
(a) Development Entrance SIgn (All Districts)
5-50
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
(1) May be erected in the public right-of-way with an
encroachment agreement.
(2) Only permitted in subdivisions, developments of over 15,000
square feet of gross floor area, multi-family developments of
more than 8 units in a single building, or developments with
more than 40,000 square feet in open air uses of land.
(3) The entrance sign may identify only the name of the
development, management or developer, and/or address or
location of development.
(b) Development Identification Sign in the GB District
(1) Sign may identify only the name of the shopping center and
the tenants. Maximum sign height may be increased by 5
feet and maximum area may be increased by 50 square feet
if a permitted freestanding playbill sign is combined with the
development identification sign.
(2) Up to 1 additional freestanding sign may be allowed
provided:
(i) The lot frontage exceeds 1,000 linear feet;
(ii) The maximum area for either sign does not exceed
200 sf; and
(iii) The additional sign is more than 250 feet from any
other freestanding sign on the same lot or any
freestanding sign on an adjoining lot.
(3) Sign area shall be allowed as follows:
(i) Up to 200 sf for centers with 2 to 15 tenants; and
(ii) Up to 300 sf for centers with 16 or more tenants.
(c) Identification Sign (All Districts)
(1) Includes only directory signs (listing occupants of buildings
and their address) in developments with multiple occupants,
individual tenant signs, and building name/address signs for
buildings with multiple occupants. An individual tenant
identification sign may only be erected if there is no wall
mounted identification sign present.
(2) A directory sign or single tenant identification sign shall, at its
closest point, be located within 6 feet of the entrance it is
intended to identify.
(d) Special Promotion SIgn (All Districts). Sign shall be limited in
duration to a maximum of 30 continuous days and not more than 3
occurrences in a calendar year.
5.7.10. - Attached Sign Requiring a Sign Permit
An attached sign requiring approval of a sign permit in accordance with Section 2.6.13,
Sign Permit, shall comply with the following general and specific standards of this
subsection:
5-51
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
A. General Standards for Attached SIgns Requiring a Permit
1. Maximum Number of Attached Signs
(a) Single-tenant Buildings. There are no limits on the total number of
attached signs, only maximum signage computation per wall.
(b) Multi-tenant Buildings.
(1) Each Tenant Has Own Entrance
a. In a multi-tenant building, each tenant may have 1
sign, the area of which is based on its proportionate
share of the building wall facing a street or parking
area.
b. The total area of all signage shall not exceed the total
allowed for the building wall.
(c) Tenant-Shared Entrances. There are no limits on the total number
of attached signs, only maximum signage computation per wall.
2. Illumination Standards
(a) Illuminated attached signs are prohibited in residential districts.
(b) In nonresidential districts all signs may be directly or indirectly
illuminated.
(c) In the OI and NC districts, illumination is limited to cut-out letter
and shielded silhouette lighting.
(d) Wall signs that face an abutting single-family or duplex use shall be
indirectly illuminated only.
B. Specific Standards for Attached SIgns Requiring a Sign Permit. In addition to
the standards in Section 5.7.10.A, General Standards for Attached Signs Requiring
a Permit, all freestanding signs requiring a permit shall be subject to the following
specific standards.
1. Table of Requirements. Signs subject to the standards in this section shall
comply with the applicable provisions in Table 5.7.10.B, Requirements for
an Attached Sign Requiring a Sign Permit.
Table 5.7.10.B : Requirements for an Attached Sign Requiring a Sign Permit
Zoning District or Sign Type Number
Area (Sq. Ft.) Max. Height
(Feet)
Area Computation
Max Min [1] (Square Feet)
Wall Signs
OI & NC Districts N/A N/A 25 8 7.5% of wall area
GB, CB, LI & HI Districts N/A N/A 50 6 10% of wall area
Awning, Canopy and Marquee Signs
All nonresidential districts 1/face N/A N/A Top of
Canopy
10% of the canopy,
awning or marquee
face
5-52
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Suspended Signs
All nonresidential districts 1/entrance 6 N/A [2] N/A
Banners
Special events (all districts) 1/500 ft of 25 N/A 20 N/A
Special Promotion SIgns
All districts 1 when average wall
height > 35 feet 75 > 6
feet top of wall 1% of wall area
[1] : "Minimum" sign area refers to the minimum area allowed by right, regardless of the size which would be
allowed by computation
[2] : Based on the first 30 feet in height of the wall on which the sign is attached. Buildings over 30 feet in height
may have additional sign area based on 5 percent of the wall area above 30 feet in height, provided the sign is
located at or near the top of the building
2. Awning, Canopy and Marquee Signs (All Nonresidential Districts)
(a) Signs shall be located at least 9 feet above pedestrian ways and 15
feet above vehicular drives.
(b) The sign face shall include the entire area of the canopy, awning, or
marquee structure.
(c) The total area of all attached signs, whether attached to a wall,
canopy, awning, or marquee shall not exceed the total allowed for
the building wall.
(d) All or any portion of this sign allocation may be affixed to the wall,
awning, canopy or marquee, provided that no part of the sign
projects above the top of the structure served by the signage.
3. Identification Signs (All Nonresidential Districts). The area of
identification signs shall be subtracted from the allowable square footage
of wall signs for the wall upon which it is placed.
4. Special Promotion Signs. Signs shall be limited in duration to a maximum
of 30 continuous days and not more than 3 occurrences in a calendar year.
5.7.11. - Reserved
5.7.12. - Reserved
5.7.13. - Encroachment Agreement for Entrance Sign
A development entrance sign shall be allowed to encroach into a public right-of-way
provided an encroachment agreement between the sign owner and the Town in a form
determined appropriate by the Town Attorney, is accepted. The encroachment
agreement shall, at a minimum, provide that:
5-53
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.8. - Design Standards
5.8.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose of these standards is to ensure greater aesthetic value and building
uniformity throughout the Town in accordance with the Town's adopted policy
guidance. The following standards are applied to all multi-family residential and
nonresidential buildings.:
5.8.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to the following, unless exempted in accordance
with Section 5.8.3, Exemptions:
A. New Buildings. New principal or accessory buildings in the OI, NC or GC districts..
B. Expansions. In the case of an expansion of an existing building, the following
standards shall apply:
1. For individual or collective expansions of 50 percent or less, the standards
in this section shall apply only to the expanded portion; or
2. For individual or collective expansions that exceed 50 percent, the
standards in this section shall be applied to the entire zone lot.
5.8.3. - Exemptions
The following are exempted from the standards of this section:
A. Single-family detached dwellings;
B. Duplex dwellings;
C. An office use converted from a single-family detached dwelling;
D. Locally or nationally designated individual historic structures, and contributing
structures within a locally or nationally designated historic district, provided such
structures comply with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation or
are issued a Certificate of Appropriateness, as applicable
5.8.4. - Site Standards
A. Building Orientation.
1. Single-building developments shall be oriented so that the front facade
faces the street from which the building derives its street address.
5-54
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
2. For all new buildings subject to a maximum street setback, at least 60% of
the front building facade shall be located parallel to and within the
required setbacks.
3. Group developments shall configure building walls to frame and enclose
the corners of street intersections or entry points into the development, a
central pedestrian access corridor within the development site, or other
site amenities on at least 3 sides.
B. Exemption from Maximum Setback. Uses that provide a civic space are exempt
from the maximum setback requirement, provided the civic space meets the
following requirements:
1. The civic space shall be between the front of the principal building and the
street;
2. The area shall not be used for parking or loading, exclusive of valet parking
and passenger loading;
3. The area shall have landscaping that covers a minimum of 10 percent of
the area;
4. It may include pedestrian amenities which include but are not limited to:
seating, outdoor play areas, bicycle racks, kiosks, water features, public art,
freestanding structures such as a clock tower, or similar amenities;
5. A decorative fence, a hedgerow, or a combination thereof may be provided
to provide a boundary between the civic space and the street right-of-way.
If provided, the boundary treatment shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Walls and fences are limited to a maximum of 4 feet in height.
Decorative fences include, but are not limited to: wrought iron,
architectural metal, or other transparent decorative fence.
Chain-link fencing is prohibited.
(b) Hedges used to establish this boundary shall be a minimum height
of 18 inches at planting and shall be maintained at a height
between 3 and 4 feet at maturity.
C. Drive-Throughs.
1. Outdoor speakers associated with a drive-through shall be located at least
50 feet from a residential district.
2. Drive-through windows, menu boards, drive aisles, and speakers shall not
be located between the principal building line and the front street
right-of-way. For corner lots, drive aisles shall not be located between the
principal building line and the front street right-of-way, to the maximum
extent practicable.
D. Fuel Pumps and Canopies. Fuel pumps and canopies shall be located behind the
front building line of the principal building, to the maximum extent practicable.
5-55
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
E. Fences. Shall comply with the standards in Section 5.11, Fences, as well as the
following:
1. Chain link, barbed wire fencing, and plain concrete block shall only be
permitted behind the rear building line of the principal building and shall
not be located within 40 feet of the right-of-way of a public street.
2. Fences located between the minimum and maximum street setback shall
be limited to 4 feet in height or less and may not be fully opaque.
3. Fences shall be provided along all lot lines that abut a residential zoning
district and be opaque to a height 6-feet above grade level.
F. Ground-based Mechanical Equipment. Ground-based mechanical equipment
should be located to the rear of the principal building(s), and shall be screened in
accordance with Section 5.6, Screening.
G. Off-street Loading. If provided, loading areas shall not be on the front facade of
the principal building and shall be screened in accordance with Section 5.6,
Screening.
H. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of materials, supplies, products, or equipment
is prohibited. Nothing shall prohibit the outdoor display of merchandise for sale in
accordance with Section 4.4.5.K, Outdoor Display.
I. Accessory Buildings.
1. Accessory buildings shall be located behind the rear building line of the
principal building they serve.
2. For group developments, accessory buildings can be located internally to
the development. In no instance, shall an accessory building be located
between a front building line that is established by a principal building and
the street the principal building faces.
3. Multi-family residential and nonresidential accessory buildings and
structures shall be similar in materials and architectural style to a principal
building.
J. Group Developments. Additional principal buildings may be built on a site
beyond the maximum street setback if there is at least 1 principal building located
on the site with a front facade that meets the street setback requirements and
covers a minimum of 50 percent of the lot width.
5.8.5. - Building Standards
The following standards are applied to all multi-family residential and nonresidential
buildings; except for locally or nationally designated individual historic structures, and
contributing structures within a locally or nationally designated historic district, provided
such structures comply with the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation or are
issued a Certificate of Appropriateness, as applicable:
5-56
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
A. Facade Articulation.
1. Front and side building facades shall include at least 2 or more of the
following features at least every 15 feet measured horizontally and vertically
per floor:
(a) Recessed entryways;
(b) Display windows;
(c) Window indentations (such as but not limited to double-hung,
stationary, or casement windows) that are regularly spaced and that
incorporate a differing building material, texture, color, awnings,
window hoods, or canopies. This shall not include a glass curtain
wall or flush mounted glass;
(d) Offset surfaces, niches, insets, projections, or bas-relief with a
minimum depth of 4 inches;
(e) Differentiated piers, columns, or pilasters;
(f) Pedestrian entrances;
(g) Textured materials (such as but not limited to brick or stone);
(h) Roofline changes, coupled with correspondingly aligned wall offset
or facade material changes, changes in the roof planes, or changes
in the height of a parapet wall; or
(i) Changes in wall plane (such as projections or recesses), in excess of
6 inches in variation.
2. Building facades facing a street should achieve vertical orientation by
using regularly spaced vertically oriented windows and doors, in
conjunction with features such as: roofline/parapet variations, window
hoods, material changes, columns, pilasters, posts, awnings, canopies,
stoops, or facade offsets, to create vertically oriented bays, or divisions of
space that are approximately 30 feet wide or less. The rhythm within a
building facade should be maintained by making each vertically oriented
bay the same width.
3. Buildings of 2 or more stories are encouraged to have front facades that
have a clear and distinct base (ground floor), middle, and top (often
defined by a decorative cornice). Features such as an increased ground
floor height (including a transom window), the use of a frieze, string course
or storefront cornice, a bulkhead or kick plate, and differentiated building
materials or coloration are similarly encouraged.
B. Facade Materials.
1. Where 2 or more materials are proposed to be combined on a facade, the
heavier and more massive elements should be located below the lighter
elements (e.g., brick shall be located below stucco). Heavier materials may
also be placed as a detail on the corner of a building or along cornices or
windows.
5-57
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
2. Primary facade materials should not change at outside corners, and shall
continue around the corner to a logical point of conclusion such as a
change in facade plane.
3. Exterior building materials shall be continued to the finished grade on any
elevation.
4. Building facades utilizing smooth-faced concrete block, or unfinished or
untreated tilt-up concrete panels, shall be limited to building facades not
visible from public streets as seen from the public right-of-way at a height
of 6 feet.
5. Building materials must utilize earth tone colors only.
6. The use of vinyl siding, corrugated and other vertical metal siding is
prohibited.
C. Facade Transparency.
1. The front building facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective,
transparent windows on at least 50 percent of the facade area between 2
and 8 feet above average grade.
2. Ground level side facades facing a street shall maintain non-reflective,
transparent windows on at least 20 percent of the facade area between 2
and 8 feet off the floor.
3. Upper stories on front and side facades facing a street shall maintain
non-reflective, transparent windows on at least 20 percent of the upper
story facade area per floor as measured between 2 and 8 feet.
4. Civic, religious institution, and utilities use categories are exempt from
these transparency requirements.
D. Main Entrance.
1. Every building along a Major Thoroughfare shall have an entrance that
faces the right-of-way it is addressed.
2. A building located on a corner lot may orient the main entrance to the
building to face the corner.
3. Main Street entrance shall be distinguishable from the balance of the front
facade through the use of one or more of any of the following or other
similar features:
(a) Projecting or recessed entry;
(b) Transom or sidelight windows;
(c) Pediments, columns, or other vertical features; or
(d) Marquees, arcades, or overhangs.
4. Buildings on lots without a frontage on a Major Thoroughfare shall comply
with the standards of this subsection for the street they face.
E. Roof-Mounted Equipment.
1. Flat roofs shall incorporate parapet walls designed to screen the roof and
roof-mounted equipment from view from the primary street fronting the
building and any abutting side streets as seen from the public right-of-way
5-58
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
at a height of 6 feet. The parapet wall should be finished in the same or
similar material and color as the building
2. For sloped roofs, equipment and other roof penetrations should be located
and screened to have a minimal visual impact as seen from adjacent
residential uses and the public right-of-way at a height of 6 feet.
3. IIn cases where complete screening is not practicable, all roof- mounted
equipment and other roof penetrations shall be camouflaged through the
use of paint or architectural techniques to minimize its appearance.
4. Green roofs, which use vegetation to improve stormwater quality and
reduce runoff, are exempt from the screening requirements described in
this subsection.
F. Service or Vehicular Bays.
1. Service or vehicular bays and their doors shall not be located so as to face
the primary fronting street if the door is located within 50 feet of the street
right-of-way.
2. Other than the primary fronting street, all service or vehicular bay doors
that face a street and are within 50 feet of the street right-of-way shall use
the same or a similar color as the building so as to blend it in with the
building they serve, to the maximum extent practicable.
5.9. - Sidewalks
5.9.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose of these standards is to ensure greater pedestrian safety and ease of access
for pedestrians in the Town in accordance with the Town's adopted policy guidance.
More specifically the intent of these standards is to:
A. Established Locations. Establish the locations where new sidewalks are required
to be installed as part of development;
B. Promote Walking. Promote expanded opportunities for recreational walking and
running;
C. Meet Daily Needs. Help ensure Town residents can meet their daily needs
without use of an automobile;
D. Allow Access. Allow easier access to shopping and commercial areas;
E. Clarify Timing. Clarify the timing of sidewalk installation; and
5-59
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
F. Fee In-Lieu. Establish provisions for the payment of a fee in-lieu of sidewalk
installation when sidewalk installation would conflict with other infrastructure
improvements.
5.9.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to the following, unless exempted in accordance
with Section 5.9.3, Exemptions:
A. Subdivisions. Subdivisions, including group developments.
B. New Buildings or Uses. New principal buildings or new open uses of land that
are subject to a site plan.
C. Expansions. Individual or collective expansions of existing principal buildings,
open uses of land, or off-street parking that are subject to a site plan and that
exceed 50 percent.
5.9.3. - Exemptions
Sidewalks shall not be required in the following instances:
A. Areas Where SIdewalks Do Not Exist. Along local and sub-collector residential
streets where the TRC finds the following conditions exist:
1. The proposed development is within an area consisting predominantly of
existing single-family detached residential development, where no
sidewalks are present; and
2. The character and size of the proposed development will not result in
substantial additional pedestrian facility needs; and
3. There are no new pedestrian facilities planned that would provide a
pedestrian connection to the proposed development.
B. Industrial Areas. As determined by the Planning and Inspections Director,
sidewalks are not required along new and existing local and collector streets
within industrial areas where all of the following conditions exist:
1. The proposed development is within an area consisting mostly of industrial
uses where the majority of developed parcels do not have sidewalks;
2. The character, size, and density of the developments are such that
pedestrian demand is expected to be limited; and
3. No transit service or greenway route exists or is planned in that location.
C. Controlled Access Roads. Along streets that are designated North Carolina
Department of Transportation controlled access facilities.
5-60
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.9.4. - Standards
A. General. Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of thoroughfare streets.
B. Thoroughfare Streets. Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of
thoroughfare streets.
C. Collector and Sub-Collector Streets
1. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of collector and sub-collector
streets.
2. The TRC may determine, during review of a development application, that
a collector or sub-collector street requires sidewalks along both sides of the
street if one or more of the following conditions exists:
(a) The current or projected average daily traffic volume is greater than
8,000 vehicles per day.
(b) The posted speed limit is greater than 35 miles per hour.
(c) Other pedestrian safety, access, or circulation needs are identified.
D. Local Streets. Sidewalks shall be installed along both sides of local streets, unless
other pedestrian safety, access, or circulation needs are identified.
E. Side Determination. Where sidewalks are required to be installed on only 1 side
of a street, the TRC shall determine which side of the street is most appropriate.
F. Cluster Mailbox Units. Sidewalk access must be provided to all areas that contain
cluster mailbox units.
G. Configuration. The configuration of the sidewalk is subject to the approval of TRC.
5.9.5. - Timing of Installation
The site plan, subdivision preliminary plat, or group development plan shall address the
phasing and timing criteria for the installation of required sidewalks, including a
maximum timeframe for completion.
5.9.6. - Fee In-Lieu of Required Sidewalk Installation
A. Conflict Anticipated. Where the installation of a sidewalk is required, and the
Planning and Inspections Director determines that installation at the time of
development would conflict with a town, state, or federal roadway project or
other utility project, the applicant shall be required to submit a fee in-lieu of
sidewalks in accordance with the following:
5-61
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
1. Fees shall be in an amount equal to the entire estimated cost of
completing the installation, based on current contract unit prices, as
approved by the Public Works Director.
2. All fees collected by the Town pursuant to this section shall be deposited in
the Town's sidewalk revolving fund and used only for construction of
sidewalks on the site, or in the street right-of-way abutting the site, for
which the fee is collected.
3. Use of submitted funds to construct sidewalks shall be coordinated with
the appropriate phase of the conflicting roadway project.
B. Conflict Eliminated. In the event that the conflict necessitating the fee in-lieu is
eliminated, one of the following shall occur:
1. If the scheduled project is configured with a different alignment, the in-lieu
fee shall be refunded to the applicant.
2. If the scheduled project is a widening of an existing roadway, in-lieu fees
for sidewalks shall be used by the Town to construct the sidewalk after the
widening.
5.10. - Exterior Lighting
5.10.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this section is to regulate exterior lighting to ensure the safety of
motorists and pedestrians and to minimize adverse effects on adjacent land uses due to
excessive light intensity or due to light trespass and glare.
5.10.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to zone lots with the following, unless exempted
in accordance with Section 5.10.3, Exemptions.
A. New Buildings or Uses. New principal buildings or new open uses of land.
B. Expansions. In the case of an expansion of an existing building, outdoor use area,
or off-street parking lot, the following standards shall apply:
1. For individual or collective expansions of 50 percent or less, the standards
in this section shall apply only to the expanded portion; or
2. For individual or collective expansions that exceed 50 percent, the
standards in this section shall be applied to the entire zone lot.
5.10.3. - Exemptions
The following are exempted from the standards of this section:
5-62
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
A. Special events, special promotion signage, and holiday displays;
B. FAA-required lighting on buildings, towers or other structures;
C. Security lighting controlled and activated by motion sensor devices for a duration
of 15 minutes or less;
D. Outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels,
such as kerosene lanterns or gas lamps;
E. Public street lighting;
F. Lighting of official government flags;
G. Temporary lighting necessary for construction or emergencies, used by
construction workers or emergency personnel; and
H. Single-family detached, attached, triplex, quadplex, and duplex dwellings, except
that these forms of development shall be subject to Section 5.10.4, Prohibited
Lighting.
5.10.4. - Prohibited Lighting
The following forms of exterior lighting shall be prohibited:
A. Traffic Control Signal
1. Lighting that imitates an official highway or traffic control light or sign;
2. Lighting in the direct line of sight with any traffic control light or sign;
B. Flashing or Revolving. Flashing, revolving, or intermittent exterior lighting visible
from any lot line or public street, except for permitted freestanding or wall signs
in accordance with Section 5.7, Signage; and
C. High Intensity Lighting. High intensity light beams, such as searchlights, laser, or
strobe lights, except when used by federal, state, or local authorities, or for special
events.
D. Architectural Lighting. Lighting that outlines the building, wall edges, roof lines,
doors, windows, or other architectural features. Lighting for architectural features
is permitted if the light source is not visible, and the lighting is aimed and
shielded from public view.
5.10.5. - Lighting Plan
A. Elements to Include. Site plans, group development plans, and building permit
applications, as appropriate, must indicate the following:
1. Fixture type;
2. Pole height; and
3. Fixture shielding.
5-63
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
B. Certification. Certification must be provided by the person preparing any plans
that the proposed development complies with the exterior lighting standards of
this section.
5.10.6. - General Standards for On-Site Exterior Lighting
A. Maximum Illumination Value at Lot Line. Exterior lighting shall be designed and
located such that the maximum illumination measured in footcandles at ground
level at any lot line shall not exceed the standards in Table 5.10.6.A, Maximum
Illumination Levels.
Table 5.10.6.A : Maximum Illumination Levels
Abutting Use [1] Maximum Illumination Value at Lot Line
(Footcandles)
Residential Use or Vacant Land Zoned for Residential Use 1
Institutional Use 1.5
Commercial Use or Vacant Land Zoned for Uses other than
Residential [2] 2.5
Vehicular Use Area 2.5
[1] : See Table 4.1.9, Principal Use Table
[2] : Includes mixed-use development
B. Maximum Height. Except for outdoor public recreation, outdoor assembly, and
similar uses, the height of exterior lighting, whether mounted on poles, walls, or
by other means, shall be no greater than 35 feet above grade at the base of the
fixture.
C. Light Trespass
1. All outdoor light fixtures that produce more than 2,000 lumens shall be
cut-off fixtures that are located, angled, or shielded to focus light on the
intended subject or area and prevent light trespass onto adjacent
properties or skyward. The lumen output of a lighting fixture is specified by
the manufacturer.
2. Wall packs shall be cut-off and floodlights shall be shielded (e.g., true
cut-off type bulb or light source not visible from off-site) to direct light
downward and eliminate light pollution above the facade of a structure.
5-64
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.10.7. - Design Standards for Specific Uses and Site
Features
A. Awnings. Awnings used for building accents over doors, windows, etc., shall not
be internally illuminated (e.g., from underneath or behind the awning) unless the
awning material does not allow light to transmit through it.
B. Canopy Lighting. Lighting under a canopy shall not exceed 30 footcandles and
shall be designed to not create glare off-site. This may be accomplished by one or
both of the following:
1. Recessed fixture incorporating a lens cover that is either recessed or flush
with the bottom of the ceiling of the canopy that provides a full cut-off or
fully-shielded light distribution.
2. Surface mounted fixture incorporating a flat glass that provides a full cutoff
or fully-shielded light distribution.
C. Outdoor Public Recreation, Outdoor Assembly and Similar Uses. All outdoor
public recreation, outdoor assembly, and similar lighting fixtures shall be
equipped with louvers, shields, or similar devices, and aimed so that light is
contained within the primary playing area or performance area and minimizes
adverse impacts on traffic safety and residentially-zoned land.
5.10.8. - Measurement
Measurement of glare or light trespass shall be accomplished in accordance with the
standards in Section 10.2.11, Exterior Lighting.
5.10.9. - Alternate Lighting Plan
An alternate lighting plan may be approved by the Planning and Inspections Director
where unreasonable or impractical situations would result from the application of the
lighting requirements. Such situations may result from physical constraints, from other
constraints, or when federal, state or local law prevents compliance with this Ordinance.
Alternate plans or fixtures must provide equal or better performance to meet the
purpose and intent of this Ordinance. However, the alternate plan shall meet the
requirements of Section 5.10.6.A, Maximum Illumination Value at Lot Line.
5-65
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.11. - Fences
5.11.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate the location, height, and appearance
of fences to protect adjacent properties from the indiscriminate placement of fences,
ensure the safety, security, and privacy of land, and ensure that fences are subject to
timely maintenance, as needed.
5.11.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to all construction or replacement of fences,
unless exempted in accordance with Section 5.11.3, Exemptions. A fence may only be
erected in accordance with Section 2.6.15, Zoning Compliance Permit.
5.11.3. - Exemptions
The following are exempted from the standards in this section:
A. Temporary fences for construction sites, including but not limited to: fencing
necessary for soil erosion and sedimentation control and tree protection.
B. The fence height limitations in this section shall not apply to fences built in
conjunction with the following:
1. Utility Facilities, Major and Minor;
2. Landfills, Major and Minor;
3. Correctional Facilities;
4. Military facilities; or
5. Hazardous Waste Disposal Facilities.
5.11.4. - Location Requirements
A. General
1. Fences shall be located outside of the public right-of-way.
2. Fences may be located within any required yard or setback.
B. In Utility Easements. Fences located within utility easements shall receive
written authorization from the easement holder. The Town shall not be
responsible for damage to, or the repair or replacement of, fences that must be
removed to access such easements.
C. Blocking Natural Drainage Flow. A fence shall not be installed so it blocks or
diverts a natural drainage flow onto or off of any other land.
5-66
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
D. Obstructions at Intersections. No fence shall be erected or maintained in a
manner that obstructs visibility for motorists at any street intersection in
accordance with the standards of Town Code.
E. Within the Local Historic Overlay (LHO). A fence constructed within an LHO
district shall comply with the requirements in Section 2.5.4, Certificate of
Appropriateness, and all applicable LHO district standards.
5.11.5. - Height Standards
A. Measurement. Maximum fence height shall be determined in accordance with
Section 10.2.12, Fences.
B. Residential Uses. The maximum fence height for residential uses is as shown in
Table 5.11.5.B, Maximum Fence Height for Residential Uses.
Table 5.11.5.B : Maximum Fence Height for Residential Uses
Location on a Lot Maximum Height
(Feet)
Within 15 feet of a thoroughfare or collector street right-of-way 6
Within 15 feet of a local street right or way, except on corner and double
frontage lots 4
On corner lots within 15 feet of any street right-of-way adjacent to the
side yard where rear lot lines abut one another [1] 6
On double frontage lots within 15 feet of any street right-of-way along
the rear yard as long as the principal structures on both sides of the
double frontage lot face the same direction as the double frontage lot
principal structure
6
All Other Locations 8
Vehicular Use Area 6
[1] : A 6-foot fence shall not encroach into the front yard setback
C. Nonresidential and Mixed Uses.
a. No fence may be erected that exceeds 8 feet in height, unless the fence is
15 feet from a lot line, or it complies with the minimum setback
requirements as applied to the principal structure, whichever is greater.
D. Athletic Fields. Athletic fields, tennis courts, playgrounds, or similar recreational
areas abutting a street may include a non-opaque fence with a maximum height
of 15 feet, provided the fence is not located within a required landscape area.
5-67
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.11.6. - Materials
A. General. The following fencing materials are permitted for fences:
1. Masonry or stone;
2. Ornamental iron, steel, or aluminum;
3. Wood;
4. Composite materials designed to appear as wood, metal, or masonry; or
5. Chain-link, except where prohibited by this Unified Development
Ordinance.
B. Restrictive Materials
1. Barbed wire, razor wire, concertina wire, and similar materials may only be
used in the following instances:
(a) Fences for correctional institutions may use barbed, razor, and
concertina wire.
(b) Fences enclosing livestock may use barbed wire.
(c) Fences for other nonresidential uses may use barbed wire, razor
wire, and concertina wire provided all of the following are met:
(1) The wire portion of the fence shall be at least six feet above
the grade; and
(2) The wire shall be included in the overall height
determination of the fence.
2. Fences that carry an electrical current are allowed for the purposes of
enclosing livestock (nothing shall prohibit below-ground electrical fences
intended for the keeping of pets).
C. Prohibited Materials. Fences made of debris, junk, rolled plastic, sheet metal,
untreated or unpainted plywood, or waste materials, unless the materials have
been recycled and reprocessed, for marketing to the general public, as building
materials designed to resemble new building materials (e.g., picket fencing made
from recycled plastic and fiber).
5.11.7. - Finished Side
When a fence is primarily parallel to and within 15 feet of a public street, it shall be
configured so that the finished side of the fence faces the street right-of-way other than
when required by the State Building Code. For the purposes of this section, the finished
side does not include any supporting members or bracing.
5-68
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5.11.8. - Maintenance
Fences shall be maintained in a safe manner plumb (vertical) to the ground. Fences not
maintained in a safe manner through neglect, lack of repair, manner of construction,
method of placement, or otherwise shall be repaired, replaced, or demolished.
5.12. - Open Space
5.12.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this section is to:
A. Establish Standards. Establish the standards under which development shall set
aside a portion of the development area as open space;
B. Distinguish Characteristics. Distinguish between the characteristics,
requirements, and appropriate locations for open space; and
C. Establish Ownership Standards. Establish minimum ownership and
maintenance standards related to open space.
5.12.2. - Applicability
The provisions of this section apply to the following developments, unless exempted in
accordance with Section 5.12.3, Exemptions:
A. Single-family detached residential subdivisions in the RM-6 district greater than 5
acres in area;
B. Single-family attached residential developments greater than 5 acres in area;
C. Multi-family developments; and
D. Development in a PD district.
5.12.3. - Exemptions
Open space requirements are exempt for development in the CB district.
5.12.4. - Minimum Open Space Amount
A. General. Table 5.12.4.A, Minimum Open Space Amount, sets out the minimum
open space requirements for development subject to the standards in this
section.
5-69
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
Table 5.12.4.A : Minimum Open Space Amount
Type of Development Minimum Open Space Requirement
Single-Family Detached 850 sf/dwelling unit
Single-Family Attached 435 sf/dwelling unit
Multi-Family Development
Less than 3 Acres in area 250 sf/dwelling unit
3 Acres or more in area 435 sf/dwelling unit
All Other Locations (Including PD districts) 20% of area
[1] : A 6-foot fence shall not encroach into the front yard setback
B. Administrative Adjustment. The Planning and Inspections Director is authorised
to grant an administrative adjustment to the minimum required amount of open
space in accordance with Section 2.6.2, Administrative Adjustment.
5.12.5. - Open Space Standards
A. Features Counted as Open Space. The following features within a development
shall be credited towards the open space requirements:
1. Environmentally-sensitive lands including water features (drainageways,
lakes, streams, etc.), wetlands, floodplains, and protected stream buffers,
provided no more than 50 percent of a development's total open space
may be located in environmentally-sensitive lands;
2. Landscaping areas, including areas containing required landscaping and
tree protection areas credited toward landscaping requirements;
3. Pedestrian amenities;
4. Stormwater management lands, including retention and detention ponds,
and bio-retention devices that are designed and improved with pedestrian
amenities;
5. Farm and forestry lands within the boundary of the development;
6. Park lands, trails, and greenways, both public and private;
7. Active recreation areas;
8. Passive recreation areas; and
9. Urban features including: plazas, fountains, courtyards, roof gardens,
pedestrian areas, indoor atriums open to public, and public sidewalks at
least 6 feet in width with pedestrian amenities.
B. Not Counted as Open Space. The following areas shall not be counted as open
space set-asides:
1. Private yards;
2. Street right-of-way or private street common area;
3. Vehicular use areas, including parking spaces, drive aisles, and private
drives;
4. Land covered by buildings not designated for active recreational use; and
5-70
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
5. Outdoor storage areas.
C. Design. Except for environmentally-sensitive lands, landscaping, farmland,
forestry lands, and urban features, credited open space shall meet the following
design standards:
1. Access. Open space shall be accessible by residents and users of the
development by means of a street, private drive, or an all-weather walkway
within a common area or easement a minimum of 20 feet in width.
2. Configuration
(a) Open space shall be at least 24 feet in width and 1,000 square feet in
area.
(b) Urban features credited towards the requirements in this section
shall maintain a minimum width of 24 feet and a minimum area of
at least 600 square feet.
D. Multi-family Development. Multi-family developments with 30 or more dwelling
units shall provide an active recreational area as a part of the total credited open
space, unless an administrative adjustment is approved by the Planning and
Inspections Director.
E. Multi-Phase Developments. Open space shall be provided for each phase of a
phased development in a cumulative amount sufficient to satisfy the open space
requirements for the subject phase of development and all preceding phases of
development.
F. Incentives for Active Recreational Features. When provided by the developer,
an allowable active recreational feature and the land associated with the feature
may be located within an environmentally sensitive area and counted towards
the requirements in Table 5.12.4.A, Minimum Open Space Amount, above and
beyond the maximum amount allowed in Section 5.12.5.A, Features Counted as
Open Space.
G. Ownership and Maintenance. Open space areas shall be owned and maintained
in accordance with Section 7.3, Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association.
5.13. - Development Types
5.13.1. - General
A. Purpose and Intent. The standards in this section are intended to establish
additional design and development standards for certain types of development
that pose unique characteristics of use, configuration, or both. More specifically,
these standards are intended to:
5-71
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
1. Recognize that some forms of development are unique and require
additional standards not typically applied to other forms of development;
2. Promote a strong sense of place and pedestrian-friendly development
through visual design interest and human-scale site design;
3. Address the impacts and compatibility of large-scale retail developments;
and
4. Establish requirements for appropriate retail development in street
intersection contexts.
B. Development Types Distinguished . The following development types are hereby
established:
1. Multiple Lot Development
5.13.2. - Multiple Lot Development
The purpose of this section is to allow a unified designed and functioning development
with multiple lots, pursuant to a preliminary plat approved in accordance with Section
2.6.12, Preliminary Plat, a nd a final plat in accordance with Section 2.6.8, Final P lat,
provided the development complies with the standards of this section.
A. Applicability. To qualify as a multiple lot development, the development must:
1. Contain 2 or more nonresidentail uses designed to function as a unified
development; and
2. Contain all of the following:
(a) Common private streets or drives;
(b) Common off-street parking;
(c) A common signage plan; and
(d) A common landscape plan.
B. Common Features
1. An approved multiple lot development shall be treated as a single zone lot
for the purposes of providing required off-street parking, required
landscape yards, required street access, compliance with zoning district
dimensional standards, and compliance with signage standards.
2. Compliance with the off-street parking and street access requirements are
met by considering the development as a whole and not on an individual
lot basis.
3. Compliance with the landscaping standards are met if the required
perimeter landscape yards are provided along the multiple lot
development perimeter and all parking lot landscaping requirements are
met.
C. Establishment. The establishment of a multiple lot development occurs through
the approval of a preliminary plat and a final plat.
5-72
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 5 : Development Standards (v3a)
1. The preliminary plat shall illustrate that the development will have
common private streets or drives and common parking.
2. Prior to the approval of a final plat, the proposed development must have
approved common signage and common landscape plans.
3. The final plat must be recorded displaying a prominent note identifying it
as a multiple lot development and explaining that the property must be
developed with common private streets or drives and off-street parking
and be subject to a common signage plan and common landscaping plan.
The note shall further state that should the property cease to conform to
the definition of a multiple lot development, the property will then be in
violation of this Ordinance and shall be retrofitted with conventional
parking and landscaping, even if doing so requires the removal of
previously installed improvements.
5-73
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
Chapter 6 - Environmental
Standards
6.1. - Reserved 6- 3
6.2. - Watershed Protection 6- 3
6.2.1. - Purpose and Intent 6- 3
6.2.2. - Applicability 6- 3
6.2.3. - Exemptions 6- 4
6.2.4. - Exemption to the Plan Submission Requirements of This Section 6- 4
6.2.5. - Compliance with Previously Approved Plans 6- 4
6.2.6. - Activities Regulated by Other Governmental Agencies 6- 5
6.2.7. - How to Use This Section 6- 5
6.2.8. - Incorporation of Watershed Map 6- 6
6.2.9. - Reserved 6- 6
6.2.10. - Low Impact Design 6- 6
6.2.11. - General Standards and Restrictions 6- 7
6.2.12. - Watershed Overlay (WSO) Established 6- 15
6.2.13. - Standards Applicable in the WSO 6- 15
6.2.14. - Protection of Fragile Areas 6- 16
6.2.15. - Reserved 6- 16
6.2.16. - Watershed Modifications 6- 16
6.2.17. - Watershed Accounting 6- 17
6.3. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation 6- 18
6.3.1. - Applicability 6- 18
6.3.2. - Exemptions 6- 18
6.3.3. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan 6- 19
6.3.4. - Basic Control Objectives 6- 23
6.3.5. - Mandatory Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity 6- 24
6.3.6. - Design and Performance Standards 6- 25
6.3.7. - Stormwater Outlet Protection 6- 26
6.3.8. - Borrow and Waste Area 6- 28
6.3.9. - Access and Haul Roads 6- 28
6.3.10. - Operations in Lakes or Natural Watercourses 6- 28
6.3.11. - Responsibility for Maintenance 6- 28
6.3.12. - Additional Measures 6- 29
6-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
6.3.13. - Existing Uncovered Areas 6- 29
6.3.14. - Restoration after Non-Compliance 6- 29
6.4. - Flood Damage Prevention 6- 30
6.4.1. - General 6- 30
6.4.2. - Application, Permit, and Certification Requirements 6- 30
6.4.3. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 6- 33
6-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
6.1. - Reserved
6.2. - Watershed Protection
6.2.1. - Purpose and Intent
These watershed protection standards are established in accordance with the
requirements in the North Carolina General Statutes Sections 143-214.5 through 143-214.7
related to water supply watershed protection. They are intended to regulate residential
density and impervious surface cover in water supply watershed drainage areas to
control non-point source water pollution and protect drinking water quality.
6.2.2. - Applicability
A. Authority. The Board of Commissioners is authorized to adopt these provisions in
accordance with North Carolina General Statutes Sections 143-214.5, 143-214.6 and
143-214.7, Section 160-A-314, the rules promulgated by the North Carolina
Environmental Management Commission, and all other relevant laws of the State
of North Carolina.
B. Location. The standards in this section apply to all land within the Town of
Aberdeen's zoning jurisdiction, including both water supply watersheds and
non-water supply watersheds. The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within
the areas designated as a Public Water Supply Watershed by the N.C.
Environmental Management Commission and shall be defined and established
on the map entitled, "Watershed Protection Map of Aberdeen, North Carolina"
("the Watershed Map"), which is adopted simultaneously herewith. The
Watershed Map and all explanatory matter contained thereon accompanies and
is hereby made a part of this Unified Development Ordinance.
C. Activities Covered.
a. Except for the activities in Section 6.2.3, Exemptions, the standards in this
section apply to all land disturbance, paving, gravel placement, and
construction of buildings or other structures in the Town’s planning
jurisdiction.
b. All activities subject to these provisions shall comply with the procedural,
design, and construction requirements of this section.
6-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
6.2.3. - Exemptions
The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this section; however, this
exemption shall not be construed to permit uses prohibited in the underlying zoning
district, or uses prohibited by this section.
A. Replacement of an existing built-upon area on a lot developed with a like or lesser
amount of new built-upon area at the same location, or at a different location on
the same lot if the TRC deter mines that equal or improved water quality will
result.
B. If a nonconforming lot of record is not contiguous to any other lot owned by the
same party, then that lot of record shall not be subject to the development
restrictions of this ordinance if it is developed for single-family residential
purposes.
C. Any lot or parcel created as part of a family subdivision after the effective date of
these rules shall be exempt from these rules if it is developed for one single-family
detached residence and if it is exempt from local subdivision regulation. Any lot or
parcel created as part of any other type of subdivision that is exempt from a local
subdivision ordinance shall be subject to the land use requirements (including
impervious surface requirements) of these rules, except that such a lot or parcel
must meet the minimum buffer requirements to the maximum extent
practicable.
6.2.4. - Exemption to the Plan Submission Requirements
of This Section
The development of a small accessory building, structure, or small amount of other
built-upon area on a lot is exempt from the plan submission requirements of this
section, provided:
A. The development is nonresidential or multi-family;
B. The total built-upon area is no greater than 600 square feet;
C. Less than 1 acre of land is disturbed;
D. The built-upon area or land disturbance is not within a required surface water
buffer; and
E. The exemption is not proposed on a lot subject to a watershed development plan
on file with the Planning and Inspections Department.
6.2.5. - Compliance with Previously Approved Plans
Any restrictions upon building location, drainageways, pavement, or other built-upon
area, percentage of impervious surface area, location of built-upon area, or any other
6-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
matter appearing on any previously approved watershed development plan covering
the subject land shall be complied with unless and until replaced by an approved revised
watershed development plan meeting the requirements of this section.
6.2.6. - Activities Regulated by Other Governmental
Agencies
A. Transportation. The NCDOT shall comply with the practices outlined in its
document entitled "Best Management Practices for the Protection of Surface
Waters," which is incorporated herein by reference.
B. Hazardous Materials.
1. The Town of Aberdeen Fire Marshall are the designated management
agencies responsible for implementing the provisions of this section
pertaining to hazardous materials.
2. An inventory of all hazardous materials used and stored in the watershed
shall be maintained.
3. A spill/failure containment plan and appropriate safeguards against
contamination are required.
4. Waste minimization and appropriate recycling of materials is encouraged.
5. Land in the WSO where oil or other hazardous substances are stored shall
comply with the following requirements:
(a) The Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA)
Section 302 Extremely Hazardous Substances (42 USC 11000 et seq.);
and
(b) Section 311 of the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended (33 USC 1251
et seq.).
6.2.7. - How to Use This Section
The following general steps should be followed to determine the applicability of the
watershed protection requirements to a specific parcel of land:
A. identify the location of the land on the Official Zoning Map;
B. Determine if the land, development, or activity is exempted (see Section 6.2.3,
Exemptions);
C. Identify fragile areas or development limitations (i.e., surface waters, steep slopes,
etc.) on the land;
D. Based on the development density or built-upon area, determine the method of
stormwater control required and surface water buffers; and
E. Comply with the requirements of the Aberdeen Stormwater Best Management
Practices Design Manual .
6-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
6.2.8. - Incorporation of Watershed Map
A. Incorporation of the WSO District on the Official Zoning Map. The
boundaries of the WSO are adopted on the Official Zoning Map and
incorporated herein by reference.
6.2.9. - Reserved
6.2.10. - Low Impact Design
A. Goals. T he primary goals of low impact design are to lower the impact of
development on receiving waters, to encourage environmentally sensitive
development, to help build communities based on environmental stewardship,
and to reduce construction and maintenance costs of the stormwater
infrastructure. The use of low impact design shall address these goals through the
objectives found in subsection (B) below.
B. Objectives
1. Preserve Fragile Areas and Open Space. P reserve fragile areas through
the following:
(a) A voiding riparian areas, wetlands, steep slopes, high infiltration and
hydric soils;
(b) M aximizing open space and common area through cluster
development where appropriate; and
(c) M aintaining open space in a natural condition by reforestation
where clearing has occurred.
2. Minimize Land Disturbance and Built-Upon Area. D esign
development to provide the following:
(a) Efficient layout to reduce overall length of streets;
(b) Shared parking and drives where possible to further reduce
built-upon area; and
(c) Use of multiple best management practices such as bio-retention
cells and infiltration areas to minimize impact.
(d) Step floor elevations to fit terrain and avoid slab-on-grade
construction to minimize land disturbance.
3. P rotect Water Resources. Use site design techniques to replicate
pre-existing hydrologic site conditions by placing water quality control
devices close to the source. Techniques may include using site design
techniques to replicate pre-existing hydrologic site conditions by placing
water quality control devices close to the source.
6-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
C. Process. T he low impact design process is established in the Town of Aberdeen
Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual .
6.2.11. - General Standards and Restrictions
A. Density and Intensity.
1. Low Density Development Calculation.
(a) F or low density development, density is measured in dwelling units
per acre for single-family detached and duplex residential
developments.
(b) F or recreational facilities, such as golf courses and tennis and swim
clubs lying within a residential development, impacts shall be
determined by measuring the built-upon area on the lot or
common area and dividing by 3,000 square feet to obtain a dwelling
unit equivalency number.
(c) F or all other residential and nonresidential development, the
built-upon area measure shall apply.
2. High Density Development Calculation. For all high density development
the built-upon area measure shall apply.
3. Density and Built-Upon Area Calculations.
(a) For the purpose of calculating density, acres shall be gross acres.
(b) As an alternative, single-family detached or duplex residential
developments dividing 4 or fewer lots and not constructing streets
may use 20,000 square-foot lots where the maximum density is 2
dwelling units per acre and 40,000 square-foot lots where the
maximum density is 1 dwelling unit per acre.
(c) If single-family detached or duplex dwellings are intermingled
within a development with other uses, then the built-upon area
measurement shall apply.
(d) When sections of the same development are devoted to
single-family detached or duplex residential development and other
sections are devoted to other uses, then the developer may apply
the appropriate measurement to the different sections or may use
the built-upon area measurement for the entire development.
(e) Single-family detached or duplex residential development using the
built-upon area measurement shall assume 3,000 square feet of
built-upon area per lot.
(f) The built-upon area maximum shall apply to the entire
development, including streets, buildings, drives, and other
impervious surfaces.
(g) The maximum built-upon area allowed shall be allocated
throughout the development.
(h) In single-family detached and duplex residential developments, the
allocation to each lot shall be uniform.
6-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(i) In all other developments, the allocation may vary among lots.
(j) In all cases, the recorded plat shall clearly state each lot's allocation
and restrictive covenants shall record these allocations.
4. Density Averaging. Two non-contiguous lots may be considered as one lot
for the purposes of development density and intensity, provided the
following requirements are met:
(a) The two lots must be within the same water supply watershed,
irrespective of jurisdictional boundaries.
(b) Neither of the lots can be publicly held land, which include but are
not limited to dedicated drainageway, open space, parkland, or
other lands obtained for watershed protection.
(c) One lot shall reduce its allowable density or built-upon area, while
the other lot shall increase its allowable density or built-upon area
by the same amount.
(d) The overall density for both lots shall meet applicable density
requirements of Section 6.2.15, Individual Water Supply Watersheds,
and both lots shall meet the stormwater control requirements for
the individual water supply watershed.
(e) If the development meets applicable low density requirements, the
stormwater runoff shall be transported by vegetated conveyances
to the maximum extent practicable.
(f) Built-upon areas shall be designed and located such that the
Technical Review Committee finds that the design of each site is
such that all of the following are achieved:
1. Minimized stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters;
2. Minimized concentrated stormwater flow;
3. Maximized use of sheet flow through vegetated areas; and
4. Maximized flow length through vegetated areas.
(g) Areas of concentrated density development shall be located in
upland areas and, to the maximum extent practicable, away from
surface waters and drainageways.
(h) The lot or portions of the lots that are not developed shall remain in
a vegetated or natural state, be placed in an easement in
accordance with subsection (m) below, and be managed through
one of the following means:
1. Conveyance to an owners' association as common elements;
2. Conveyance to a local government as a park, open space or
greenway; or
3. Placement under a permanent conservation or farmland
preservation easement.
(i) Metes and bounds descriptions of the areas to remain vegetated
and limits on use shall be recorded as follows:
1. On a plat;
2. If located within Common Elements, in the property's
declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions;
6-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
3. If not located within Common Elements, in the individual
deeds for each of the lots; and
4. With language making them irrevocable unless amended
under the provisions of this Ordinance.
(j) Density averaging for a development will be reviewed and approved
as part of the watershed development plan for the lot or lots within
the Town's watershed jurisdiction. If one of the lots is located
outside the Town's jurisdiction and that lot is transferring its density
allocation to a lot within the Town's jurisdiction, then the density
averaging approval for the development may not be granted until
any required development approvals are provided by the other
watershed jurisdiction.
(k) Easements shall be platted over those areas that are not developed
and they must remain in a vegetated or natural state. Within such
easements, principal and accessory buildings and structures are not
permitted and the natural ground cover and the natural tree
canopy must be preserved, with the following exceptions:
1. Utilities and associated erosion control structures may be
constructed and maintained;
2. Normal maintenance by mechanical means is allowed for the
removal of dead, diseased, deformed, poisonous, or noxious
vegetation and pests harmful to health;
3. Mechanical mowing of utility areas is allowed to control
growth;
4. The removal of dead trees and logs is permitted, provided the
stumps remain;
5. The removal of briars and vines is permitted, provided the
underbrush remains in its natural state; and
6. The removal of hazardous trees is permitted, provided the
stumps remain.
B. Methods of Stormwater Control
1. Vegetated Conveyances for Low Density Development. Stormwater
runoff shall be transported from the development by vegetated
conveyances to the maximum extent practical, as determined by the TRC.
2. Alternate Measures. The following stormwater management facilities are
considered alternate measures that may be allowed provided that they
meet the standards of the Town of Aberdeen Stormwater Best
Management Practices Design Manual :
(a) Extended dry pond;
(b) Infiltration trench;
(c) Natural infiltration area;
(d) Participation in a public or private regional runoff control program,
in compliance with Section 6.2.11 C, Participation in a Regional
Stormwater Control Program;
6-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(e) Low impact design; and
(f) Any best management practices approved by the Public Works
Director that complies with the performance standards of control of
the first ½ inch of rainfall.
3. Engineering Stormwater Controls for High Density Development.
Stormwater management facilities, such as wet detention ponds, meeting
the performance standards of control of the first 1 inch of rainfall and
removal of 85 percent of total suspended solids (TSS) shall be used to
control stormwater runoff in compliance with the Town of Aberdeen
Stormwater Best Management Practices Design Manual . In-lieu of an
on-site engineered stormwater control, developments may participate in a
regional stormwater control program in compliance with the
requirements of Section 6.2.11 C, Participation in a Regional Stormwater
Control Program.
C. Participation in a Regional Stormwater Control Program.
1. Private Regional Stormwater Control Program.
(a) Where Permitted.
1. Participation in a private regional engineered stormwater
control program is permitted where a private off-site
stormwater control program has been established by one or
more property owners and approved by the TRC. A
development may participate in the program in-lieu of any
certification of runoff control required by this section,
provided that:
a. The development is within an area covered by an
off-site engineered stormwater control structure;
b. Runoff from the development drains to an existing
engineered stormwater control structure;
c. The parties agree to share the cost of any required
maintenance and/or construction;
d. The agreement runs with the property;
e. The agreement is recorded with the appropriate
county Register of Deeds in accordance with Section
6.2.11 D.3, Recordation of Improvements;
f. The Planning and Inspections Director finds that the
watershed development plan is in compliance with all
other applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
2. Developments participating in a private regional stormwater
control program are encouraged to maintain
pre-development hydrology at the project site.
D. Improvements
1. Design of Improvements
6-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(a) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall be
performed by a North Carolina registered professional engineer,
approved by the TRC, and meet or exceed the standards of the
Town of Aberdeen Stormwater Best Management Practices Design
Manual .
(b) The TRC shall require that a stormwater management facility be
positioned on a site such that water quality protection is improved.
2. Construction of Improvements
(a) The construction of all stormwater management facilities as shown
on an approved watershed development plan shall be completed
and have received final approval prior to any plat recordation, or
said improvements shall be guaranteed by a surety in accordance
with Section 7.2 , Financial Guarantees.
(b) The construction of all stormwater management facilities as shown
on an approved watershed development plan shall be completed
and have received final approval prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
(c) If a building permit is not required for a site, then any required
stormwater management facility shall be completed prior to
installation of any built-upon area on the site.
3. Recordation of Improvements. All stormwater management facilities and
associated access/maintenance easement(s) shall be recorded on a plat,
and a mechanism to ensure their maintenance shall be established and
recorded concurrent with or prior to plat recordation.
4. Engineer’s Certificate of Completion Required. An engineer's
Certification of Completion for stormwater management facilities as set
out in the Town's Development Guide shall be submitted prior to issuance
of any building certificate of occupancy.
5. Operation and Maintenance Agreement.
(a) Maintenance responsibility for stormwater management facilities
and their access shall be vested with a responsible party by means
of a legally binding and enforceable operation and maintenance
agreement that is executed as a condition of plan approval, as
provided for in Section 6.2.11 D.3, Recordation of Improvements.
(b) The agreement must be approved by the Planning and Inspections
Director and shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site,
portions of the site, and lots or parcels served by the stormwater
management facilities.
(c) In the case of participation in a regional runoff control program in
accordance with Section 6.2.11, General Standards and Restrictions, a
binding contract or agreement shall be required for participation.
(d) The operation and maintenance agreement shall be referenced on
the final plat and shall be recorded with the appropriate county
Register of Deeds upon final plat approval.
6-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(e) If no subdivision plat is recorded for the site, then the operation and
maintenance agreement shall be recorded with the appropriate
county Register of Deeds so as to appear in the chain of title of all
subsequent purchasers under generally accepted searching
principles.
(f) The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the owner
or owners' association to maintain, repair and, if necessary,
reconstruct the stormwater management facilities, and shall state
the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for such.
(g) The owner of each stormwater management facility installed
pursuant to this Ordinance shall maintain and operate it so as to
preserve and continue its function in controlling water quality and
quantity in accordance with the function for which it was designed.
(h) The operation and maintenance agreement shall refer the property
owner or owners' association to the Town of Aberdeen for specific
maintenance requirements of stormwater management facilities. In
addition, it shall grant to the Town a right of entry in the event that
the Public Services Director has reason to believe it has become
necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, or reconstruct the
stormwater management facilities. In no case shall the right of
entry, of itself, confer an obligation on the Town to assume
responsibility for maintenance of the stormwater management
facilities.
(i) The Public Services Director shall have the responsibility to inspect
the engineered stormwater control structures annually, as required
by NC Environmental Management Commission, to record the
results on forms approved or supplied by the NCDWR, to inspect
any other stormwater management facilities as deemed necessary,
and to notify the responsible property owner or owners' association
when maintenance or repairs are required.
(j) All required repairs and maintenance shall be performed within 90
days after such notice. In case of failure by the responsible party to
perform the required maintenance or repairs within the stated
period, the Town may perform such maintenance or repairs and
recover all costs attendant thereto from the landowner or owners'
association.
(k) For all stormwater management facilities required pursuant to this
Ordinance that are owned by a private property owner or an
owners' association, the required operation and maintenance
agreement shall include all of the following provisions:
1. Acknowledgment that the owner or owners' association shall
continuously operate and maintain the stormwater
management facilities.
2. Establishment of an escrow account, which can be spent
solely for sediment removal, structural, biological, or
6-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
vegetative replacement, major repair, or reconstruction of
the stormwater management facilities. If stormwater
management facilities are not performing adequately or as
intended or are not properly maintained, the Town, in its sole
discretion, may remedy the situation, and in such instances
the Town shall be fully reimbursed from the escrow account.
3. Escrowed funds may be spent by the landowner or owners'
association for sediment removal, structural, biological or
vegetative replacement, major repair, and reconstruction of
the stormwater management facilities.
4. Granting to the Town a right of entry to inspect, monitor,
maintain, repair, and reconstruct stormwater management
facilities.
5. Allowing the Town to recover from the landowner or owners'
association and its members any and all costs the Town
expends to maintain or repair the stormwater management
facilities or to correct any operational deficiencies.
6. Failure to pay the Town all of its expended costs, after 45 days
written notice, shall constitute a breach of the agreement.
7. In case of a deficiency, the Town shall thereafter be entitled
to bring an action against the owner or owners' association
and its members to pay, or foreclose upon the lien hereby
authorized by the agreement against the property, or both.
Interest, collection costs, and attorney fees shall be added to
the recovery.
8. A statement that this agreement shall not obligate the Town
to maintain or repair any stormwater management facility,
and the Town shall not be liable to any person for the
condition or operation of stormwater management facilities.
9. A statement that this agreement shall not in any way
diminish, limit, or restrict the right of the Town to enforce any
of its ordinances as authorized by law.
10. A provision indemnifying and holding harmless the Town for
any costs and injuries arising from or related to the
stormwater management facilities, unless the Town has
agreed in writing to assume the maintenance responsibility
and has accepted dedication of any and all rights necessary
to carry out that maintenance.
6. Inspections Program.
(a) Inspections and inspection programs by the Town may be
conducted or established on any reasonable basis, including but not
limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections
based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and
joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under
environmental or safety laws.
6-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(b) Inspections may include, but are not limited to:
1. Reviewing maintenance and repair records;
2. Sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and
material or water in stormwater management facilities; and
3. Evaluating the condition of stormwater management
facilities.
(c) If the owner or occupant of any land refuses to permit such
inspection, the Public Services Director shall proceed to obtain an
administrative search warrant pursuant to North Carolina General
Statutes Section 15-27.2, as amended.
(d) No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Public
Services Director while carrying out their official duties.
E. Watershed Development Plan
1. Plan Required. A watershed development plan prepared by a North
Carolina registered professional engineer in accordance with the
requirements of this section shall be submitted to the Planning and
Inspections Director for all development.
2. Construction Plans a Part of Watershed Development Plan. The
construction plans for required runoff control structure(s) shall be
approved as part of the watershed development plan, and prior to issuance
of any building or land disturbance permit on a site. For subdivisions,
construction plans shall be submitted in accordance with Section 2.6.12,
Preliminary Plat.
3. Master Watershed Development Plan
(a) Where authorized by the TRC, a master watershed development
plan may be approved for certain large-scale nonresidential and
multi-family developments, in-lieu of a watershed development
plan with the required construction plans.
(b) Where authorized, the master watershed development plan shall be
approved by the TRC prior to the recordation of any plat, or issuance
of any grading or building permits for the total site.
(c) Prior to the approval of any site plans or group development plans,
grading permit, or building permit for any development site
included on a given master watershed development plan, a
site-specific watershed development plan shall be approved subject
to the requirements of this section.
4. Plan Approval. The TRC shall approve any watershed development plan
that is in conformance with the requirements of this section.
5. Approved Plan a Prerequisite. A watershed development plan shall be
approved prior to the recordation of any plat, or issuance of any grading
permit or building permit for the site. The Planning and Inspections and
the Public Works Director are not authorized to issue any permits for
development on any land unless a watershed development plan is
approved, if one is required.
6-14
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
6. Engineered Stormwater Controls and Alternate Measures. When a
permanent engineered stormwater control structure or alternate measure,
including participation in a regional stormwater control program, is
required for a development to comply with the requirements of this
section, a North Carolina registered professional engineer shall prepare the
plan with the Engineer's Certification of Runoff Control as set out in the
Town’s Development Guide affixed, signed, sealed, and dated.
6.2.12. - Watershed Overlay (WSO) Established
A. District Boundaries The district boundaries for each WSO are shown on the Town
of Aberdeen Watershed Map, which is incorporated herein by reference. WSO
boundaries shall be determined in accordance with Section 3.1.5, Official Zoning
Map, and Section 2.6.4, Determination.
6.2.13. - Standards Applicable in the WSO
A. Prohibited Uses. T he following uses and activities are prohibited in a WSO:
1. A ll hazardous or toxic substance generators or handlers as defined in this
Ordinance; and
2. E stablishment of a new public or private major landfill or expansion of an
existing private major landfill.
B. Built-Upon Area Limitations
1. Drowning Creek Watershed. Drowning Creek is classified as WS II water
supply watershed. In order to maintain predominantly undeveloped land
use intensity, limits on the built-upon area and density must be set.
(a) General Standards.
1. Single family residential uses shall be allowed at a maximum
of one dwelling unit per acre (1 du/ac).
2. No residential lot shall be less than one acre (or 40,000
square feet excluding roadway right-of-way), except within
an approved cluster development.
3. All multi-family and non-residential development shall be
allowed a maximum of twelve percent (12%) built-upon area.
4. Allocation shall be made on a first come, first served basis. An
allocation shall be assigned when a building permit for the
site is issued, site plan is approved, or the preliminary
subdivision plat for a development is approved. Expiration of
a building permit, site plan approval, or preliminary plat
approval shall terminate the allocation identified in this
Subsection.
6-15
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
5. The Watershed Administrator is authorized to approve SIAs
consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. Projects
must, to the maximum extent practicable , minimize
built-upon surface area, direct stormwater away from surface
waters and incorporate Best Management Practices to
minimize water quality impacts.
(b) Exemptions.
1. New multi-family and non-residential development may
occupy ten percent (10%) of the watershed area which is
outside the critical area, with seventy percent (70%)
built-upon area when approved as a special intensity
allocation (SIA).
2. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project
area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the
project is to be developed.
6.2.14. - Protection of Fragile Areas
A. Buffer Area Required.
1. High Density. A minimum of one hundred (100) foot vegetative buffer is
required for all new development activities that exceed the low density
option;
2. Low Density. A minimum thirty (30) foot vegetative buffer for
development activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on
the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic
maps or as determined by local government studies. Desirable artificial
streambank or shoreline stabilization is permitted.
3. Development in Buffer. No new development is allowed in the buffer
except for water dependent structures, other structures such as flag poles,
signs and security lights which result in only diminutive increases in
impervious area and public projects such as road crossings and greenways
where no practical alternative exists. These activities should minimize
built-upon surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters and
maximize the utilization of stormwater Best Management Practices.
6.2.15. - Reserved
6.2.16. - Watershed Modifications
A. General.
1. T he TRC is authorized to modify this section and accept an alternate
means of accomplishing the purposes of this Ordinance for those
6-16
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
watershed requirements that are more stringent than the State minimum
watershed requirements.
2. W here such watershed requirements are State minimum requirements,
then a departure from those requirements shall only be considered in
accordance with Section 2.5.19, Watershed Variance.
B. Grounds for Modification. In considering a watershed modification, the TRC shall
determine that the modification request meets one or more of the following
findings:
1. Equal or Better Performance
(a) A finding by the TRC that equal or better performance in
furtherance of the purposes of this Ordinance will result from the
alternate standards portrayed on the plan constitutes grounds for
approval of a modification. The evaluation of performance shall be
made with regard to overall performance in furtherance of the
purposes of this Ordinance.
(b) If an alternate standard as portrayed on the plan reduces
performance with regard to one or more Ordinance purposes but
produces a concomitant and counterbalancing superiority of
performance with regard to one or more other purposes, a
modification may be approved.
2. Physical Constraints. A finding by the TRC that the size, topography, or
existing development of the property or of adjoining areas prevents
conformance with a standard constitutes grounds for approval of a
modification. finding by the TRC that the size, topography, or existing
development of the property or of adjoining areas prevents conformance
with a standard constitutes grounds for approval of a modification.
3. Other Constraints. A finding by the TRC that a federal, state or local law or
regulation prevents conformance with a standard constitutes grounds for
approval of a modification.
4. Conditions
(a) In approving a modification, the TRC may prescribe such reasonable
and appropriate conditions and safeguards as will assure that the
use of the land will:
(1) Be compatible with surrounding lands;
(2) Not alter the essential character of the neighborhood; and
(3) Support the purposes of this Ordinance.
(b) Violations of conditions and safeguards that are part of the terms of
modification approval shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
(c) An approved modification is part of an approved watershed plan
and shall have the same duration as the plan approval.
6-17
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
6.2.17. - Watershed Accounting
A. 10/70 Provision
a. T he Planning and Inspections Director shall keep records on the Town’s
use of the provision allowing a maximum of 10 percent of the GWA of the
Drowning Creek Watershed to be developed with a maximum of 70
percent built-upon area. Records for the watershed shall include the total
area of the watershed's GWA, total acres eligible to be developed under
this provision, total acres approved for development under this provision,
and individual records for each project with the following information:
location, number of developed acres, type of land use and stormwater
management plan.
b. D evelopment under this provision requires engineered stormwater
controls.
B. Record Keeping. T he Planning and Inspections Director shall keep a record of all
watershed variances, stream determinations and determinations of no practical
alternatives. This record shall be submitted for each calendar year to the North
Carolina Division of Water Resources on or before January 1 of the following year
and shall provide a description of each project receiving a variance, stream
determination or determination of no practical alternatives and the reasons for
granting them.
6.3. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
6.3.1. - Applicability
A. General
1. U nless exempted by this section, no person shall initiate any
land-disturbing activity without a soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan and a land disturbance permit in accordance with Section 2.6.11 , Land
Disturbance Permit, if the land-disturbing activity:
(a) E xceeds 1 acre (lands under one ownership or diverse lands being
developed as a unit shall be aggregated);
(b) I s located on highly erodible soils with a "k" factor greater than 0.36;
(c) I ncludes a water quality pond or retention structure in a watershed,
or drains into a water quality pond or retention structure in any part
of a watershed;
(d) I s located in an existing uncovered area requiring extensive soil
erosion control measures in accordance with Subsection 6.3.13,
Existing Uncovered Areas; or
6-18
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(e) R equires extensive erosion control measures.
B. Protection of Property. A person conducting land-disturbing activity shall take
all reasonable measures to protect all public and private property from damage
caused by such activity.
6.3.2. - Exemptions
T he following activities are exempted from the requirements of Section 2.6.11, Land
Disturbance Permit, and the standards in this section:
A. A land-disturbing activity which is essential to protect human life during an
emergency;
B. A land-disturbing activity undertaken in areas that do not comply with Section
6.3.1 A.1(b)—(f) above;
C. T he stockpiling of raw or processed sand, stone, or gravel in material processing
plants and storage yards, provided sediment control measures are utilized to
protect against off-site damage;
D. A land-disturbing activity undertaken on agricultural land for the raising of plants
or animals useful to man, including but not limited to:
1. F orage and sod crops, grain and feed crops, tobacco, cotton and peanuts;
2. D airy animals and dairy products;
3. P oultry and poultry products;
4. L ivestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or
goats, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals;
5. B ees and aviary products; and
6. F ur animals.
E. A land-disturbing activity undertaken on forest land for the production and
harvesting of timber and timber products, which are conducted in accordance
with Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality ( Best Management
Practices ) as adopted by the North Carolina Department of Environment and
Natural Resources (DENR). The landowner shall provide the Office of Erosion
Control a copy of the Reforestation/Regeneration Plan and the Forest
Stewardship Program Plan for review of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Plan. A Forest Stewardship Plan submitted under the guise of any reason other
than that of a true Forest Stewardship Plan (subdivision or commercial
development) shall be void. The plan shall be treated as a subdivision or
commercial development and shall be governed under the approximate standard
within this Ordinance. If land-disturbing activity undertaken on forestland for the
production and harvesting of timber and timber products is not conducted in
accordance with Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality , the
provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to such activity and any related
land-disturbing activity on the tract;
6-19
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
F. A land-disturbing activity undertaken by persons as defined in North Carolina
General Statutes Section 113A-52(8) who are otherwise regulated by the provisions
of The Mining Act of 1971, North Carolina General Statutes Section 74-46 through
74-68; and
G. A land-disturbing activity undertaken on lands over which the State has exclusive
regulatory jurisdiction as provided in North Carolina General Statutes Section
113A-56(a).
6.3.3. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
L and-disturbing activities subject to the standards in this section shall require prior
approval of a soil erosion and sediment control plan prepared in accordance with the
following standards.
A. Preparation of Plan
1. The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared by, and
shall bear the seal and signature of a licensed professional engineer,
registered landscape architect, certified professional in erosion and
sedimentation control (CPESC), or a registered surveyor to the extent
permitted by North Carolina law, at a scale not less than 1 inch equals 100
feet.
2. The plan shall be filed with the Planning and Inspections Director, and the
applicable Soil and Water Conservation District, 30 days prior to the
commencement of the proposed activity.
3. Plans submitted for sites less than 1 acre do not require a seal and
signature of a licensed professional engineer, registered landscape
architect, certified professional in erosion and sedimentation control
(CPESC), or registered surveyor.
B. Submission of Plan
1. A person conducting land-disturbing activity that proposes to disturb or
uncover 1 or more acres shall submit an erosion control plan with the
Planning and Inspections Director, at least 30 days prior to beginning such
activity and shall keep another copy of the plan on file at the job site.
2. If the Planning and Inspections Director, either upon review of such plan or
on inspection of the job site, determines that a significant risk of
accelerated erosion or off-site sedimentation exists, the Planning and
Inspections Director shall require a revised plan.
3. Pending the preparation of the revised plan, work shall cease or shall
continue under conditions outlined by the appropriate authority.
C. Financial Responsibility Statement
6-20
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
1. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be disapproved unless
accompanied by an authorized statement of financial responsibility and
ownership.
2. This statement shall be signed by the person financially responsible for the
land-disturbing activity or their attorney in fact.
3. The statement shall include the mailing and street addresses of the
principal place of business of the person financially responsible and
landowner, or their registered agents.
4. If the person financially responsible is not a resident of North Carolina, a
North Carolina agent must be designated in the statement for the purpose
of receiving notice of compliance or non-compliance with the plan, the
North Carolina Environmental Policy Act, this Ordinance, or rules or orders
adopted or issued pursuant to this Ordinance.
D. Plan Requirements. The plan required by this section shall contain architectural
and engineering drawings, maps, assumptions, calculations, and narrative
statements as needed to adequately describe the proposed development of the
land and the measures proposed to ensure compliance with the requirements of
this section. Plan content may vary to meet the needs of specific site
requirements. Detailed guidelines for plan preparation can be found in the
Development Guide .
E. North Carolina Division of Water Resources Approval Required. The landowner
or developer shall forward to the Director of the North Carolina Division of Water
Resources, a plan for any land-disturbing activity that involves the utilization of
ditches for the purpose of de-watering or lowering the water table of a tract.
Written documentation of this plan submittal shall be provided to the Planning
and Inspections Director prior to approval of an erosion and sedimentation
control plan.
F. Conservation District Review. Within 20 days of receipt of any plan, the
applicable Soil and Water Conservation District shall review it and submit its
comments and recommendations to the Planning and Inspections Director.
Failure of the Soil and Water Conservation District to submit its comments and
recommendations within 20 days shall not delay final action on the plan.
G. Planning and Inspections Director Review
1. The Planning and Inspections Director shall review each complete plan
submitted within 30 days of the date it is determined complete and notify
the person submitting the plan that it is approved, approved with
conditions, approved with performance reservations, or disapproved.
2. Failure to approve or disapprove a soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan within 30 days of the date it is determined to be complete shall result
in its being approved.
6-21
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
3. If the plan is disapproved, the reasons for the denial shall be stated in
writing.
4. The Planning and Inspections Director shall approve or deny a revised soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan within 15 days of receipt, or it shall
be deemed approved.
5. If, following commencement of a land-disturbing activity pursuant to an
approved plan, the Planning and Inspections Director determines that the
plan is inadequate to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, the
Planning and Inspections Director may require revisions as necessary for
compliance.
6. A plan submitted for a land-disturbing activity for which an environmental
document is required by the North Carolina Environmental Policy Act
(North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-1, et seq.) shall be deemed
incomplete until a complete environmental document is available for
review. The Planning and Inspections Director shall promptly notify the
person submitting the plan that the 30 day time limit for review of the plan
pursuant to this section shall not begin until a complete environmental
document is available for review.
H. Grounds for Plan Denial. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be
disapproved if:
1. It fails to adequately meet the basic control objectives or detail provisions
of this Ordinance;
2. Implementation of the plan would result in a violation of rules adopted by
the Environmental Management Commission to protect riparian buffers
along surface waters; or
3. If its content is inadequate.
I. Other Denials
1. A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be disapproved if there
is a finding that an applicant, a parent, subsidiary, or other affiliate of the
applicant:
(a) Is conducting or has conducted land-disturbing activity without an
approved plan, or has received notice of violation of a plan
previously approved by the North Carolina Sedimentation Control
Commission or the Planning and Inspections Director and has not
complied with the notice within the time specified in the notice;
(b) Has failed to pay a civil penalty assessed pursuant to the
Environmental Policy Act or this Ordinance which is due and for
which no appeal is pending;
(c) Has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to North Carolina
General Statutes Section 113A-64(b) or any criminal provision of this
Ordinance; or
(d) Has failed to substantially comply with State rules adopted pursuant
to the Act or regulations of this Ordinance.
6-22
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
2. For purposes of this subsection, an applicant's record may be considered
for only the 2 years prior to the application date.
J. Application Amendments. An amendment to a soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan may be submitted in written and/or graphic form and shall be
reviewed in the same manner as the original application. Until such time as the
amendment is approved, the land-disturbing activity shall not proceed except in
accordance with the plan as originally approved.
K. Work Conducted from Approved Plan. A person engaged in land-disturbing
activity who fails to file a plan in accordance with this Ordinance, or who conducts
a land-disturbing activity except in accordance with provisions of an approved
plan shall be deemed in violation of this Ordinance.
L. Plan Approval Required for Permit. If land-disturbing activity is subject to the
requirements of this section, a building permit shall not be issued unless a soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan is submitted to the Planning and
Inspections Director, a land disturbance permit issued in accordance with Section
2.6.11, Land Disturbance Permit (if required), and initial soil erosion and
sedimentation control devices are installed and are functioning properly.
M. Work Completed Before Final Subdivision Approval. A final plat approval or
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless work at the site is completed in
accordance with a valid land disturbance permit, or financial guarantee is
approved and accepted as required by this Ordinance.
N. Financial Guarantee. The applicant for a land disturbance permit to grade more
than 1 acre may be required to file with the Planning and Inspections Director a
financial guarantee to cover all the costs of protection of the site, which shall be
established in accordance with Section 7.2.2.C, Form of Performance Guarantee,
and Section 7.2.2.E, Amount of Performance Guarantee. The guarantee shall
remain in force until the work is completed in accordance with the land
disturbance permit and the work is approved by the Planning and Inspections
Director. Upon violation of this Ordinance, the Planning and Inspections Director
may draw on the financial guarantee in accordance with Section 7.2.2.G, Default
and Forfeiture of Performance Guarantees, to establish protective cover on the
site, to control the velocity of runoff, and/or prevent off-site sedimentation.
6.3.4. - Basic Control Objectives
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan may be disapproved pursuant to Section
6.3.3 H, Grounds for Plan Denial, if the plan fails to address the following control
objectives:
6-23
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
A. Identify Critical Areas. O n-site areas which are subject to severe erosion, and
off-site areas which are especially vulnerable to damage from erosion and/or
sedimentation, are to be identified and receive special attention;
B. Limit Time of Exposure. A ll land-disturbing activity is to be planned and
conducted to limit exposure to the shortest feasible time;
C. Limit Exposed Areas. A ll land-disturbing activity is to be planned and conducted
to minimize the size of the area to be exposed at any one time;
D. Control Surface Water. S urface water runoff originating upgrade of exposed
areas should be controlled to reduce erosion and sediment loss during the period
of exposure;
E. Control Sedimentation. A ll land-disturbing activity is to be planned and
conducted so as to prevent off-site sedimentation damage; and
F. Manage Stormwater Runoff. W hen the increase in the velocity of stormwater
runoff resulting from a land-disturbing activity is sufficient to cause accelerated
erosion of the receiving watercourse, plans are to include measures to control the
velocity at the point of discharge so as to minimize accelerated erosion of the site
and increased sedimentation of the stream.
6.3.5. - Mandatory Standards for Land-Disturbing Activity
Land-disturbing activity shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Undisturbed Buffer Zone Required.
1. Land-disturbing activity shall not be permitted in proximity to a lake or
natural watercourse unless an undisturbed buffer zone 25 feet wide is
provided, or a buffer zone is provided along the margin of the watercourse
of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within the 25 percent of the
buffer zone nearer the land-disturbing activity, provided that these
standards shall not apply to a land-disturbing activity in connection with
the construction of facilities to be located on, over, or under a lake or
natural watercourse.
2. Unless otherwise provided, the width of a buffer-zone is measured from
the edge of the water to the nearest edge of the disturbed area, with the
25 percent of the strip nearer the land-disturbing activity containing
natural or artificial means of confining visible siltation.
3. Waters that have been classified as trout waters by the North Carolina
Environmental Management Commission shall have an undisturbed buffer
zone 25 feet wide, or of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within
the 25 percent of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activity,
6-24
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
whichever is greater. Provided, however, that the Planning and Inspections
Director may approve plans which include land-disturbing activity along
trout waters when the duration of the disturbance is temporary and the
extent of the disturbance is minimal.
4. The 25 foot minimum width factor for an undisturbed buffer zone adjacent
to designated trout waters shall be measured horizontally from the top of
the bank.
5. Where a temporary and minimal disturbance is permitted, land-disturbing
activities in the buffer zone adjacent to designated trout waters shall be
limited to a maximum of 10 percent of the total length of the buffer zone
within the tract so that there is not more than 100 linear feet of
disturbance in each 1000 linear feet of buffer zone. Larger areas may be
disturbed with the written approval of DENR.
6. Land-disturbing activity shall not be undertaken within a buffer zone
adjacent to designated trout waters that will cause adverse temperature
fluctuations in these waters, as established in 15 NCAC 2B.0211 " Fresh
Surface Water Classification and Standards ".
B. Fill Material. Unless a permit from the Public Services Director to operate a
landfill is on file for the official site, acceptable fill material shall be free of organic
or other degradable materials, masonry, concrete and brick in sizes exceeding 12
inches, and any materials which would cause the site to be regulated as a landfill
by the State of North Carolina.
C. Graded Slopes and Fills
1. The angle for graded slopes and fills shall be no greater than a 2-to-1 slope
(horizontal to vertical) if they are to be stabilized with vegetative cover.
2. Slopes or fills steeper than 2-to-1 must be protected by structures.
3. In any event, slopes left exposed will, within 7 days of completion of any
phase of grading, be planted or otherwise provided with temporary or
permanent ground cover, devices, or structures sufficient to restrain
erosion.
D. Ground Cover. Whenever land-disturbing activity is undertaken on a tract, the
person conducting the land-disturbing activity shall install such sedimentation
and erosion control devices and practices as are sufficient to retain the sediment
generated by the land-disturbing activity within the boundaries of the tract
during construction upon and development of said tract, and shall plant or
otherwise provide a permanent ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion after
completion of construction or development. Except as provided in Section 6.3.6 B,
High Quality Water Zones, of this Ordinance, provisions for a ground cover
sufficient to restrain erosion must be accomplished within 14 days.
6-25
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
6.3.6. - Design and Performance Standards
A. Design for 10-Year Storm. E xcept as provided in Section 6.3.6 B, High Quality
Water Zones, erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and
devices shall be so planned, designed, and constructed to provide protection
from the calculated maximum peak rate of runoff from the 10-year storm. Runoff
rates shall be calculated using the procedures in the USDA, Soil Conservation
Service's " National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices ," or
other acceptable calculation procedures.
B. High Quality Water Zones. I n high quality water (HQW) zones, the following
design standards shall apply:
1. U ncovered areas in HQW zones shall be limited at any time to a maximum
total area within the boundaries of the tract of 20 acres. Only the portion of
the land-disturbing activity within a HQW zone shall be governed by this
section. Larger areas may be uncovered within the boundaries of the tract
with the written approval of DENR.
2. S oil erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices
within HQW zones shall be planned, designed, and constructed to provide
protection from the runoff of the 25-year storm which produces the
maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to procedures in the
United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's "
National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices " or
according to procedures adopted by any other agency of this State or the
United States or any generally recognized organization or association.
3. S ediment basins within HQW zones shall be designed and constructed so
the basin will have a settling efficiency of at least 70 percent for the 40
micron (0.04 mm) size soil particle transported into the basin by the runoff
of that 2-year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as
calculated according to procedures in the United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's " National Engineering Field
Manual for Conservation Practices " or according to procedures adopted
by any other agency of this State or the United States or any generally
recognized organization or association.
4. Newly constructed open channels in HQW zones shall be designed and
constructed with side slopes no steeper than 2 horizontal to 1 vertical if a
vegetative cover is used for stabilization unless soil conditions permit a
steeper slope or where the slopes are stabilized by using mechanical
devices, structural devices, or other acceptable ditch liners. In any event,
the angle for side slopes shall be sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion.
5. Ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion must be provided for any
portion of a land-disturbing activity in a HQW zone within 7 days of
completion of any phase of grading.
6-26
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
C. Sedimentation Basins. Except as provided for in Section 6.3.6 B, High Quality
Water Zones, above, all sedimentation basins shall be designed and constructed
to have a settling efficiency of at least 70 percent for the 40 micron (0.04 mm) size
soil particle.
6.3.7. - Stormwater Outlet Protection
A. Intent. S tream banks and channels downstream from any land-disturbing activity
shall be protected from increased degradation by accelerated erosion caused by
increased velocity of runoff from the land-disturbing activity.
B. Performance Standard.
1. L and-disturbing activity shall be conducted so that the post-construction
velocity of the 10-year storm runoff in the receiving natural watercourse to
the discharge point does not exceed the greater of:
(a) T he velocity established in Table 6.3.7.B, Maximum Permissible
Velocity for Stormwater Discharges; or
(b) T he velocity of the 10-year storm runoff in the receiving natural
watercourse prior to development.
2. I f condition B.1 above cannot be met, the receiving watercourse (and
discharge point) shall be designed and constructed to withstand the
expected velocity anywhere the velocity exceeds the "prior to
development" velocity by 10 percent.
Table 7.1.6.C : Development Entry Points
Material Feet Per Second Meters Per Second
Fine Sand (non colloidal) 2.5 0.8
Sandy Loam (non colloidal) 2.5 0.8
Silt Loam (non colloidal) 3 0.9
Ordinary Firm Loam 3.5 1.1
Fine Gravel 5 1.5
Stiff Clay (very colloidal) 5 1.5
Graded, Loam to Cobbles (non colloidal) 5.5 1.7
Graded, Silt to Cobbles 3.5 1.1
Alluvial Silts (non colloidal) 5 1.5
Coarse Gravel (non colloidal) 6 1.8
Cobbles and Shingles 5.5 1.7
Shales and Hard Pans 6 1.8
6-27
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
[1] : These standards are adapted from recommendations by Special Committee on Irrigation Research,
American Society of Civil Engineers, 1926, for channels with straight alignment. For sinuous channels, multiply
allowable velocity by 0.95 for slightly sinuous, by 0.9 for moderately sinuous channels, and by 0.8 for highly
sinuous channels
C. Acceptable Management Measures
1. General. Measures applied alone or in combination to satisfy the intent of
this section are acceptable if there are no objectionable secondary
consequences. The N.C. Sedimentation Commission and the Town
recognize that the management of stormwater runoff to minimize or
control downstream channel and bank erosion is a developing technology.
Innovative techniques and ideas will be considered and may be used when
shown to have the potential to produce successful results.
2. Stormwater Runoff Management Alternatives. Some alternatives are to:
(a) Avoid increases to surface runoff volume and velocity by including
measures to promote infiltration to compensate for increased runoff
from areas rendered impervious;
(b) Avoid increases in stormwater discharge velocities by using
detention devices, vegetated or roughened swales, and waterways
in-lieu of closed drains and high velocity paved sections;
(c) Provide energy dissipaters at outlets of storm drainage facilities to
reduce flow velocities to the point of discharge. These may range
from simple rip-rapped sections to complex structures;
(d) Protect watercourses subject to accelerated erosion by improving
cross sections and/or providing erosion-resistant lining; or
(e) Upgrade or replace the receiving device structure, or watercourse
such that it will receive and conduct the flow to a point where it is
no longer subject to degradation from the increased rate of flow or
increased velocity.
3. Exceptions. This rule shall not apply where it can be demonstrated that
stormwater discharge velocities will not create an erosion problem in the
receiving watercourse.
6.3.8. - Borrow and Waste Area
When the person conducting the land-disturbing activity is also the person conducting
the borrow or waste disposal activity, areas from which borrow is obtained and which are
not regulated by the provisions of the Mining Act of 1971, and waste areas for surplus
materials other than landfills regulated by the Public Service Department, shall be
considered as part of the land-disturbing activity where the borrow material is being
used or from which the waste material originated. When the person conducting
land-disturbing activity is not the person obtaining the borrow and/or disposing of the
waste, these areas shall be considered a separate land-disturbing activity.
6-28
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
6.3.9. - Access and Haul Roads
Temporary access and haul roads, other than existing public roads, constructed or used
in connection with any land-disturbing activity shall be considered a part of such activity.
6.3.10. - Operations in Lakes or Natural Watercourses
A. L and-disturbing activity in connection with construction in, on, over, or under a
lake or natural watercourse shall be planned and conducted in such a manner as
to minimize the extent and duration of disturbance of the stream channel.
B. T he relocation of a stream, where relocation is an essential part of the proposed
activity, shall be planned and executed so as to minimize changes in the stream
flow characteristics, except when justification for significant alteration to flow
characteristic is provided.
C. T he U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall be notified by the developer of any
planned operation in lakes or natural watercourses for possible issuance of
Section 404 or other permits.
6.3.11. - Responsibility for Maintenance
During the development of a site, the person conducting the land-disturbing activity
shall install and maintain all temporary and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures as required by the approved plan, by any provision of this Ordinance,
the Act, or by any order adopted pursuant to this Ordinance or the North Carolina
Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973 (see Section 113A-50 of the North Carolina
General Statutes). After site development, the landowner or person in possession or
control of the land shall install and/or maintain all necessary permanent soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures, except those measures installed within a road or street
right-of way or easement accepted for maintenance by a governmental agency.
6.3.12. - Additional Measures
Whenever the Planning and Inspections Director determines that significant
sedimentation is occurring as a result of land-disturbing activity, despite application and
maintenance of protective practices, the person conducting the land-distributing
activity will be required to and shall take additional protective action.
6.3.13. - Existing Uncovered Areas
A. Applicability. A ll uncovered areas existing on the effective date of this Ordinance
which are the result of land-disturbing activity, which exceed 1 acre, which are
subject to continued accelerated erosion, and which are causing off-site damage
from sedimentation, shall be provided with a ground cover or other protective
6-29
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
measures, structures, or devices sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion and
control off-site sedimentation.
B. Notice of Violation. T he Planning and Inspections Director will serve upon the
landowner or other person in possession or control of the land, a written notice of
violation in accordance with Section 9.6.1, Notice of Violation. In determining the
corrective measures required and the time allowed for compliance, the Planning
and Inspections Director shall take into consideration the economic feasibility,
technology, and quantity of work required and shall set reasonable attainable
time limits for compliance.
C. Requiring Erosion Control Plan. T he Planning and Inspections Director
reserves the right to require preparation and approval of a soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan in any instance where extensive control measures are
required.
D. Exemptions. T his rule shall not require ground cover on cleared land forming the
future basin of a planned reservoir.
6.3.14. - Restoration after Non-Compliance
The Planning and Inspections Director may require a person who engaged in a
land-disturbing activity and failed to retain sediment generated by the activity, as
required by North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-57 (3), to restore the waters and
land affected by the failure to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting pollution
by sedimentation. This authority is in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty or
injunctive relief authorized under this Ordinance.
6.4. - Flood Damage Prevention
6.4.1. - General
A. Applicability. T his section shall apply to development in all special flood hazard
areas within the corporate limits and ETJ of the Town of Aberdeen.
B. Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas. T he special flood hazard
areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement
between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
and its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for Moore County dated
November 11, 2017, al ong with its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map Panels
(8469, 8478, 8479, 8488, 8540, 8560, 8561, 8570, 8571, 8580, ), which are
6-30
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
incorporated herein by reference.
C. Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. A floodplain development
permit is required prior to commencement of development within special flood
hazard areas determined in accordance with the provisions of this section and
Section 2.6.9, Floodplain Development Permit.
D. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. T he degree of flood protection required
by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does
not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This section shall not
create liability on the part of the Town or any officer or employee of the Town for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this Unified Development
Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
6.4.2. - Application, Permit, and Certification
Requirements
A. Application Requirements. A n application for a floodplain development permit
shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements in the Development
Guide , the certification requirements in Section 6.4.2 B below, and submitted in
accordance with the requirements of Section 2.6.9 , Floodplain Development
Permit.
B. Certification Requirements. D evelopment subject to this section shall comply
with the following requirements:
1. Elevation Certificates
(a) Before the Start of Construction
(1) A n elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior to
the actual start of any new construction.
(2) C ertification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation
to mean sea level shall be submitted.
(3) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies shall be corrected by
the applicant.
(4) Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
(b) After Reference Level Established
(1) An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after
the reference level is established.
6-31
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(2) Within 7 calendar days of establishment of the reference
level elevation, the applicant shall submit a certification of
the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea
level.
(3) Any work done within the 7 day calendar period and prior to
submission of the certification shall be at the applicant's risk.
(4) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant immediately and
prior to further work being permitted to proceed.
(5) Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the
project.
(c) Final As-Built Elevation Certificate
(1) A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after construction is completed and prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) The permit holder shall submit a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all
attendant utilities to the Planning and Inspections Director.
(3) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(4) In some instances, another certification may be required to
certify corrected as-built construction.
(5) Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
2. Floodproofing Certificate
(a) If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood
protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA
Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an
inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual
start of any new construction.
(b) The applicant shall submit to the Planning and Inspections Director
a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference
level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level.
(c) Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same.
(d) The Planning and Inspections Director shall review the certificate
data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance
plan. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the
applicant prior to floodplain development permit approval.
6-32
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(e) Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
(f) Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be
cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
3. Manufactured Dwelling. If a manufactured dwelling is placed within Zone
A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches
in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required
in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards.
4. Watercourse Alteration. All the following items shall be submitted by a
permit holder to the Planning and Inspections Director prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit if a watercourse is to be altered or
relocated:
(a) A description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation;
(b) A professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse
and the effects to properties located both upstream and
downstream; and
(c) Accessory Structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of Section 6.4.3 B.7, Accessory Structures.
5. Certification Exemptions. The following structures, if located within Zone
A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in this subsection:
(a) Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of Section 6.4.3 B.5,
Recreational Vehicles;
(b) Temporary nonresidential structures meeting requirements of
Section 6.4.3 B.6, Temporary Non-Residential Structures; and
(c) Accessory Structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of Section 6.4.3 B.7, Accessory Structures.
6.4.3. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
A. General Standards. C ompliance with the following standards shall be required
within a special flood hazard area:
1. N ew construction and substantial improvements in special flood hazard
areas shall:
(a) B e designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure;
(b) B e constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage;
(c) B e constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damages;
(d) B e designed so that electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities are configured
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
6-33
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
components during conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood
protection elevation. These include, but are not limited to:
(1) H VAC equipment;
(2) W ater softener units;
(3) B ath/kitchen fixtures;
(4) D uctwork;
(5) E lectric/gas meter panels/boxes;
(6) U tility/cable boxes;
(7) H ot water heaters; and
(8) E lectric outlets/switches;
(e) B e designed so that new and replacement water supply systems
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(f) B e designed so that new and replacement sanitary sewage systems
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
(g) B e located and constructed to avoid impairment of on-site waste
disposal systems or contamination from them during flooding;
2. A ny alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure,
which is in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall comply
with the requirements of "new construction" as established in this section;
3. N othing in this section shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance and located totally or partially within the floodway,
non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional
encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the
floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that
such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other
requirements of this section;
4. N ew solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management
facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be
permitted in the special flood hazard area;
5. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use
or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment
facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or
tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood
protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
Section 6.4.2 B, Certification Requirements;
6. S ubdivision and other development applications shall:
(a) B e consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) R equire public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood
damage;
(c) R equire adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
6-34
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(d) R eceive all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for
which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
7. W hen a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the
entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvement.
8. W hen a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood
hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the
more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation
shall apply.
B. Specific Standards. I n addition to the standards in Section 6.4.3.A, General
Standards, development in all special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for
Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, or Section 6.4.3.C, Standards for
Floodplains without Established Base Flood Elevations, shall be subject to the
following:
1. Non-Residential Construction
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential
structure shall have the reference level, including basement,
elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as
established in this section.
(b) A structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be
floodproofed in-lieu of elevation, provided all areas of the structure,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the
regulatory flood protection elevation are made watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy.
(c) For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance
with Section 6.4.4 F, Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone
AO). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall
be provided to the Planning and Inspections Director as set forth in
Section 6.4.2 B, Certification Requirements, along with the
operational and maintenance plans.
2. Manufactured Dwelling
(a) New and replacement manufactured dwellings shall be elevated so
that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than
the regulatory flood protection elevation, as established in this
section.
(b) Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement, either by a certified engineered foundation system, or in
6-35
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
accordance with the most current edition of the State of North
Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the
Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to NCGS 143-143.15.
(c) When the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36
inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be
supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the
elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering
certification is required.
(d) All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirement of Section 6.4.3 B.3, Elevated Buildings.
(e) An evacuation plan shall be developed for evacuation of residents of
all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood
prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Public
Works Director and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.
3. Elevated Buildings. Fully enclosed areas associated with new construction
and substantially improved structures that are below the lowest floor shall
comply with the following:
(a) Not be designed or used for human habitation, but only be used for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises.
Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of
maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the
living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such
enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate
rooms, except to enclose storage areas.
(b) Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to the
regulatory flood protection elevation.
(c) Include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the
openings shall be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:
(1) A minimum of 2 flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
(2) The total net area of all flood openings shall be at least 1
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(3) If a building has more than 1 enclosed area, each enclosed
area shall have flood openings to allow floodwaters to
automatically enter and exit;
(4) The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than 1 foot above the adjacent grade;
6-36
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(5) Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and
(6) Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not
require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning,
regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure
and requires flood openings as outlined above.
4. Additions / Improvements
(a) Not a Substantial Improvement
(1) In cases where an addition or improvement to a pre-FIRM
structure does not constitute a substantial improvement, the
addition or improvement shall be designed to minimize flood
damages and shall not render the pre-FIRM structure any
more nonconforming with respect to the standards in this
section.
(2) In cases where an addition and/or improvement to a
post-FIRM structure does not constitute a substantial
improvement to the existing structure, then only the
additions or improvements shall comply with the standards
for new construction.
(3) Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to
the existing structure other than a standard door in a
common wall shall require only the addition to comply with
the standards for new construction.
(b) Substantial Improvements. In cases where an addition or
improvement to a pre- or post-FIRM structure (whether in
combination with interior modifications or not) do constitute a
substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements shall comply with the standards for
new construction.
5. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
(a) Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed
and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently
attached additions); or
(b) Meet all the requirements for new construction.
6. Temporary Non-Residential Structures. Temporary nonresidential
structures shall not remain within the special flood hazard area for a time
period exceeding 3 months. This time period may be renewed up to a
maximum of 1 year.
7. Accessory Structures
(a) An accessory structure shall comply with the following:
6-37
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
(1) Not be used for human habitation (including working,
sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
(2) Not be temperature-controlled;
(3) Be designed to have low flood damage potential;
(4) Be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer
the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
(5) Be firmly anchored; and
(6) Incorporate flood openings to facilitate automatic
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces below regulatory
flood protection elevation, if necessary.
(b) An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that
satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or
floodproofing certificate.
(c) Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other
accessory structures in accordance with Section 6.4.2 B, Certification
Requirements.
C. Standards for Floodplains without Established Base Flood Elevations. In
addition to the standards in Section 6.4.3 A, General Standards, and Section 6.4.3
B, Specific Standards, development within the special flood hazard areas
designated as Approximate Zone A and established in Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for
Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, where no BFE is provided by FEMA, shall
be subject to the following:
1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be allowed within a distance of
20 feet each side from top of bank or 5 times the width of the stream,
whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by
a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge; and
2. The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria:
(a) When BFE data is available from other sources, all new construction
and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply
with all applicable provisions of this section and the Ordinance and
shall be elevated or floodproofed.
(b) All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development
proposals shall provide BFE data if development is greater than 5
acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. The BFE
data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with Section 6.4.1
B, Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, and utilized in
implementing this section.
(c) When BFE data is not available from a Federal, State, or other
source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated to or
6-38
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
D. Standard for Riverine Floodplains with BFE, but Without Established
Floodways or Non-Encroachment Areas. In addition to the standards in Section
6.4.3 A, General Standards, and Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards, development
along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available from
another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are identified
for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, shall be subject to
the following:
1. Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless
certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than 1 foot at any point within the community.
E. Floodways and Non-Encroachment Areas. In addition to the standards in
Section 6.4.3 A, General Standards, and Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards,
development proposed in floodways or non-encroachment areas established by
Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, shall be subject
to the following:
1. No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
(a) It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and
presented to the Planning and Inspections Director prior to
issuance of floodplain development permit; or
(b) A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is approved by FEMA.
(c) A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon
completion of the proposed encroachment.
2. If (E.1) above is satisfied, development shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of this section.
3. No manufactured dwellings shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured dwellings in an existing manufactured dwelling park or
subdivision, provided the following provisions are met:
(a) The anchoring and the elevation standards of Section 6.4.3 B.2,
Manufactured Dwellings; and
(b) The no encroachment standard of (1) above.
F. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO). In addition to the standards
in Section 6.4.3 A, General Standards, and Section 6.4.3 B, Specific Standards,
6-39
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 6 : Environmental
(v3a)
development located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in
Section 6.4.1 B, Basis for Establishing Special Flood Hazard Areas, as shallow
flooding areas shall comply with the following:
1. The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth number
specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a freeboard
of 2 feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least 2 feet above the
highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;
2. Nonresidential structures may, in-lieu of elevation, be floodproofed to the
same level as required by subsection F.1 above so that the structure,
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities below that level shall
be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
3. Certification is required in accordance with Section 6.4.2 B, Certification
Requirements; and
4. Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
6-40
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards
7.1. - Subdivisions 7- 2
7.1.1. - Purpose and Intent 7- 2
7.1.2. - Applicability 7- 2
7.1.3. - Street and Utility Construction 7- 3
7.1.4. - Dedication of Right-of-Way 7- 4
7.1.5. - Permanent Runoff Control Structures/Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Devices 7- 5
7.1.6. - Subdivision Standards 7- 6
7.2. - Financial Guarantees 7-1 4
7.2.1. - Financial Guarantees In-Lieu of Completion 7- 14
7.2.2. - Performance Guarantee 7- 14
7.2.3. - Maintenance Warranty 7- 17
7.2.4. - As-Built Plans Required. 7- 18
7.2.5. - Improper Release of Financial Guarantees 7- 19
7.3. - Homeowners’ or Property Owners’ Association 7-1 9
7.3.1. - Establishment 7- 19
7.3.2. - Submission of Owners’ Association Declaration 7- 20
7.3.3. - Inspection and Approval of Improvements 7- 21
7.4. - Greenway Dedication. 7- 22
7.4.1. - Required Greenway Dedication. 7- 22
7.4.2. - Greenway Easement Width. 7- 22
7.4.3. - Limitation on Dedication. 7- 22
7.4.4. - Density Credits. 7- 22
7.5. - Reservation of Land 7- 22
7.5.1. - General 7- 22
7.5.2. - Reservation Desired 7- 23
7-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
7.1. - Subdivisions
7.1.1. - Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this section is to establish standards for the subdivision of land in the
Town. More specifically, this section is intended to:
A. Provide for the orderly growth and development of the Town.
B. Coordinate the provision of streets within and contiguous to proposed
subdivisions with other existing or planned streets in the general area.
C. Provide for adequate drainage and flood control.
D. Provide for the adequate provision of public services and infrastructure.
E. Provide for adequate open space for light, air, and recreation.
F. Provide for the conservation and protection of natural and historical areas.
G. Provide for the acceptance of rights-of-way, easements, streets, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, bikeways, drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, and other
improvements dedicated to public use.
H. Provide for the installation of monuments establishing street and lot lines.
I. Provide for the allocation of cost for infrastructure for development to be borne by
the developer, unless specifically exempted.
7.1.2. - Applicability
A. General. N o subdivision of land in the Town’s jurisdiction, as defined in Section
10.4, Definitions including group development or multiple lot development shall
occur, and no lot or parcel created by such division of land may be sold or
developed, unless the division is expressly exempted from this section or has
received subdivision approval in accordance with Section 2.6.12, Preliminary Plat,
Section 2.6.8 Final Plat, and the requirements of this chapter.
B. Exclusions. D ivisions of land not considered a subdivision shall be exempted
from these standards in accordance with Section 2.6.7, Exempt Map.
C. Dedication and Acceptance.
1. Rights-of-Way and Easements
(a) T he approval and recordation of a final plat constitutes dedication
to and acceptance by the Town of each public street, alley, or utility
easement shown on the plat.
(b) T he approval and recordation of a final plat does not constitute an
acceptance by the Town of maintenance responsibility for
improvements within a right-of-way or easement.
7-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
(c) I mprovements within a right-of-way or easement, such as utility
lines, street paving, drainage facilities, or sidewalks may be accepted
for maintenance by the Board of Commissioners or by the Public
Works Director, who is authorized to inspect and, where
appropriate, accept the dedication of such improvements.
2. Open Space
(a) L and designated as public open space on a final plat shall be
considered to be offered for dedication until such offer is accepted
by the Town. The offer may be accepted by the Town through:
(1) E xpress action by the Public Works Director; or
(2) C onveyance of fee simple marketable title (unencumbered
financially and environmentally) of the land to the Town at
the time of final plat recordation.
(b) U ntil such offer of dedication is accepted by the Town, land offered
for dedication may be used for open space purposes by the
landowner or by the owners' association. Land offered for dedication
shall not be used for any purpose inconsistent with the proposed
public use.
7.1.3. - Street and Utility Construction
A. Required. S treet and utility construction plan approval shall be required for all
street, potable water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer facilities before the street
and utility improvements occur. Street and utility construction shall be designed
and installed to meet all Town of Aberdeen Code of Ordinance, Title V, Public
Works Standards provisions.
B. Preparation. S treet and utility construction plans shall be prepared by a
registered engineer licensed to practice in the State of North Carolina. They shall
be prepared in accordance with the Development Guide.
C. Construction Plans.
1. S treet and utility construction plans for all street, potable water, sanitary
sewer, and storm sewer facilities shall be submitted to the Town following
or concurrently with preliminary plat review but shall not be reviewed until
the street and utility network for the preliminary plat is found generally
satisfactory by the TRC.Subdivi
2. F or each subdivision section, the street and utility construction plans shall
include all improvements lying within or adjacent to that section as well as
all water and sanitary sewer lines lying outside that section that are
required to serve that section.
3. S treet and utility construction plans shall not be approved until the
preliminary plat is approved in accordance with Section 2.6.12 Preliminary
Plat.
7-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
4. Street and utility plans shall meet all requirements of the Town’s Code of
Ordinances, Development Guide and State laws and regulations.
D. Statement of Required Improvements. T he applicant shall submit a statement
of required improvements which specifies the length of streets to be constructed
and the diameter material and length of sanitary sewer and water lines and other
required public improvements to be installed for the subdivision section. The
statement shall include all public improvements for which the
developer/subdivider is responsible and the date when the improvements shall
be completed.
E. Oversized Improvements and Extensions
1. T he Town may require the construction of wider streets and the
installation of oversized utilities when it is in the interest of future
development or the street is shown for improvement on the Moore County
Comprehensive Transportation Plan .
2. T he Town may require the extension of streets and utilities to adjacent
land when it is in the interest of future development or is shown on the
Moore County Comprehensive Transportation Plan .
F. Approval Period. S treet utility construction plan approval shall be valid for 1 year
unless the TRC determines that materials or methods shown on the plan pose a
threat to the public health or safety. Plan approval shall be extended in
conjunction with the extension of preliminary plat approval, unless the TRC
determines that materials or methods shown on the plan pose a threat to public
health or safety. The extension shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the
preliminary plat.
G. Inspection. W ork performed in accordance with approved street and utility
construction plans shall be inspected and approved by the Town.
7.1.4. - Dedication of Right-of-Way
A. Dedication of Right-of-Way with Density Transfer. W hen land is proposed for
subdivision or is being considered for approval as a conditional zoning district or
special use and a portion of it is in a corridor for a street or highway shown on a
plan established and adopted in accordance with North Carolina General Statutes
Section 136-66.2, the Town may provide for the dedication of right-of-way within
that corridor pursuant to any applicable legal authority.
1. Required Dedication. T he Town may require the applicant to dedicate,
for street or highway purposes, the right-of-way within a corridor for a
street shown for improvement in the Moore County Comprehensive
Transportation Plan if the Town allows the applicant to transfer density
credits attributable to the dedicated right-of-way to contiguous land
7-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
owned by the applicant. Dedication shall not be required unless the TRC
finds that the dedication:
(a) Does not result in the deprivation of a reasonable use of the land;
and
(b) Is either reasonably related to the traffic generated by the proposed
development or the impact of the dedication is mitigated by
measures provided in this Ordinance.
2. Voluntary Dedication. If an applicant elects to dedicate right-of-way
within a corridor for a street shown for improvement on the Moore County
Comprehensive Transportation Plan , the Town may allow the applicant to
transfer density credits attributable to the dedicated right-of-way to
contiguous land that is part of a common development plan
B. Acquisition Review for Proposed Construction within Proposed
Right-of-Way. W hen development is proposed that is within future
rights-of-way of any existing or future street identified in the Moore County
Comprehensive Transportation Plan , the development shall not be approved
until the Town is given an opportunity to purchase or acquire the street
right-of-way in accordance with the following:
1. T he landowner shall submit to the Town a written proposal naming the
price and terms upon which the owner will sell the land within the future
right-of-way or a written statement of refusal to sell. In addition, the
landowner shall provide the estimated cost of the proposed development
within the future right-of-way. Once this written information is received by
the Town, then notification of the landowner's intent is established.
2. T he Town shall then determine whether it will take the necessary steps to
acquire the right-of-way prior to development. If the Town fails to begin
acquisition, or to institute condemnation proceedings within 60 days from
the receipt of the landowner's notification of intent, the landowner may
proceed with the development after obtaining all approvals and permits
required by this Ordinance.
7.1.5. - Permanent Runoff Control Structures/Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Devices
A. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Devices. An approved Soil Erosion
and Sedimentation Control Device may be installed prior to approval of street
and utility construction plans in accordance with the standards in this section.
B. Permanent Runoff Control Structures.
1. Coordination with Streets and Utilities. S treet and utility construction
plans shall show the location of existing or proposed runoff control
structures relative to the proposed improvements to avoid conflicts during
and after construction.
7-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
2. Design and Construction. A runoff control structure shall be designed
and installed in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.2,
Watershed Protection, and this section.
3. Owners Association Required. W hen a permanent runoff control
structure serves more than 1 lot within a subdivision, an owners' association
shall be required for the purposes of ownership and maintenance
responsibility (see Section 7.3, Homeowners' or Property Owners'
Association).
4. Maintenance Responsibility. T he owners association shall be responsible
for maintaining the completed permanent runoff control structure(s). If the
owners' association is dissolved or ceases to exist, all the owners of record
at the time of required maintenance shall be jointly and severally liable for
all costs related to the completed permanent runoff control structure(s).
5. Maintenance Note Required on Final Plat. W hen a subdivision contains
a permanent runoff control structure to which paragraph (3) above is
applicable, the final plat shall contain a prominent note with the full text of
paragraph (4) above.
6. Timing of Completion. T he permanent runoff control structure(s) shall be
substantially completed and have full design volume available prior to the
recordation of a final plat for the subdivision. This may require the cleanout
and disposal of sediment from a pond.
7.1.6. - Subdivision Standards
A. General.
1. Design. P roposed subdivisions and group developments shall:
(a) C omply with this section and the Development Guide ;
(b) B ear a reasonable relationship to the approved plans of the Town;
and
(c) B e designed to promote development that is beneficial to the Town.
2. Development Name. T he name of a proposed development shall not
duplicate or be phonetically similar to an existing development name in
the Town or its ETJ unless the proposed development lies adjacent or in
proximity to the existing development.
3. Reasonable Relationship. A ll required improvements, easements, and
rights-of-way (other than required reservations) shall substantially benefit
the development or bear a reasonable relationship to the need for public
facilities attributable to the new development.
4. Off-Site Connections. W hen in the opinion of the TRC it is necessary to
connect streets and/or utilities off-site to adjoining streets and/or utilities,
the connections may be required in accordance with Town policy.
7-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
B. Lot Dimensions and Standards. T he size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be
appropriate for the location of the proposed subdivision and for the type of
development contemplated. Lots shall conform to the following standards.
1. Conformance to Other Regulations. A lot shall have sufficient area,
dimensions, and street access to allow a principal building to be erected on
it in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
2. Lot Depth to Width Ratio. A lot shall not have a depth greater than 4
times its width, at the minimum front street setback.
3. Side Lot Line Configuration. S ide lines of lots should be at or near right
angles or radial to street lines.
4. Lot Lines and Drainage. L ot boundaries shall coincide with natural and
pre-existing manmade drainageways, to the maximum extent practicable,
to avoid disruption of established drainage patterns or lots that can be
built upon only by altering such drainageways.
5. Lots Adjoining Dedicated Public Open Space or Required
Watershed Stream Buffer Areas. S ingle-family lots with public water
and sewer service that abut a dedicated public open drainageway,
dedicated public open space areas, or a required watershed stream buffer
when such buffer is in a common area, may have less area than the
minimum lot size required, provided the following standards are met:
(a) N o lot area shall be less than 60 percent of the minimum lot size for
the zoning district or less than 4,000 square feet.
(b) A note shall be placed on the Final Plat stating:
"The required area of Lots ( insert lot # ) through ( insert lot # ) has
been reduced in accordance with Section 7.1.6.B.5 Lots Adjoining
Dedicated Public Space or Required Watershed Stream Buffer
Areas. All other dimensional standards of the Development
Ordinance shall apply."
6. Special Purpose Lots. M inimum lot dimensional standards shall not
apply to lots for family or religious institution cemeteries, sewage lift
stations, and similar utility uses. Such lots shall comply with the following:
(a) A special-purpose lot shall be permitted only after the TRC has
determined that the proposed lot has sufficient dimensions to
accommodate the intended use and, where required by this
Ordinance, landscape yards.
(b) I f the special-purpose lot does not have direct access to a public
street, an easement for ingress and egress with a minimum width of
10 feet shall be platted.
(c) T he subdivision to create the lot shall be approved in accordance
with this chapter. The final plat shall label the lot as a special
purpose lot.
7. Access Requirements.
7-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
(a) A ll lots shall be served by street access meeting the requirements of
Chapter 5: Development Standards.
(b) E xcept for multi-family and single-family attached developments,
no lot used for a use type included in the Household Living Use
Category in Table 4.2.4, Residential Use Classification, shall be
permitted direct access to a major or minor thoroughfare street.
8. Flag Lots. F lag lots shall comply with the following standards:
(a) A flag lot shall not have more than 1 single-family detached dwelling
and an uninhabitable accessory structure;
(b) T he maximum flagpole length shall be 300 feet;
(c) T he minimum flagpole width shall be;
(1) 25-feet on local streets,
(2) 35-feet on industrial and collector streets, or
(3) 45-feet of thoroughfares.
(d) T he maximum lot area with public sewer shall be 1 acre;
(e) T he maximum lot area without public sewer shall be 3 acres. (Note:
The flagpole portion of the lot shall not be used to calculate area,
width, depth, coverage, and setbacks of the lot or to provide
off-street parking);
(f) W here public water is available, any building on the flag lot shall be
within 500 feet of a fire hydrant. The distance shall be measured
along the street, then along the flagpole, then in a straight line to
the building location;
(g) W here public sewer is available, an occupied building on the flag lot
shall have a gravity service line, or the sewer pump requirement
shall be noted on the plat; and
(h) U se of a single driveway to serve an adjoining flag lot or to serve a
flag lot and an adjoining conventional lot is encouraged. In the latter
case, the preferred location for the driveway is on the flagpole
portion of the flag lot, with the conventional lot granted an access
easement over the flagpole.
9. Minimum Street Frontage. T he minimum street frontage for a platted
lot is 25 linear feet.
C. Streets.
1. Dedication of Right-of-Way. R ight-of-way for public streets shall be
dedicated to the Town in accordance with North Carolina General Statutes
Section 160A, Article 19, Part 2, and other applicable State law. When
dedication cannot be required, future street right-of-way indicated on the
Moore County Comprehensive Transportation Plan shall be shown on the
plat.
2. Conformance with the Comprehensive Transportation Plan. T he
location and design of streets shall be in conformance with the Moore
County Comprehensive Transportation Plan . If conditions warrant,
7-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
right-of-way widths and pavement widths in excess of the minimum street
standards may be required in accordance with Section 7.1.3.E, Oversized
Improvements and Extensions.
(a) The right-of-way minimum width shall meet all minimum
requirements as set forth in the Town’s Code of Ordinances and
Development Guide.
3. Conformance with Adjoining Street Systems. T he planned street
layout of a proposed subdivision shall be compatible with existing or
proposed streets and their classifications on adjoining or nearby tracts.
4. Access to Adjoining Land. I f the TRC determines access to adjoining
land is necessary and appropriate for adequate traffic circulation, proposed
streets shall be extended to the boundary of the site.
5. Development Entry Points
(a) U nless exempted in accordance with subsection (d) below, all
subdivisions shall provide access from the development to a
Collector Street of the street system outside the development in
accordance with Table 7.1.6.C, Development Entry Points:
Table 7.1.6.C : Development Entry Points
Residential Uses (# of Units) Minimum # of Entry Points
30 or Fewer 1
31-70 2
71-120 3
121 or more 4
(b) N othing in this section shall limit the total number of streets
providing access to the street system outside a development.
(c) T he TRC may allow stub streets to count as a development entry
point when there is a reasonable likelihood of the stub street
connecting to a future roadway.
(d) D evelopment shall be exempted from these standards if it is
demonstrated the following conditions apply:
(1) N o other street access points can be located to the site due
to existing lot configurations, absence of connecting streets,
environmental, or topographic constraints;
(2) N CDOT will not authorize the required number of entrances;
or
(3) A lternative access can be provided in a manner acceptable
to the Town that is supported by a transportation impact
analysis.
6. Reserve Strips. A reserve strip adjoining street rights-of-way shall not be
permitted under any condition to prevent access to adjacent land.
7-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
7. Street Classification. T he final determination of the classification of
streets in a proposed subdivision shall be made by the TRC.
8. Public Street Design Criteria. S treets shall be designed to conform to
the standards set forth in the Development Guide.
9. Street Names . S treet names, prefixes, suffixes and addresses shall
conform to the guidelines and policies set forth in the Town’s Street Name
and Address Assignment Guidelines and Policies located in the
Development Guide.
10. Private Street Standards.
(a) Where Allowed. P rivate streets are allowed in single-family
sections of planned development districts, single-family attached
developments, and multiple lot developments.
(b) Design and Construction
(1) T he street design standards for private streets are the same
as for public streets.
(2) T he developer must furnish an engineer's seal and
certification that a private street has been tested and
certified for the subgrade, base, and asphalt.
(3) P rivate streets shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Town’s standards , or NCDOT's
Subdivision Roads: Minimum Construction Standards ,
whichever is applicable.
(c) Owners’ Association Required. A n owners' association is required
to own and maintain all private streets allowed under this
Ordinance.
(d) Plats. All through street in a residential area that connects 2 public
streets shall not be a private street.
(e) Through Streets. A through street in a residential area that
connects 2 public streets shall not be a private street.
(f) Connections to Public Streets. A ll private streets connecting with
public streets require driveway approvals from the Town or NCDOT,
as applicable.
D. Sidewalks. S idewalks shall be configured in accordance with the standards and
Section 5.9, Sidewalks.
E. Utilities.
1. Public Water and Sewer Construction Requirements. W ater and
sewer lines, connections, and equipment shall be constructed in
accordance with the Town’s standards, or the NCDOT's Subdivision Roads:
Minimum Construction Standards , as appropriate.
2. Water and Sewer Connections.
(a) C onnection of each lot to public water and sewer utilities shall be
required if the proposed subdivision is within 300 feet of the nearest
7-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
adequate line of a public system, unless the Public Works Director
determines geographic or topographic factors make such
connection infeasible.
(b) W here public sewer is not available, lots shall comply with
applicable County Environmental Health Division regulations.
(c) A pproval of the applicable Environmental Health Division shall be
obtained after preliminary plat approval.
(d) T he final plat shall show the certificate of approval from the
applicable Environmental Health Division.
3. Underground Utilities. E lectrical, community antenna, television, and
telephone utility lines installed in subdivisions of 5 lots or more shall be
underground, unless the TRC determines underground installation is
inappropriate.
4. Utility Easements
(a) Width.
(1) T o provide for electric, telephone, gas, and community
antenna television services, conduits, and water and sewer
lines within a subdivision, appropriate utility easements not
to exceed 30 feet in width shall be provided.
(2) T he location of the easements shall be reviewed and
approved by the TRC, with advice from utility providers,
before final plat approval.
(b) No Buildings or Improvements within Easement
(1) U tility easements shall be kept free and clear of any buildings
or other improvements that would interfere with the proper
maintenance or replacement of utilities.
(2) T he Town shall not be liable for damages to any
improvement located within the utility easement area
caused by maintenance or replacement of utilities.
5. Electrical Utilities.
(1) Street Lights. A development in the Town with public
streets shall include public street lights.
(2) Electrical Service. D evelopment outside the Town limits
shall be provided electric service by the agency having
jurisdiction in the area
F. Drainage.
1. General Requirements.
(a) T his section applies to all watercourses that have a drainage basin
greater than 1½ acres. In addition, watercourses which are
contained in areas of special flood hazard as shown on the FEMA
panels are subject to the requirements of Section 6.4, Flood
Damage Prevention. In case of a conflict between this section and
Section 6.4, the stricter regulation applies
7-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
(b) D rainage within development affected by this section shall be
designed using standard engineering practices.
(c) N o fill, buildings or structures, except for water dependent
structures, greenways, utility substations, utilities, roads or other
related public improvements, shall be placed or constructed within
the protected drainage easements specified in this section. Parking
areas and associated drives may be constructed over enclosed
subsurface drains.
(d) D rainage within development affected by this section shall be
handled in any of following systems:
(1) E nclosed subsurface; or
(2) Drainage swales
2. Determination of Drainage System
(a) Enclosed subsurface. Public and private roads and access ways
within developments shall utilize curb and gutter and storm drains
to provide adequate drainage of such roads and access ways, as
determined by the TRC.
(b) Drainage swales. Use of drainage swales rather than curb and
gutter is prohibited unless specifically approved by the TRC.
3. Drainage Systems.
(a) Enclosed Subsurface Drains (Storm Sewers)
(1) E nclosed subsurface drainage systems shall be designed and
constructed using standard engineering practices.
(2) E nclosed subsurface drainage systems on private property
shall be protected as provided in Section 7.1.6.F.3(d),
Protected Drainage Easements.
(b) Drainage Swales. In order to be considered for the use of drainage
swales, the applicant shall be required to submit a full independent
stormwater plan with calculations showing the need for drainage
swales and the inability to use underground stormwater drains for
the property in question. Should such approval be granted by the
TRC, the applicant must use the approved stormwater plan and
obtain approval from the NC Department of Environmental Quality
(NCDEQ) or other entity as assigned by the State of North Carolina.
(c) Protected Drainage Easements. S ubdivisions shall comply with
the requirements in Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation,
Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention, and the following standards:
(1) W here a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse or
drainageway, an easement shall be indicated on all plats of
the subdivision. The easement shall substantially conform
with the lines of the watercourse or drainageway, plus the
additional width that is necessary to convey expected storm
flows.
7-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
(2) T he size, design, and construction of drainage structures
shall conform to the best management practices as
approved by the Technical Review Committee.
(3) T he Town shall not accept the responsibility to maintain any
drainage easement or storm drainage structures, except for
those within a public street right-of-way or traversing
Town-owned land.
G. Flood Damage Prevention
1. Minimize Flood Damage . A subdivision shall be designed to minimize
flood damage;
2. Public Utilities. A subdivision shall have public utilities and facilities such
as sanitary sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. Drainage. A subdivision shall have adequate drainage to reduce exposure
to flood hazards; and
4. Base Flood Elevation Data Required.
(a) B ase flood elevation (BFE) data shall be provided for subdivision
applications unless a licensed engineer certifies that the 100-year
storm flow for streams in or near the subdivision, site, or group
development is less than 500 cubic feet per second.
(b) I n special flood hazard areas designated by FEMA maps, BFE data
shall be provided for development with more than 50 lots or 5 acres
in area. (See Section 6.4, Flood Damage Prevention, for additional
flood protection regulations.)
5. Placement of Monuments. T he Standards of Practice for Land
Surveying in North Carolina , as adopted by the North Carolina State Board
of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, shall apply
when installing permanent monuments.
H. Street Trees.
1. Sufficient trees shall be planted or retained between the paved portion of
the street and a line running parallel to and fifty (50) feet from the
centerline of the street, there is for every thirty (30) feet of street frontage
at least an average of one (1) deciduous tree that has, or will have when
fully mature, a trunk at least twelve (12) inches in diameter. Permissible
types of street trees are set forth in the Development Guide .
2. Required street trees may vary the location along the public right-of-way.
The Technical Review Committee shall deem the new locations as
appropriate and as reasonably necessary to account for physical limitations
such as buildings, natural hazards or steep topography.
7-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
7.2. - Financial Guarantees
7.2.1. - Financial Guarantees In-Lieu of Completion
A. General. In-lieu of the completion, installation, and dedication of all required
public improvements (streets, potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater,
electricity, and street lights) and private site improvements (off-street parking,
landscaping, screening, protected trees, fencing, stormwater management and
sedimentation control) prior to approval of a final plat or issuance of a certificate
of occupancy (as appropriate), a developer shall submit:
1. A bona fide itemized estimate of the costs, including labor, for all required
improvements, for which the developer is responsible, and the date when
the improvements are to be completed, prepared, signed and sealed by a
NC licensed engineer; and
2. An acceptable financial guarantee for the installation of said required
improvements in accordance with Section 7.2.2., Performance Guarantee.
B. Timing. The itemized estimate of the costs and financial guarantee shall not be
accepted until after the construction plans and profiles for the development are
approved, in accordance with Section 7.1.3, Street and Utility Construction, and a
watershed development plan, if applicable, is approved in accordance with
Section 6.2.11 E, Watershed Development Plan.
C. Effect. Once the itemized estimate of the costs and the required financial
guarantee is accepted by the Town, in accordance with Section 2.5.7., Financial Guarantee,
the final plat or certificate of occupancy (as appropriate) may be approved if the
proposed development complies with all other requirements of this Ordinance.
7.2.2. - Performance Guarantee
A. General. A performance guarantee, in accordance with the standards in this
section, shall be required in the following circumstances:
1. To ensure the completion of public infrastructure improvements (streets,
potable water, sanitary sewer, stormwater, electricity, and street lights) that
are required as part of an approved preliminary plat, site plan, or group
development plan, but are not approved as complete before approval of a
final plat or certificate of occupancy, as appropriate;
2. To ensure completion of private site improvements (parking, screening,
landscaping, protected trees, fencing, stormwater management, and
sedimentation control,) that are required as part of a preliminary plat, site
plan, or group development plan, but are not installed before approval of a
certificate of occupancy.
7-14
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
B. Term of Performance Guarantees. The term of the performance guarantee shall
reflect any time limit for completing installation of required improvements that is
included in the preliminary or final plat, site plan, or group development plan, as
appropriate, but in any case, the term shall not exceed 18 months. The Town
Manager, for good cause shown, may grant up to 1 extension of time, for a time
period not exceeding 1 year.
C. Form of Performance Guarantee.
1. The applicant shall propose the form(s) of the performance guarantee,
which shall be provided in one or more of the following forms:
(a) Cash, Irrevocable Letter of Credit, or Equivalent Security.
(1) The developer shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily
convertible into cash at face value, such as an irrevocable
letter of credit, either with the Town or in escrow with a
financial institution.
(2) If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a
financial institution, an agreement between the financial
institution and the developer shall be filed with the Town
guaranteeing the following:
(i) That the escrow account shall be held in trust until
released by the Town and may not be used or pledged
by the developer for any other matter during the term
of the escrow; and
(ii) That in case of a failure on the part of the developer to
complete or repair the improvements, the financial
institution shall, upon notification by the Town ,
immediately pay the funds deemed necessary by the
Town to complete or repair the improvements up to
the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to
the Town any other instruments fully endorsed or
otherwise made payable in full to the Town.
(3) The financial institution holding the cash or other instrument
shall indicate to the Town its notification requirements for
release or payment of funds.
(b) Surety Bond.
(1) The developer shall obtain a surety bond from a surety
bonding company authorized to issue surety bonds in North
Carolina.
(2) The bond shall be payable to the Town and shall be in an
amount as required by this subsection.
2. The performance guarantee shall distinguish between the portion of the
guarantee provided for public improvements as well as the portion of the
guarantee provided for private improvements, as appropriate.
7-15
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
3. The performance guarantee shall be conditioned on the performance of all
work necessary to complete the installation of the required improvements
within the term of the financial guarantee.
D. Apportionment of Performance Guarantee. The performance guarantee shall:
1. Distinguish between the portion of the guarantee provided for public
improvements versus the amount provided for private improvements, as
appropriate.
2. Be conditioned on the performance of all work necessary to complete the
installation of the required improvements within the term of the
performance guarantee.
E. Amount of Performance Guarantee.
1. General. Performance guarantees shall be in an amount equal to 125
percent of the estimated cost of completing the installation of the required
improvements, including the costs of materials, labor, and project
management.
2. Estimate Costs.
(a) Estimated costs of completing installation of required public
improvements shall be itemized by improvement type and certified
by the developer's licensed professional engineer, and is subject to
approval by the Public Works Director.
(b) Estimated costs for completing costs of private site improvements
shall be itemized and certified by the developer's contractor, and is
subject to approval by the Public Works Director or the Planning
and Inspections Director, as appropriate.
F. Release or Reduction of Performance Guarantees
1. Requirements for Release or Reduction. The Planning and Inspections
Director or Public Works Director, as appropriate, shall release or reduce a
performance guarantee only after:
(a) The owner or developer has submitted to the Town a written
request for a release or reduction of the performance guarantee
that includes certification by the owner's or developer's engineer or
contractor, whichever is appropriate, that installation of the
guaranteed improvements has been completed in accordance with
approved plans and specifications, and as-builts (if applicable);
(b) Town staff has performed an inspection of the improvements and
certified in writing that installation of the guaranteed
improvements is completed in accordance with approved plans and
specifications; and
(c) No release or reduction in performance guarantee amounts will be
considered until more than 25 percent of the work is in place and
approved.
7-16
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
2. Acceptance Shall be Documents. The Planning and Inspections Director
or Public Works Director, as appropriate, shall provide written notice of the
Town's final acceptance of the improvements subject to performance
guarantees.
G. Default and Forfeiture of Performance Guarantees.
1. Notice of Failure to Install or Complete Improvements. If the owner or
developer fails to complete installation of the guaranteed improvements
within the term of the financial guarantee (as may be extended), the
Planning and Inspections Director or Public Works Director, as appropriate,
shall give the owner or developer 15 days written notice of the scope
and degree of the default, by certified mail.
2. Town Completion of Improvements. After the 15 days notice period
expires, the Town may draw on the guarantee and use the funds to
perform work necessary to complete installation of the guaranteed
improvements. After completing such work, the Town shall provide a
complete accounting of the expenditures to the owner or developer. In the
event of a default triggering the use of the financial guarantee, the Town
shall return any of the unused deposited cash funds or other security.
3. Existing Guarantees. Any performance guarantees in existence prior to
the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be
governed by the rules and regulations of the UDO to which they were
accepted.
7.2.3. - Maintenance Warranty
A. General. A maintenance warranty in accordance with the standards in this
section is required to ensure against defects in workmanship or materials in
providing stormwater management facilities required as part of an approved
preliminary plat, site plan, or group development plan, as appropriate.
B. Term of Maintenance Warranty. The term of a maintenance warranty shall be 1
year from the date of the engineer's certification of completion.
C. Form of Maintenance Warranty. The applicant shall propose the form(s) of the
maintenance warranty, which shall be provided in one or more of the forms in
Section 7.2.2.C, Form of Performance Guarantee
D. Function of Maintenance Warranty. The maintenance warranty shall:
1. Be conditioned on the performance of all work necessary to cure defects in
materials and workmanship and maintain the required stormwater
management facilities during the term of the maintenance warranty.
2. Provide that in case of the owner's or developer's failure to maintain and
repair or replace the stormwater management facilities, the Town shall be
able to obtain the funds necessary to make necessary repairs or
replacements in accordance with the warranty provisions for timeframe
7-17
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
and forfeiture.
E. Amount of Maintenance Warranty. Maintenance warranty shall be in an amount
up to 25 percent of the full actual cost, including the costs of materials and labor,
of installing the required stormwater management facilities.
F. Release of Maintenance Warranty. The Public Works Director shall release a
maintenance warranty at the end of the term of the guarantee only after an
inspection is conducted of the stormwater management facilities, and it is
certified in writing that the guaranteed stormwater management facilities have
been maintained in accordance with approved plans and specifications.
G. Default and Forfeiture of Maintenance Warranty.
1. Notice of Failure to Maintain Improvements. If the owner or developer
fails to maintain the stormwater management facilities improvements
during the term of the maintenance warranty, the Public Works Director
shall give the owner or developer 30 days written notice of the scope and
degree of the default by certified mail.
2. Town Correction of Defects. After the 30-day notice period expires, the
Town shall present a plan to cure any defects within 30 days, and following
such presentation, draw on the security and use the funds to perform work
necessary to ensure the guaranteed stormwater management facilities
comply with approved plans and specifications. After completing the work,
the Town shall provide a complete accounting of the expenditures to the
owner or developer and, as applicable, refund all unused funds, without
interest.
7.2.4. - As-Built Plans Required.
Upon completion of a public infrastructure project, the developer shall certify to the
Public Works Director that the completed project has been constructed in accordance
with the approved plans and shall submit actual "as built" plans for all public
improvements after final construction is completed. Upon completion of a private
stormwater management facility, the developer shall certify to the Public Works Director
that the completed project is in accordance with the approved plans and shall submit
actual "as built" plans after final construction is completed. The plans shall show the final
design specifications for all improvements and the field location, size, depth, and related
measures, controls and devices, as installed. The designer shall certify, under seal, that
the as-built design, measures, controls, and devices are in compliance with the approved
plans and with the requirements of this Ordinance. A final inspection and approval by
the respective Director shall occur before the release of the financial guarantee.
7-18
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
7.2.5. - Improper Release of Financial Guarantees
If the Town releases a financial guarantee through error, the error shall not release the
developer from responsibility for the completion of all improvements required by this
section and this Ordinance.
7.3. - Homeowners’ or Property Owners’
Association
7.3.1. - Establishment
A. Creation. A homeowners' or property owners' association (owner's association)
shall be established to fulfill requirements of the North Carolina Condominium
Act, NC Planned Community Act, or to accept conveyance and maintenance of all
common elements (common areas) within a development. The owners'
association shall be in legal existence prior to the conveyance, lease-option, or
other long-term transfer of control of any unit or lot in the development and
before approval of a final plat.
B. Conveyance. Where a development has common elements (common area)
serving more than 1 dwelling unit or lot, these areas shall be conveyed to the
owners' association, in which all owners of units or lots in the development shall
be members. All areas other than public street rights-of-way, other areas
dedicated to the Town, and lots shall be designated as common elements. In a
condominium development the common elements shall be platted in
accordance with the North Carolina Condominium Act. In other development, the
fee-simple title shall be conveyed by the subdivider or developer to the owners'
association prior to the sale or development of the first lot.
C. Subdivision or Conveyance of Common Elements (Common Areas). Common
elements (common areas) shall not subsequently be subdivided or conveyed by
the owners' association unless a revised preliminary plat and a revised final plat
showing such subdivision or conveyance is approved in accordance with the
procedures and standards of its original approval.
D. Minimize Number of Associations. Development, whether including different
land uses, different types of housing, or simply different sections, shall hold the
number of owners' associations to the minimum practicable. An association may
establish different categories of membership, different budgets for the categories,
and different rates of assessment when different kinds of services are provided to
7-19
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
different categories. Smaller associations under an umbrella (master) association
are allowed.
E. Owners’ Association Not Required. A development involving only 2 units
attached by a party wall (or 2 separate walls back-to-back) shall not be required to
have common elements or an owners' association. Such development without an
owners' association shall establish a binding agreement between owners to
govern any party walls and to ensure reciprocal easement rights needed for
maintenance.
7.3.2. - Submission of Owners’ Association Declaration
After preliminary plat approval, and before final plat approval, it is recommended that
the subdivider submit a draft of the declaration of the owners' association containing
covenants, conditions and restrictions governing the owners' association, lots or units,
and common elements to the Planning and Inspections Director for review and
approval. Prior to or concurrently with the submission of the final plat for review and
approval, the subdivider shall submit a copy of the final declaration for review and
approval. The declaration shall include provisions for the following:
A. Membership. M embership in the owners' association shall be mandatory for
each original purchaser and each successive purchaser of a lot or unit. Provisions
shall be made for the assimilation of owners in subsequent sections of the
development.
B. Responsibilities of Owners’ Association. The declaration shall state that the
Association is responsible for:
1. Liability insurance and payment of premiums for liability insurance and
local taxes;
2. Maintenance of all common elements including, but not limited to,
stormwater management facilities, utilities, streets, drives, walks, and
recreation facilities, at the time such common elements are transferred to
the owners' association;
3. Establish and maintain an escrow account for the maintenance and repair
of stormwater management facilities, as required in Section 6.2.11.D.5,
Operation and Maintenance Agreement.
4. Payment of assessments for public and private improvements made to or
for the benefit of the common elements.
C. Exterior Maintenance of Units. The owners' association shall be responsible for
exterior maintenance of all attached units (whether they be dwelling units or
nonresidential units); or each unit owner shall be made responsible, with the
owners' association granted authority to perform such exterior maintenance in
the event the unit owner fails to do so in a prompt and satisfactory manner, and
to assess the cost of the maintenance against the unit.
7-20
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
D. Default by Owners’ Association.
1. Upon default by the owners' association in the payment to the jurisdiction
entitled thereto of any assessments for public improvements or ad
valorem taxes levied against the common areas, which default shall
continue for a period of 6 months, each owner of a lot in the development
shall become personally obligated to pay to the jurisdiction a portion of the
taxes or assessments in an amount determined by dividing the total taxes
and/or assessments due to the jurisdiction by the total number of lots in
the development.
2. If the sum is not paid by the owner within 30 days following receipt of
notice of the amount due, the sum shall become a continuing lien on the
property of the owner, the owners' heirs, devisees, personal
representatives, and assigns. The taxing or assessing jurisdiction may
either bring an action at law against the owner personally obligated to pay
the same, or may elect to foreclose the lien against the property of the
owner.
E. Membership. The owners' association is empowered to levy assessments against
the owners of lots or units within the development. Such assessments shall be for
the payment of expenditures made by the owners' association for the items set
forth in this section, and any assessments not paid by the owner against whom
such assessments are made shall constitute a lien on the lot of the owner.
F. Easements. Easements over the common elements (common areas) for access,
ingress, and egress from and to public streets and walkways, and easements for
enjoyment of the common elements and for parking shall be granted to each lot
or unit owner.
G. Maintenance and Restoration. Provisions for maintenance and restoration in the
event of destruction or damage shall be established for common elements and
party walls. It is recommended that the owners' association engage the services
of a professional management company and that all inspections and repairs be
conducted by qualified personnel.
H. Common Elements and Location. The common elements shall be listed and the
location of common areas or commons elements shall be shown graphically as an
attachment to the declaration of the Owners' Association.
7.3.3. - Inspection and Approval of Improvements
The Town shall inspect and approve, where required by this Ordinance, all private
improvements prior to transfer of maintenance responsibility to the owners' association.
7-21
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
7.4. - Greenway Dedication.
7.4.1. - Required Greenway Dedication.
Whenever a tract of land included within any proposed subdivision, including a group
development plan, includes any part of a greenway designated on the Bikeway,
Greenway, and Trails Master Plan , the greenway shall be platted and dedicated as a
greenway easement.
7.4.2. - Greenway Easement Width .
The width of the greenway easement shall be a minimum of 50 feet, to the maximum
extent practicable.
7.4.3. - Limitation on Dedication.
No dedication shall be required for a greenway lying outside of any floodplain or special
flood hazard area, but such area may be reserved by TRC in accordance with Section 7.5,
Reservation of Land, for possible Town acquisition.
7.4.4. - Density Credits.
Land that is dedicated in fee-simple interest to and accepted by the Town of Aberdeen
for the expressed purpose of establishing a public greenway shall be credited toward the
donating parcel, lot or tract area for the purpose of calculating the density of
development and area coverage calculations though no longer part of the parcel.
Dedicated land credits shall be transferred to subsequent holders if properly noted in
transfer deeds.
7.5. - Reservation of Land
7.5.1. - General
A. Identification by TRC. Where a proposed park, greenway, open space, or school
shown in the Town’s adopted policy guidance is located in whole or in part in a
subdivision or group development, the TRC may require the reservation of the
land for future use.
B. Notification by TRC. Upon submittal of a preliminary plan or group development
that includes part or all of a site to be reserved, the TRC shall immediately notify
7-22
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 7 : Subdivision Standards (v3a)
Board of Commissioners or other appropriate governmental agency, who shall
promptly decide whether it wishes the site to be reserved.
7.5.2. - Reservation Desired
A. Identification on Plat or Plan. If the appropriate government agency decides it
wishes the site to be reserved, then the preliminary plat or group development
shall provide for the reservation of the site for a period of not more than 1 year
from the date of approval, except as otherwise provided in Section 160A-372 of the
North Carolina General Statutes.
B. Reservation Time Period. The reservation period may be extended for additional
periods of time upon mutual agreement between the landowner and the
appropriate governmental agency, each of which shall not exceed 2 years.
7-23
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
Chapter 8 : Nonconformities
8.1. - General Applicability 8- 2
8.1.1. - Purpose and Scope 8- 2
8.1.2. - Determination of Nonconformity Status 8- 2
8.1.3. - Continuation and Minor Repairs and Maintenance Allowed 8- 2
8.1.4. - Change of Tenancy or Ownership 8- 2
8.2. - Nonconforming Uses 8- 3
8.2.1. - Applicability 8- 3
8.2.2. - Standards Applied to All Nonconforming Uses 8- 3
8.2.3. - Standards Applied to Specific Nonconforming Uses 8- 4
8.3. - Nonconforming Structures 8- 6
8.3.1. - Applicability 8- 6
8.3.2. - Continuation and Replacement 8- 6
8.3.3. - Expansion and Enlargement. 8- 7
8.4. - Nonconforming Lots of Record. 8- 7
8.4.1. - Applicability. 8- 7
8.4.2. - Continuation. 8- 7
8.4.3. - Expansion or Enlargement. 8- 8
8.4.4. - ???????????????? 8- 8
8.4.5. - Government Acquisition of Land 8- 8
8.5. - Nonconforming Signs 8- 9
8.5.1. - Applicability 8- 9
8.5.2. - Prohibited Actions 8- 9
8.5.3. - Signs Rendered Nonconforming 8- 9
8.5.4. - Maintenance of Nonconforming Signage Allowed 8- 9
8.5.5. - Replacement of Nonconforming Signage 8- 10
8.5.6. - Discontinuance of Business Activity 8- 10
8.5.7. - Change in Use 8- 11
8.5.8. - Additional Sign Permit Application 8- 11
8-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
8.1. - General Applicability
8.1.1. - Purpose and Scope
There are existing uses of land, structures, lots of record, and signs that were lawfully
established before the effective date of this Unified Development Ordinance or a
subsequent amendment thereto, that now do not conform to standards and
requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance. Such uses, structures, lots, and
signs are collectively referred to as "nonconformities." The purpose and intent of this
chapter is to allow nonconformities to continue to exist, but to regulate and limit their
continued existence and expansion so as to bring them into conformity to the extent
that is reasonably practicable.
8.1.2. - Determination of Nonconformity Status
In all cases, the burden of establishing that a nonconformity lawfully exists shall be the
responsibility of the landowner of the land on which the alleged nonconformity is
located.
8.1.3. - Continuation and Minor Repairs and Maintenance
Allowed
A. Maintenance Allowed. Nonconformities are allowed to continue in accordance
with the requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance, and are allowed
and encouraged to receive minor repairs and routine maintenance that are
necessary to maintain the nonconformity and its surroundings in a safe condition
and to protect against health hazards.
B. Strengthening Allowed. Nothing in this Unified Development Ordinance shall
prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe or lawful condition of any part
of any building or structure declared unsafe or unlawful by a duly authorized
Town official.
8.1.4. - Change of Tenancy or Ownership
No change of title or possession or right to possession of property involved with a
nonconformity shall be construed to prevent the continuance of such nonconformity.
8-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
8.2. - Nonconforming Uses
8.2.1. - Applicability
Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the standards in this section.
8.2.2. - Standards Applied to All Nonconforming Uses
The standards in this section shall apply to all nonconforming uses in the Town except as
otherwise provided in Section 8.2.3, Standards applied to specific nonconforming uses.
A. Continuation.
1. A nonconforming use may be continued and maintained in accordance
with the standards of this section.
2. If a nonconforming use is replaced by a conforming use, the
nonconforming use may not be re-established.
B. Conversion.
1. No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use
unless the use is determined by the Planning and Inspections Director to
be of equal or less intensity or density. In determining whether a
nonconforming use is of equal or less intensity or density, the Planning and
Inspections Director shall consider:
a. Anticipated traffic of each use;
b. Parking requirements of each use;
c. Anticipated number of persons on the premises of each use at a
time of peak demand;
d. The number of dwelling units; and
e. Off-site impacts of each use, such as noise, glare, dust, vibration, or
smoke.
2. A nonconforming use must continue to occupy the same lot or plot of
land.
C. Expansion or Enlargement. A nonconforming use may be expanded or enlarged
provided:
1. The additional square footage of the expansion or enlargement does not
exceed 25 percent of the square footage of the structure(s) that existed at
the time the use became nonconforming;
2. The expansion or enlargement occupies the same lot or plot of ground as
occupied by the existing structure at the time the use became
nonconforming;
3. Neither the number of dwelling units or the intensity of the use is
increased; and
8-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
4. The expansion or enlargement does not create any additional
nonconformities.
D. Cessation.
1. General.
a. If a nonconforming use of land ceases operation for a continuous
period of more than 180 days, any subsequent use of the land shall
be a use permitted in the district by right.
b. The landowner shall demonstrate that the nonconforming use has
not ceased for a continuous period of more than 180 days, to
maintain its nonconforming status.
c. A determination by the Town that a nonconforming use has ceased
may be based on (but not limited to) any of the following:
(1) Removal of inventory, equipment, or machinery;
(2) Termination in or a substantial reduction in utility services;
(3) Absence or reduction in activity at the site compared with
the former level of use;
(4) Failure to maintain minimal hours of operation;
(5) Voluntary demolition;
(6) Unoccupied buildings in which the use was formerly
conducted;
(7) Removal of on-site signage or copy from that signage;
(8) Failure to apply or re-apply for the necessary permits; or
(9) Failure to appeal from the denial of necessary permits.
2. Damage, Destruction, or Demolition. If a nonconforming use of land
ceases because of damage, destruction, or demolition of the structure in
which the use is located, the structure may be reconstructed or repaired
and the use re-established within 180 days, but may not exceed the square
footage existing prior to its damage or destruction, except as provided in
Section 8.2.2.C, Expansion or Enlargement.
E. Signs. Signage for nonconforming uses is subject to the standards in Section 5.7,
Signage.
8.2.3. - Standards Applied to Specific Nonconforming Uses
The following specific nonconforming uses shall meet the requirements of Section 8.2.2,
Standards Applied to All Nonconforming Uses, except as expressly stated in the specific
nonconforming use requirements.
A. Standards Applied to Manufactured Dwellings. Nonconforming manufactured
dwellings shall meet the requirements of Section 8.2.2.,Standards Applied to All
Nonconforming Uses except as stated herein.
1. Continuation and Replacement.
a. A nonconforming manufactured dwelling that is the sole principal
structure on a lot, or is located within a manufactured dwelling park,
8-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
may be continued or replaced, in accordance with the requirements
of this section.
b. A manufactured dwelling that replaces a manufactured dwelling
located on a lot shall:
(1) Obtain a building permit in accordance with Section 2.6.3.,
Building Permit;
(2) Meet or exceed the construction standards promulgated by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
that were in effect at the time the dwelling was
manufactured; and
(3) Meet the requirements of a manufactured dwelling in
accordance with Section 4.3.2.B.4., Manufactured Dwelling.
c. A manufactured dwelling that replaces a manufactured dwelling
located in a manufactured dwelling park shall;
(1) Obtain a building permit in accordance with Section 2.6.3 .,
Building Permit;
(2) Meet or exceed the construction standards promulgated by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
that were in effect at the time the dwelling was
manufactured;
(3) Be a single-wide unit no wider than 15 feet; and
(4) Not increase the number of dwelling units in the
manufactured dwelling park.
d. No manufactured dwelling made prior to June 15, 1976 may be used
to replace a lawfully established nonconforming manufactured
dwelling.
2. Expansion or Enlargement. A replacement manufactured dwelling or
single-wide manufactured dwelling may be larger than the existing
manufactured dwelling being replaced, provided:
a. It is located in a residential zoning district;
b. It is located on the same lot or space as the previous dwelling unit;
and
c. It meets all applicable setbacks for the district where it is located.
B. Standards Applied to Single-family Detached or Duplex Dwellings.
1. Expansion or Enlargement. A nonconforming single-family detached or
duplex dwelling may be expanded or enlarged provided:
a. The expansion or enlargement occupies the same lot or plot of
ground as occupied by the existing structure at the time the use
became nonconforming; and
b. The expansion or enlargement does not create any additional
nonconformities.
8-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
8.3. - Nonconforming Structures
8.3.1. - Applicability
Nonconforming principal and accessory structures shall be subject to the standards in
this section.
8.3.2. - Continuation and Replacement
A. Continuation . A nonconforming structure may be continued in accordance with
Section 8.1.3, Continuation and Minor Repairs and Maintenance Allowed.
B. Replacement .
1. After Damage in Excess of 50 Percent of Building Value. In the event
of damage by fire or other causes to an extent exceeding 50 percent of its
building value prior to such damage, as established by the applicable
county tax listing, reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall be
permitted only in compliance with the applicable dimensional standards of
this Unified Development Ordinance.
2. After Damage Less Than 50 Percent of Building Value. In the event of
damage by fire or other causes to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of its
building value prior to such damage, as established by the applicable
county tax listing, reconstruction of a nonconforming structure shall be
permitted, provided it is constructed:
a. In accordance with an approved site plan, group development, or
building permit, as applicable;
b. In the same location and up to the same dimensions as originally
existed; or
c. In compliance with the current dimensional standards.
3. Relocation. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved, in whole or in
part, to another location on or off the parcel of land on which it is located,
unless upon relocation it conforms to the requirements of this Unified
Development Ordinance.
8.3.3. - Expansion and Enlargement.
A. Alteration. No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any way
which increases the nonconformity however, any nonconforming structure or
portion thereof may be altered to decrease the degree of nonconformity.
B. Enlargement. Any enlargement of a nonconforming structure shall conform to
the dimensional standards of the zoning district where it is located.
8-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
8.4. - Nonconforming Lots of Record.
8.4.1. - Applicability.
Nonconforming lots of record shall comply with the standards in this section.
8.4.2. - Continuation.
A. Lots with Contiguous Frontage in One Ownership. When 2 or more
adjoining lots with contiguous frontage are under common ownership and the
lots are nonconforming in terms of width or area, such lots shall be combined for
development purposes to create 1 or more lots, each of which conforms to the
applicable dimensional standards of the district.
B. Single Lot of Record in a Residential District. When a lot in a residential zoning
district has an area or width which does not conform to the dimensional
standards of the district where it is located, but was of record on the effective date
of this Unified Development Ordinance, then a single-family dwelling may be
built on the lot, subject to compliance with setback standards.
C. Single Lot of Record in a Nonresidential District. When a lot in a nonresidential
district has an area or width which does not conform to the dimensional
standards of the district where it is located, but was of record on the effective date
of this Unified Development Ordinance, then development on the lot may be
permitted, subject to compliance with all required setbacks, open space
requirements, and all other applicable development and design standards.
8.4.3. - Expansion or Enlargement.
The boundaries, shape, or size of a nonconforming lot may be modified through a lot line
adjustment, boundary adjustment, recombination, or consolidation provided it reduces
the extent of the nonconformity.
8.4.4. - Reserved
8.4.5. - Government Acquisition of Land
Conforming lots subject to governmental acquisition of a portion of the lot for a public
purpose that results in the lot becoming nonconforming because it no longer complies
with lot area or width standards of the district shall be deemed conforming upon receipt
of a zoning compliance permit (see Section 2.6.15, Zoning Compliance Permit), and
compliance with the following:
8-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
A. Complies with Use Table. The development proposed complies with Table 4.1.9,
Principal Use Table;
B. Complies with Dimensional Standards. The development proposed complies
with the dimensional standards of this Unified Development Ordinance;
C. Complies with Off-Street Parking Standards. The development proposed is
designed to comply with the off-street parking and landscaping standards of this
Unified Development Ordinance; and
D. Complies with Other Applicable Standards. The development proposed
complies with all other standards and requirements of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
8.5. - Nonconforming Signs
8.5.1. - Applicability
Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the standards in this section.
8.5.2. - Prohibited Actions
The following actions associated with a nonconforming sign shall be prohibited:
A. Enlargement or Alteration. Enlargement or structural alteration of a
nonconforming sign or sign structure;
B. Type of Lighting. Changes to the type of sign lighting; and
C. Relocation. Relocation of a nonconforming sign upon the premises.
8.5.3. - Signs Rendered Nonconforming
Signs made nonconforming by amendment of the Official Zoning Map shall be removed
within 365 days of the date they were rendered nonconforming.
8.5.4. - Maintenance of Nonconforming Signage Allowed
A nonconforming sign may remain in place and be maintained indefinitely as a legal
nonconforming sign, subject to the following standards:
A. Maintenance Actions. Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign shall be
allowed, and shall include the following:
1. Nonstructural repairs, such as repainting or electrical repairs;
2. Incidental alterations which do not increase the degree or extent of the
nonconformity; and
3. Changing of copy, as provided in this section.
8-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
B. Change of Signs Copy. Nonconforming signs may change copy in the form of
replacement panels or replacement lettering, provided:
1. The copy size remains the same; or
2. The replacement copy is less nonconforming.
8.5.5. - Replacement of Nonconforming Signage
A. Removal. Any nonconforming sign that is removed for any reason shall be
replaced only with a sign that complies with the provisions of this Unified
Development Ordinance.
B. Damage.
1. If damage to a nonconforming sign from any cause is less than 50 percent
of either the original or replacement value, whichever is less, the sign may
be rebuilt or repaired to its original condition in its original location and
may continue to be displayed.
2. If damage from any cause to a nonconforming sign equals or exceeds 50
percent of either the original or replacement value, the nonconforming
sign may only be replaced with a sign that complies with the provisions of
this ordinance.
C. Renovation Nonconforming sign shall be removed or replaced with conforming
signage if any of the following occur:
1. Expansions.
a. Principal buildings with expansions that exceed 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area (GFA); or
b. Collective total expansions of 3,000 square feet of principal
buildings, open uses of land and off-street parking.
2. Structural or nonstructural alterations (excluding routine maintenance and
repair of the façade of the principal building) that exceed 50 percent of the
façade's area, which is calculated from the area of the façade or wall used
in calculating the maximum allowable sign area.
8.5.6. - Discontinuance of Business Activity
A. D iscontinued for Less than 90 Days. If the business activity on the premises
where a nonconforming sign is located is discontinued for a continuous period of
less than 90 days, then the nonconforming sign shall be allowed to remain.
B. Discontinued for 90 Days or More. If the business activity on the premises where
a nonconforming sign is located is discontinued for a continuous period of 90
days or more, then the nonconforming sign must be removed or replaced by a
sign conforming to the standards of this Unified Development Ordinance.
8-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 8 : Nonconformities (v3a)
8.5.7. - Change in Use
Nonconforming signage shall be removed or replaced with conforming signage if there
is a change in use.
8.5.8. - Additional Sign Permit Application
Nonconforming signage shall be removed or replaced with conforming signage if an
application for a sign permit to add new or additional signage to the premises is
approved.
8-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
Chapter 9: Enforcement
9.1. - Purpose 9- 3
9.2. - Compliance Required 9- 3
9.3. - Violations 9- 3
9.3.1. - Development without Authorization 9- 3
9.3.2. - Development Inconsistent with Authorization 9- 3
9.3.3. - Violation by Act or Omission 9- 3
9.3.4. - Use in Violation 9- 4
9.3.5. - Subdivide in Violation 9- 4
9.3.6. - Continue a Violation 9- 4
9.4. - Responsible Persons 9- 4
9.4.1. - General 9- 4
9.4.2. - Failure by Town Does Not Relieve Individual 9- 4
9.4.3. - Remedy Upon Notice 9- 5
9.5. - Enforcement 9- 5
9.5.1. - Responsibilities 9- 5
9.5.2. - Investigations 9- 5
9.5.3. - Inspections 9- 5
9.5.4. - Supporting Documentation 9- 5
9.5.5. - Interference 9- 6
9.6. - Enforcement Procedure 9- 6
9.6.1. - Notice of Violation 9- 6
9.6.2. - Failure to Comply with Order 9- 7
9.7. - Remedies 9- 7
9.7.1. - Civil Penalties 9- 7
9.7.2. - Denial of Permit or Certificate 9- 7
9.7.3. - Conditional Permit or Temporary Certificate 9- 7
9.7.4. - Stop Work Orders 9- 7
9.7.5. - Revocation of Permits 9- 8
9.7.6. - Criminal Penalties 9- 8
9.7.7. - Injunctive Relief 9- 8
9.7.8. - Order of Abatement 9- 9
9.7.9. - Equitable Remedy 9- 9
9.7.10. - State and Common Law Remedies 9- 9
9.7.11. - Previous Enforcement 9- 9
9.8. - Remedies - Cumulative and Continuous 9- 10
9-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
9.8. - Remedies - Cumulative and Continuous 9- 10
9.8.1. - Cumulative Violations 9- 10
9.8.2. - Repeat Violations 9- 10
9.9. - Assessment of Civil Penalties 9- 10
9.9.1. - Responsible Parties 9- 10
9.9.2. - Notice 9- 10
9.9.3. - Continuing Violation 9- 11
9.9.4. - Demand for Payment 9- 11
9.9.5. - Nonpayment 9- 11
9.9.6. - Penalties 9- 11
9.9.7. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Penalty Use 9- 13
9-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
9.1. - Purpose
T his chapter establishes procedures through which the Town seeks to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance and obtain
corrections for Unified Development Ordinance violations. It also sets forth the remedies
and penalties that apply to violations of this Unified Development Ordinance. The
provisions of this chapter are intended to encourage the voluntary correction of
violations, where possible.
9.2. - Compliance Required
Compliance with all the procedures, standards, and other provisions of this Unified
Development Ordinance is required by all persons owning, developing, managing,
using, or occupying land or structures in the town.
9.3. - Violations
Any of the following shall be a violation of this Unified Development Ordinance and
shall be subject to the remedies and penalties provided by this chapter and by State
law.
9.3.1. - Development without Authorization
Engage in any development, use, construction, land disturbance, or other activity of any
nature upon land or improvements thereon subject to the jurisdiction of this Unified
Development Ordinance without all required plans, permits, certificates, or other forms
of authorization as set forth in this Unified Development Ordinance.
9.3.2. - Development Inconsistent with Authorization
Engage in any development, use, construction, land disturbance, or other activity of any
nature in any way inconsistent with any approved plan, permit, certificate, or other form
of authorization granted for such activity.
9.3.3. - Violation by Act or Omission
Violate, by act or omission, any term, variance, modification, adjustment, condition, or
qualification placed upon any required plan, permit, certificate, or other form of
authorization for the development, use, construction, land disturbance, or other activity
upon land or improvements thereon.
9-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
9.3.4. - Use in Violation
Erect, construct, alter, repair, maintain or use any building or structure, or use any land in
violation of this Unified Development Ordinance or any regulation made under the
authority conferred thereby.
9.3.5. - Subdivide in Violation
Subdivide land in violation of this Unified Development Ordinance or transfer or sell land
by reference to a plat or map showing a subdivision of land before the plat or map has
been properly approved under this Unified Development Ordinance and recorded in the
office of the Moore County Register of Deeds. The description by metes and bounds in
the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring land does not exempt the transaction for violation this Unified Development
Ordinance.
9.3.6. - Continue a Violation
Continuance of any violations in this section is a separate and distinct offense.
9.4. - Responsible Persons
9.4.1. - General
The landowner, tenant, or occupant of any land or structure, and an architect, engineer,
builder, contractor, agent, or any other person who participates in, assists, directs,
creates, or maintains a situation that constitutes a violation of this Unified Development
Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and is subject to the remedies and
penalties set forth in this chapter.
9.4.2. - Failure by Town Does Not Relieve Individual
Failure of a Town official charged with enforcement responsibility to observe or
recognize conditions which violate the intent and purpose of this Unified Development
Ordinance, or to deny the issuance of a development or land disturbance permit, shall
not relieve the landowner from responsibility for the condition or damages resulting
therefrom and shall not result in the Town, its officers, or agents being responsible for
conditions or damages resulting therefrom.
9-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
9.4.3. - Remedy Upon Notice
Upon notice of a violation, the landowner and any other responsible person shall
immediately remedy the violation.
9.5. - Enforcement
9.5.1. - Responsibilities
The Public Works Director and Planning and Inspections Director shall be responsible for
enforcing the following:
A. Public Works Director. The Public Works Director is responsible for enforcing the
provisions of this Ordinance pertaining to land disturbance, flood damage
prevention, the construction of public infrastructure, and the inspection and
maintenance of stormwater management devices.
B. Planning and Inspections Director. The enforcement of the remaining
provisions of this Ordinance are the responsibility of the Planning & Inspections
Director.
9.5.2. - Investigations
As appropriate, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above has the power to
conduct such investigation as may be deemed necessary to carry out their duties as
prescribed in this Unified Development Ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at
reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating
any complaints or alleged violations of this Unified Development Ordinance.
9.5.3. - Inspections
As appropriate, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above has the right upon
presentation of proper credentials, or inspection warrant if necessary, to enter on any
premises within the jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspecting
the sites of any complaints or alleged violations, or determination of compliance or other
enforcement action of this Unified Development Ordinance.
9.5.4. - Supporting Documentation
As appropriate, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above has the power to
require written statements, certificates, certifications, or the filing of reports with respect
9-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
to pertinent questions relating to complaints or alleged violations of this Unified
Development Ordinance.
9.5.5. - Interference
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the
Town who requests entry for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate
credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such
representative while in the process of carrying out their official duties.
9.6. - Enforcement Procedure
When the Planning and Inspections Director or Public Works Director, as
appropriate, finds a violation of this Unified Development Ordinance, it shall be their
duty to notify the responsible persons of the violation.
9.6.1. - Notice of Violation
If the landowner or occupant of the land, building, structure, sign, or use in violation fails
to take prompt action, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1, as appropriate, shall
give the owner or occupant written notice (by certified or registered mail to their last
known address, by personal service, or by posting notice conspicuously on the property)
of the following:
A. Violation Exists. That the land, building, structure, sign, or use is in violation of
this Unified Development Ordinance;
B. Nature of the Violation. The nature of the violation, and citation of the Section(s)
of this Unified Development Ordinance violated;
C. Remedy. The measures necessary to remedy the violation;
D. Allowable Time Period. The time period in which the violation must be corrected;
except that no time period need be given for grading without a permit or
interference with official duties;
E. Penalties that May be Assessed. That penalties or remedies may be assessed;
and
F. Appeal. That the party cited has the right to appeal the Notice in accordance with
Section 2.5.2, Appeal.
9-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
9.6.2. - Failure to Comply with Order
If the owner or occupant of a property fails to comply with a notice of violation from
which no appeal has been taken, or a final decision by the BOA following an appeal, the
landowner or occupant shall be subject to such remedies and penalties as may be
provided for by State law or by Section 9.7, Remedies.
9.7. - Remedies
9.7.1. - Civil Penalties
Any person who violates any provision of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be
subject to the assessment of a civil penalty under the procedures provided in Section 9.9,
Assessment of Civil Penalties.
9.7.2. - Denial of Permit or Certificate
As appropriate, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above may withhold or deny
any permit, certificate, or other authorization on any land, subdivision, building,
structure, sign, or use in which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this
Unified Development Ordinance, or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate,
or other authorization previously granted.
9.7.3. - Conditional Permit or Temporary Certificate
As appropriate, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 above shall condition the
authorization of any permit or certificate upon the correction of the deficiency, payment
of civil penalties within a specified time, or the posting of a compliance security
approved by appropriate governmental authority.
9.7.4. - Stop Work Orders
A. General. Whenever a building, structure, sign, or part thereof is being
constructed, altered, repaired, moved, or demolished in violation of this Unified
Development Ordinance, any of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1, as appropriate,
may order the work to be immediately stopped.
B. Order in Writing. The stop work order shall be in writing and directed to the
landowner, occupant, or person doing the work. The stop work order shall state
the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the
conditions under which the work may be resumed.
9-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
C. In Accordance with State Statutes or Building Code. Such action shall be in
accordance with Section 160A-421 of the North Carolina General Statutes or the
State Building Code.
9.7.5. - Revocation of Permits
As appropriate, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 may revoke and require the
return of a permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the
revocation. Permits or certificates may be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, or specifications; refusal or failure to comply with the
requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made
in securing the permit or certificate. Any permit or certificate mistakenly issued in
violation of an applicable State or Town law may also be revoked.
9.7.6. - Criminal Penalties
A. Violation Erosion and Sedimentation Control. An y person who knowingly or
willfully violates any soil erosion and sedimentation control provision of this
unified development ordinance, or rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to
the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions, or who knowingly or
willfully initiates or continues a land-disturbing activity for which a soil erosion
and sedimentation control plan is required, except in accordance with the terms,
conditions, and provisions of an approved plan, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by a fine not to exceed
$5,000, or both.
B. All Other Violations. Any violation of this Unified Development Ordinance may
be enforced as a misdemeanor as provided for by NCGS 14-4, subject to a
maximum fine of $500, and NCGS 113A-64, subject to a maximum fine of $5,000.
9.7.7. - Injunctive Relief
A. Action by Board of Commissioners. W henever the Board of Commissioners
has reasonable cause to believe that any person is violating or threatening to
violate this Unified Development Ordinance, or any rule or order adopted or
issued pursuant to this Unified Development Ordinance, or any term, condition, or
provision of an approved development plan, or soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan, it may, either before or after the institution of any other action or
proceeding authorized by this Unified Development Ordinance, institute a civil
action in the name of the Town, for injunctive relief to restrain, correct, abate,
mandate, or enjoin the violation or threatened violation.
B. Superior Court. T he action shall be brought in the Superior Court of the
appropriate county. Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is
9-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
occurring or is threatened, it shall enter such orders or judgments as are
necessary to abate the violation or to prevent the threatened violation.
C. No Relief from Criminal Penalties. The institution of an action for injunctive
relief under this section shall not relieve any party to such proceedings from any
civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this Unified Development
Ordinance.
9.7.8. - Order of Abatement
A. General. I n addition to an injunction, the Town may apply for and the court may
enter an Order of Abatement as part of the judgment in the case. An Order of
Abatement may direct any of the following actions:
1. That buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished,
or removed;
2. That fixtures, furniture, or other moveable property be moved or removed
entirely;
3. That improvements, alterations, modifications, or repairs be made; or
4. That any other action be taken as necessary to bring the property into
compliance with this Unified Development Ordinance.
B. Lien. As appropriate, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1 may execute the
Order of Abatement and have a lien placed on the property in the nature of a
mechanic's and materialman's lien for the cost of executing the order.
9.7.9. - Equitable Remedy
The Town may apply to a court of law for any appropriate equitable remedy to enforce
the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance. The fact that other remedies are
provided under general law or this Unified Development Ordinance shall not be used by
a violator as a defense to the Town’s application for equitable relief.
9.7.10. - State and Common Law Remedies
In addition to other enforcement provisions contained in this section, the Board of
Commissioners may exercise any and all enforcement powers granted to it by state law
or common law.
9.7.11. - Previous Enforcement
Nothing in this Unified Development Ordinance shall prohibit the continuation of
previous enforcement actions.
9-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
9.8. - Remedies - Cumulative and Continuous
9.8.1. - Cumulative Violations
All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that North Carolina
law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain violation
or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of
the same violation.
9.8.2. - Repeat Violations
If a landowner or occupant repeats the same violation within a two year period from the
date of the initial violation, it shall be considered to be a continuation of the initial
violation and shall be subject to additional penalties and remedies.
9.9. - Assessment of Civil Penalties
9.9.1. - Responsible Parties
Any person who violates any provision of this Unified Development Ordinance, including
the owner or occupant of any land, building, structure, sign, use of land, or part thereof,
and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who participates or acts in
concert, assists, directs, creates, or maintains any condition that is in violation of this
Unified Development Ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and subject to
the penalties and remedies provided in this Unified Development Ordinance.
9.9.2. - Notice
A. Notification Required. Civil penalties may not be assessed until the responsible
person in violation has been notified in accordance with Section 9.6, Enforcement
Procedure.
B. Civil Penalty Imposed. If after receiving a notice of violation under Section 9.6.1,
the person fails to take corrective action or file an appeal, a civil penalty may be
imposed in accordance with this section.
C. Notice of Penalty Assessment. Notice of the civil penalty assessment shall be
served in the same manner as a notice of violation.
D. Assessment Contents. The assessment notice shall state the nature of the
violation, the civil penalty to be imposed upon the violator, and shall direct the
9-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
violator to pay the civil penalty within 15 days of the date of the notice.
E. Separate Notices. Separate notices must be provided for the first, second, third
and fourth violations. After notice for the fourth violation, penalties may be
assessed and accrue on a daily basis without any further notice to the property
owner.
F. Assessment Until Compliance. Civil penalties may be assessed until compliance
is achieved.
9.9.3. - Continuing Violation
For each day the violation is not corrected, the violator will be guilty of an additional and
separate offense and subject to additional civil penalty.
9.9.4. - Demand for Payment
If compliance is not achieved, then either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1, as
appropriate, shall make written demand for payment of penalties that have accrued
while the property has been in violation. The demand for payment shall be sent to the
responsible person in violation and must include a description of the violation for which
the civil penalties have been imposed.
9.9.5. - Nonpayment
If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within 30 days after demand
for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to legal counsel to institute a civil
action for recovery of the civil penalty. Moreover, if the civil penalty is not paid within the
time prescribed, either of the directors listed in Section 9.5.1, as appropriate, may have a
criminal summons or warrant issued against the violator. Upon conviction, the violator is
subject to any criminal penalty the court may impose pursuant to Section 14-4 of the
North Carolina General Statutes.
9.9.6. - Penalties
A. General. A ny person who violates any provision of this Unified Development
Ordinance, except for soil and erosion control violations, shall be subject to
assessment of a civil penalty in the amount of $50.00 for the first violation, $100.00
for the second violation, $200.00 for the third violation, and $500.00 for the fourth
and each succeeding violation.
B. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. C ivil penalties for specific violations of
Section 6.3, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation, are assessed as follows:
9-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
1. Grading Without Permit. $5 000 per day for failure to secure a valid land
disturbance permit prior to conducting a land-disturbing activity for which
a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan is required.
2. Failure to Protect. $ 500 per day for failure to take all reasonable
measures to protect public property or private property, including lakes
and/or natural watercourses, from damage caused by land-disturbing
activities.
3. Failure to Follow Plan. $ 300 per day for failure to conduct a
land-disturbing activity in accordance with the provisions of an approved
soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
4. Failure to Install Devices. $ 500 per day for failure, when more than one
acre is disturbed ($250 per day when one acre or less is disturbed), to install
erosion and sedimentation control devices sufficient to retain the
sediment generated by the land-disturbing activity within the boundaries
of the tract(s) and prevent off-site sedimentation.
5. Failure to Maintain Measures. $300 per day for failure to maintain
satisfactory soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures
and/or devices on the site that are designed to provide protection from the
calculated maximum peak rate of runoff from the 10-year storm.
6. Failure to Maintain Temporary Measures. $250 per day for failure to
maintain temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and
facilities during the development of the site.
7. Failure to Maintain Slopes. $250 per day for failure on graded slopes and
fills to maintain an angle sufficient to retain vegetative cover or other
adequate soil erosion and sedimentation control devices or structures.
8. Failure to Cover Slopes. $250 per day for failure, within 7 days of
completion of any phase of grading, to plant or otherwise provide exposed,
graded slopes or fills with ground cover, devices, or structures sufficient to
restrain erosion.
9. Failure to Plant Cover. $250 per day for failure on a tract when more than
one contiguous acre is disturbed, to plant or otherwise provide ground
cover sufficient to restrain erosion within 14 days of completion of any
phase of grading.
10. Failure to Revise Plan. $250 per day for failure to file an acceptable,
revised soil erosion and sedimentation control plan after being notified of
the need to do so.
11. Failure to Maintain. Buffer $250 per day for failure to retain a buffer zone
of sufficient width along a lake or natural watercourse to confine visible
siltation within the 25 percent of the buffer zone nearest the
land-disturbing activity.
12. Interference with Official Duties. $500 per day for obstructing,
hampering, or interfering with any authorized agent of the Town or the NC
Sedimentation Control Commission while in the process of carrying out
their official duties.
9-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 9 : Enforcement (v3a)
9.9.7. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Penalty
Use
Civil penalties collected for soil erosion and sedimentation control violations must be
used or disbursed as directed by Section 113A-64(a) of the North Carolina General
Statutes.
9-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Chapter 10 : Measurements &
Definitions
10.1. - General Rules for Interpretation 10- 2
10.1.1. - Meanings and Intent 10- 2
10.1.2. - Headings, Illustrations, and Text 10- 2
10.1.3. - Lists and Examples 10- 2
10.1.4. - Computation of Time 10- 2
10.1.5. - References to this Ordinance 10- 2
10.1.6. - References to Other Regulations/Publications 10- 3
10.1.7. - Delegation of Authority 10- 3
10.1.8. - Technical and Non-Technical Terms 10- 3
10.1.9. - Public Officials and Agencies 10- 3
10.1.10. - Mandatory and Discretionary Terms 10- 3
10.1.11. - Conjunctions 10- 3
10.1.12. - Tenses and Plurals 10- 4
10.1.13. - Term Not Defined 10- 4
10.2. - Rules of Measurements 10- 4
10.2.1. - Purpose 10- 4
10.2.2. - Measurement, Generally 10- 4
10.2.3. - Lot Dimensions 10- 5
10.2.4. - Setbacks 10- 7
10.2.5. - Density and Intensity 10- 9
10.2.6. - Height 10- 10
10.2.7. - Slope and Elevation 10- 11
10.2.8. - Parking Space Computation 10- 11
10.2.9. - Landscaping 10- 12
10.2.10. - Signage 10- 12
10.2.11. - Exterior Lighting 10- 13
10.2.12. - Fences 10- 13
10.3. - Abbreviations 10- 14
10.4. - Definitions 10- 16
10-1
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
10.1. - General Rules for Interpretation
The following rules shall apply for construing or interpreting the terms and provisions of
this Unified Development Ordinance.
10.1.1. - Meanings and Intent
A. A ll provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this Unified
Development Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the general
purposes set forth in Section 1.3, General Purpose and Intent, and the specific
purpose statements set forth throughout this Unified Development Ordinance.
B. W hen a specific section of these regulations gives a different meaning than the
general definition provided in Section 10.4, Definitions, the specific section's
meaning and application of the term shall control.
C. T erms that are not defined are subject to their common or customary meaning.
10.1.2. - Headings, Illustrations, and Text
I n the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this Unified Development
Ordinance and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall
control. Graphics and other illustrations are provided for informational purposes only and
should not be relied upon as a complete and accurate description of all applicable
regulations or requirements.
10.1.3. - Lists and Examples
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms like "for
example," "including," and "such as," or similar language are intended to provide
examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
10.1.4. - Computation of Time
The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and
including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday,
or holiday observed by the Town, the deadline or required date of action shall be the
next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the Town. References to
days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.
10.1.5. - References to this Ordinance
A reference to a chapter, section, subsection, or paragraph means a chapter, section,
subsection, or paragraph of this Ordinance, unless otherwise specified.
10-2
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
10.1.6. - References to Other Regulations/Publications
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document,
it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation,
resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise specifically
stated.
10.1.7. - Delegation of Authority
Any act authorized by this Unified Development Ordinance to be carried out by a
director may be delegated by the appropriate director to a subordinate of that
department.
10.1.8. - Technical and Non-Technical Terms
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of
the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
10.1.9. - Public Officials and Agencies
All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the
Town of Aberdeen, unless otherwise indicated.
10.1.10. - Mandatory and Discretionary Terms
The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation
or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words "may", "can", or "should" are
suggestive and are not mandatory and they do not establish an obligation or duty to
comply with the particular provision.
10.1.11. - Conjunctions
Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as
follows:
A. “And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply;
and
B. “Or" indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events apply.
10-3
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
10.1.12. - Tenses and Plurals
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular
number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number,
unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the
masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa.
10.1.13. - Term Not Defined
If a term used in any chapter of this Ordinance is not defined, the Planning and
Inspections Director is authorized to provide a definition in accordance with Section
2.6.4, Determination, based upon the definitions used in professionally accepted sources.
10.2. - Rules of Measurements
The rules of measurement section includes terms that involve calculation and
measurement. It groups terms together by subject area. Additional definitions of other
terms are found in Section 10.4, Definitions.
10.2.1. - Purpose
The purpose of this section is to clarify the rules of measurement and exemptions that
apply to all principal, accessory, and temporary uses allowed in this Unified Development
Ordinance. These standards may be further modified by other sections in this Unified
Development Ordinance, or in accordance with Section 2.6.4, Determination.
10.2.2. - Measurement, Generally
A. Straight Lines. Unless otherwise stated in this Unified Development Ordinance,
distances specified in this Ordinance are to be measured as the length of an
imaginary straight line joining 2 points.
B. Rounding. All calculations that result in part of a whole number shall be rounded
up to the next highest whole number, unless otherwise provided in this section or
elsewhere in this Unified Development Ordinance.
C. Irregular Shapes. In cases where an irregular shape complicates the application
of these standards, the Planning and Inspections Director shall determine the
applicable dimensional, setback, or bulk standards.
10-4
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
D. Separation
1. Lot to Lot. When the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance
require separation between 2 or more lots, or a lot and another feature,
separation shall be measured by drawing straight lines from the nearest
point of 1 lot line to the nearest point of the lot line subject to the
separation requirement.
2. Use Type to Use Type. When the provisions of this Unified Development
Ordinance require one use type to be separated from another use type,
separation shall be measured by drawing straight lines from the nearest
point of the wall of the existing or proposed principal structure to the
nearest point of the wall of the existing or proposed structure subject to
the separation requirement.
10.2.3. - Lot Dimensions
A. Lot Lines
1. Corner Side Lot Line. The corner side lot line is a side lot line that abuts a
street or other right-of-way.
2. Front Lot Line. The front lot line is the line connecting the 2 side lot lines
along the edge of the street that provides a lot's street address or that
opposes the primary entrance of a building.
3. Rear Lot Line. The rear lot line is the line connecting the 2 side lot lines
along the edge of the lot opposite from the front line.
4. Side Lot Line. The side lot line is the lot line connecting the front and rear
lot lines regardless of whether it abuts a right-of-way or another lot line.
B. Lot Types
1. Conservation Subdivision Lot. A building lot located within a conservation
subdivision.
2. Corner Lot. A lot abutting 2 or more streets at their intersection.
3. Cul-de-Sac Lot. A lot located on the head or turnaround of a cul-de-sac
with side lot lines on a tangent to the arc of the right-of-way.
4. Double Frontage Lot. A lot, other than a corner lot, with frontage on more
than 1 street other than an alley.
5. Flag Lot. A lot, created by a subdivision, with less lot width than is required
for a conventional lot. It is composed of a narrow "flagpole" strip extending
from the street and a much wider "flag" section lying immediately behind
a lot or lots having the required street frontage for a conventional lot. In
the case of a flag lot, the lot line at the end of the flagpole lying generally
parallel to the street to which the flagpole connects shall be considered to
be the front lot line for setback purposes.
6. Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner lot with only 1 frontage on a street
other than an alley.
10-5
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
7. Reverse Frontage Lot. A lot with a building or structure that is oriented in
an opposing direction to the existing buildings or structures on adjacent
lots.
8. Single-Family Attached (Townhouse) Lot. A parcel of land intended as a
unit for transfer of ownership and lying underneath, or underneath and
around, a single-family attached (townhouse) use.
9. Zone Lot. One or more lots of record in 1 undivided ownership with
sufficient total area, area exclusive of easements and flood hazards, total
dimensions, street access, and frontage to permit construction thereon of
a principal building together with its required parking and landscape
yards.
C. Lot Measurements
1. Minimum Lot Area
(a) The minimum amount of required land area, measured horizontally,
that must be included within the lines of a lot. Lands located within
any private easements shall be included within the lot area. The
following features shall not be included in calculating minimum lot
area:
(1) Public street rights-of-way;
(2) Private street common area; and
(3) The "pole" or "pan handle" portion of a flag lot.
(b) In the case of single-family attached and multi-family development,
the district tables in Chapter 3: Zoning Districts set out a minimum
development size for minimum lot area. The minimum
development size is the land area necessary for at least 3 dwelling
units. Beyond the first 3 units, the maximum density for the zoning
district controls the maximum number of dwelling units per acre.
2. Lot Area Averaging. Lot area averaging may be applied to new
single-family detached development in certain zoning districts as noted in
the individual zoning district dimensional standards in Chapter 3 Zoning
Districts. The areas of residential lots in the same development may be
averaged in order to meet the required minimum lot area for the
applicable zoning district in accordance with the following:
(a) Lot area averaging must be proposed and approved at the time of
preliminary plat approval.
(b) All lots to be averaged must be for residential use and be within 75%
to 125% of the minimum lot area required by the zoning district.
(c) The areas of all such lots in the development are added together
and divided by the total number of lots. The resulting number shall
meet or exceed the required minimum lot area for the district.
(d) Residential lots that are larger than 125% of the required minimum
lot area for the district are permitted, but shall be excluded from lot
area averaging.
10-6
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
3. Lot Width. The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear
lot lines at each side of the lot, measured at the inside edge of the front
setback. On cul-de-sac lots, lot width is measured at a front street setback
of up to 50 feet from the right-of-way (which becomes the minimum
building line).
4. Street Frontage. The length of the lot line of a single zone lot abutting a
public or private street right-of-way.
10.2.4. - Setbacks
A setback is the horizontal distance from a lot line or street right-of-way line to the
nearest part of the applicable building, structure, sign, or activity, measured
perpendicularly to the line.
A. Perimeter Setback. Setbacks applied to single building developments, group
developments and multiple lot developments. When applied to group
developments or multiple lot developments it applies only to the outermost
buildings along the perimeter of a development. A perimeter setback does not
apply along streets.
B. Rear Setback. A setback from an interior lot line lying on the opposite side of the
lot from the front street setback.
C. Side Setback. Any interior lot line setback other than a rear setback.
D. Street Setbacks. Any setback from a street right-of-way line.
1. Front Street Setback. Any setback from a street on which the building is
addressed or primarily fronts. A through lot has 2 front street setbacks.
2. Maximum Street Setback. The maximum distance a building can be
located from the street it fronts.
3. Minimum Street Setback. The minimum distance a building can be
located from the street it fronts.
E. Side Street Setback. Any setback from a street other than the front street
setback.
F. Setbacks Following Government Acquisition of Land. Where land acquisition
for a public purpose reduces the distance between an existing legally-established
structure and an adjacent lot line to an amount less than the minimum required
by the district, then the resulting distance shall be deemed the minimum setback
for the lot.
G. Setback Encroachments. Table 10.2.4.G, Allowable Encroachment into Setbacks,
sets out the kinds of features that are permitted to encroach within a required
10-7
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
setback, provided they do not obstruct visibility for motorists at any street
intersection in accordance with the standards in Town’s Code of Ordinances.
Table 10.2.4.G : Allowable Encroachments into Setbacks
Feature Allowable Encroachment
Bay windows
May extend up to 3 feet into any required setback,
if no more than 9 feet wide, but in no case shall be
closer than 3 feet to any lot line.
Bus shelters and gatehouses May be located in required setback
Chimneys, fireplaces or outdoor kitchens
May extend up to 3 feet into any required setback,
but in no case shall be closer than 3 feet to any lot
line
Flagpoles, mailboxes, lamp and address posts May be located in required setback
Fences or walls, ornamental entry columns, and
gates
May be located in any required setback, subject to
limitations in Section 5.11, Fences
Handicapped ramps May be located in required setback
HVAC condensers, heat pumps, or other outdoor
mechanical equipment
May be located within any required
setback
Open balconies, fire escapes, or exterior stairways
May extend up to 3 feet into any required setback,
but in no case shall be closer than 3 feet to any lot
line
Pet shelters, play equipment, and outdoor
furniture May be located in any required setback
Roof eaves and overhangs, or awnings
May extend up to 3 feet into any required setback,
but in no case shall be closer than 3 feet to any lot
line
Signs, projecting or free-standing May extend into or be located in any required
setback in accordance with Section 5.7, Signage
Sills or entablatures May extend up to 12 inches into any required
setback
Uncovered porches, stoops, decks, patios, terraces,
walkways, or driveways
May extend into or be located in any required
setback, if less than 12 inches high
Vegetation and landscaping features such as
retaining walls, fountains, ponds, ornamental
ponds, trellises, arbors, and similar landscaping
features
May be located in any required setback
Well houses and utility cabinets May be located in any required setback
Canopies, awnings, and marquees attached to a
building in the GB and CB districts
May extend into the street right-of-way if:
- No portion is closer than 3 feet to the face of the
curb;
- No portion is less than 9 feet above grade; and
- No portion requiring vertical support from the
10-8
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
sidewalk is located above a sidewalk of less than 8
feet in width
Canopies attached to a building in the GB district
May extend into the street setback provided no
portion of the canopy is closer than 10 feet to the
street right-of-way line
Freestanding canopies
May be located in the street setback provided no
portion is closer than 15 feet to the street
right-of-way
Wall signs in the CB district May project into the street right-of-way
10.2.5. - Density and Intensity
A. Maximum Density. T he maximum number of residential dwelling units
permitted per acre of land area. Density is determined by dividing the number of
dwelling units by the total amount of land area within a particular lot or tract.
B. Maximum Density Calculation
1. L and area that is dedicated to the Town for drainageway and open space
on the final plat may be included in the lot area for the purpose of
determining the maximum number of dwelling units permitted.
2. W hen the developer dedicates and builds a new public street in or
abutting a multi-family development, the street right-of-way may be
included in the lot area for the purpose of determining the maximum
number of dwelling units permitted.
3. W hen a single-family attached or multi-family development occupies both
sides of a street for a minimum centerline distance of 400 feet, the entire
development may be treated as a single zone lot for purposes of
calculation of the maximum number of dwelling units permitted, provided
that a final plat is recorded with a prominent note specifying that the
property must remain in 1 ownership (except for individual units in
townhome or condominium developments). This plat note is not required
if the portion of the development on each side of the street independently
meets all requirements of this Unified Development Ordinance.
4. W ithin a mixed-use development the density is determined by dividing
the total number of dwelling units by the total acreage of the mixed-use
development.
C. Density Equivalence
1. W hen calculating the density for a life care use or private dormitory, 2
bedrooms in a life care or private dormitory shall be equivalent to 1 regular
dwelling unit.
2. W hen calculating the density for single-room occupancy (SRO) residence,
a rooming unit of less than 150 square feet shall be equivalent to ½ a
10-9
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
dwelling unit and a rooming unit of 150 square feet or more shall be
equivalent to 1 dwelling unit.
3. M aximum density amounts do not apply to student housing or lodging on
college or university campuses when the housing is owned or operated by
the college or university. In these instances, residential land uses are
considered as an accessory to the college or university principal use.
D. Rounding. W hen computation of density results in a fraction, the fraction shall
be rounded down to the next lowest whole number.
E. Built-Upon Area
1. T he portion of a development that is covered by impervious or partially
impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel, recreation
facilities like courts, but not wooden slat structures such as decks or
boardwalks.
2. T he water area of a swimming pool is not considered built-upon area.
F. Gross Floor Area. T he sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of
walls separating 2 buildings.
10.2.6. - Height
A. Maximum Building Height. T he vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade to the topmost section of the roof.
B. Structure Height Restrictions
1. A s required by Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Chapter 1,
Part 77, and determined by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), no
structure may be constructed or existing structure altered in a manner or
at a height that constitutes a safety hazard to aerial navigation.
2. N o permit or plan approval shall be granted in the absence of FAA
approval.
3. L ighting or electronic signals that interfere with air traffic communications
or navigational aids are prohibited as determined by the FAA.
C. Exemptions to Height Requirements. Except as required in 10.2.6.B, Structure
Height Restrictions, height limits shall not apply to bulk storage silos, grain
elevators, barns, chimneys, elevator shafts, church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes,
flagpoles, monuments, water towers, rooftop dish antennas, solar equipment,
skylights, fire escapes or roof access stairways, mechanical equipment required to
operate and maintain the building, derricks, conveyors, power transmission
towers, or similar appurtenances, provided:
10-10
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
1. The appurtenance is not constructed for the purpose of providing
additional floor area in the building; and
2. The appurtenance complies with the screening requirements for
mechanical equipment and appurtenances in this Unified Development
Ordinance.
10.2.7. - Slope and Elevation
A. Slope. T he degree of deviation of the ground surface from a flat, horizontal
elevation, usually expressed in percent or degrees of deviation from horizontal.
B. Base Flood Elevation. A determination of the water surface elevations of the
base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has not been
provided in a "Special Flood Hazard Area", it may be obtained from engineering
studies available from a Federal, State, or other source using FEMA approved
engineering methodologies. This elevation establishes the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation.
C. Finished Grade. T he established grade following grading, excavation, or other
land-disturbing activity.
D. Natural Grade. T he level of the ground elevation prior to the commencement of
development or land-disturbing activity.
10.2.8. - Parking Space Computation
A. Rounding. W hen computation of the number of required parking spaces results
in a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded down to the next whole number.
B. Multiple and Mixed Uses. U nless otherwise approved, development containing
more than 1 principal use shall provide off-street parking in an amount equal to
the total requirements of all individual uses, unless the Planning and Inspections
Director determines that a lower standard proposed as part of an alternative
parking plan would be adequate because of differences in peak operating hours.
C. Seat Based Standards. W here the minimum number of off-street parking
spaces is based on the number of seats, all computations shall be based on the
design capacity of the areas used for seating.
D. Floor-Area Based Standards. W here the minimum number of off-street
parking spaces is based on square feet of floor area, all computations shall be
based on gross floor area. The square footage shall not include outdoor display or
use area.
10-11
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
E. On-Street Parking. E xcept as otherwise specifically permitted, on-street parking
on public or private streets shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking
standards of this Unified Development Ordinance.
F. Driveways Used to Satisfy Requirements. D riveways may be used to satisfy
minimum off-street parking standards for single-family detached, single-family
attached, and duplex dwellings, provided sufficient space is available to satisfy the
standards of this Unified Development Ordinance.
10.2.9. - Landscaping
A. Setback Less than the Required Planting Area
1. I n cases where the required building setback is less than the required
planting area width, the building setback shall control, reducing the
required planting area width only alongside the building.
2. T he planting rate of the required planting area shall still apply.
B. Rounding. W hen computation of the amount of landscaping material to be
provided results in a fraction, the minimum number of shrubs or trees to be
provided shall be rounded upwards to the next highest whole number.
10.2.10. - Signage
A. Area for Single-faced Signs. The area of a sign shall be computed by means of
the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof which will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other
display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or
structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework,
bracing, or decorative fence.
B. Area for Multi-faced Signs. For multi-faced signs, the sign area shall be
computed by including all sign faces visible from any one point. When 2 identical
sign faces are placed back to back so that both faces cannot be viewed from any
point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed
by the measurement of 1 of the faces.
C. Height. Signs height shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign
at the finished grade or from the nearest adjacent street grade to which the sign
is oriented and on which the lot has frontage, whichever is higher, to the top of
the highest component of the sign. Finished grade shall be the grade after
construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for
10-12
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
the purpose of locating the sign.
D. Lots with Multiple Frontages. Lots fronting on 2 or more streets are allowed the
permitted sign area for each street frontage. The total sign area that is oriented
toward a particular street, however, may not exceed the portion of the lot's total
sign area that is derived from that street frontage or building frontage.
E. Wall Area (for the purposes of Sign Area Measurement). For the purposes of
determining allowable sign area, a wall is the vertical exterior surface of a
building, the area of which shall be determined as follows:
1. The area of all parallel vertical surfaces along a single building elevation
regardless of offsets shall be counted as 1 wall.
2. The front of each unit of a multiple tenant commercial building shall be
counted as a separate wall.
3. The area of an angled wall surface shall be counted as part of whichever
adjoining wall surface it is most parallel with.
4. A 45 degree angled wall may be counted as part of the area of either
adjoining wall, but not as a part of both.
10.2.11. - Exterior Lighting
A. Measured at the Lot Line. L ight level measurements shall be made at the lot
line of the land upon which light to be measured is being generated. If
measurement on private property is not possible or practical, light level
measurements may be made at the boundary of the public street right-of-way
that adjoins the land.
B. Measured at Finished Grade. M easurements shall be made at finished grade
(ground level), with the light-registering portion of the meter held parallel to the
ground pointing up. The meter shall have cosine and color correction and have an
accuracy tolerance of no greater than plus or minus 5 percent.
C. Measurement Device. M easurements shall be taken with a light meter that has
been calibrated within 2 years.
10.2.12. - Fences
Fence height shall be measured in accordance with the following standards:
A. Measurement Location. Fence height shall be measured at the highest point
above grade (not including columns or fence posts) on the portion of the fence
nearest an abutting or adjacent lot or street right-of-way.
10-13
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
B. Column and Post Height. Columns or posts shall not exceed a height of 18 inches
above the built height of the fence.
C. Wall or Berm Below Fence. Any retaining wall or berm below a fence shall be
included within the fence height.
D. Railings Not Included. Safety railings required by the State Building Code shall
not be included in fence height measurements.
10.3. - Abbreviations
Table 10.3, Abbreviations, includes the abbreviations and their corresponding terms as
used in this Unified Development Ordinance.
Table 10.3 : Abbreviations
Abbreviation Associated Term
ADA Americans with Disabilities Act
ADU Accessory Dwelling Unit
ANSI American National Standards Institute
ATM Automatic Teller Machine
BFE Base Flood Elevation
BMP Best Management Practice
BOA Board of Adjustment
bua Built-upon area
CZ Conditional Zoning
dB Decibel
DBH Diameter at Breast Height
DENR
North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources
DWR North Carolina Department of Water Resources
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
ETJ Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
EV Electric Vehicle
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FAR Federal Aviation Regulation
FCC Federal Communications Commission
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency
10-14
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
FBFM Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
FHBM Flood Hazard Boundary Map
FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map
FIS Flood Insurance Study
FTA Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996
GCO Gateway Corridor Overlay District
GWA General Watershed Area
HPC Historic Preservation Commission
HQW High Quality Water
HUD Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development
HVAC Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning
kW Kilowatt
LCID Land Clearing and Inert Debris
Ldn Day-Night Average Sound Level
Lf or LF Linear Feet
LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LHO Local Historic Overlay District
LOMA Letter of Map Amendment
LOMR Letter of Map Revision
LOMR-F Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill
MHO Manufactured Housing Overlay District
MW Megawatt
NC North Carolina
NCDCR North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources
NCDOT North Carolina Department of Transportation
NCGS North Carolina General Statute
NFIP National Flood Insurance Program
OS Open Space
PB Planning Board
PD Planned Development
ROW Right-of-way
SF or Sq. Ft. Square Feet
SFHA Special Flood Hazard Area
SR Secondary Road in the North Carolina Secondary Road System
10-15
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
SUP Special Use Permit
TIA Traffic Impact Analysis
TRC Technical Review Committee
UDO Unified Development Ordinance
WEC Wind Energy Conversion System
WSE Water Surface Elevation
WSO Watershed Protection Overlay District
10.4. - Definitions
The following are definitions for terms used in this Unified Development Ordinance that
do not involve calculations or measurement (see Section 10.2, Rules of Measurement, for
terms and definitions related to calculation or measurement).
Table 10.4 : Definitions
Term Definition
Abutting
The condition of 2 parcels of land having a common property line or
boundary, including cases where 2 or more parcels of land adjoining at
a corner, but not including cases where parcels of land are separated
by a street or alley.
Access
The right or ability of pedestrians, vehicles, and boats to enter and
leave property.
Access Easement An easement which grants the right to cross land.
Accessory Building
A detached building, the use of which is incidental to that of the
principal building and which is located on the same lot as the principal
building.
Accessory Dwelling
Unit
A secondary dwelling unit established in conjunction with and clearly
subordinate to a principal dwelling unit, whether part of the same
structure as the principal dwelling unit, or as a detached structure on
the same lot.
Accessory Structure
A detached subordinate or incidental structure, the use of which is
incidental to the principal structure and which is located on the same
lot as the principal structure.
Accessory Use
A use that is incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal
use of land or buildings and located on the same lot.
Active Recreation
Area
Uses or structures intended for specific active recreational uses such
as athletic fields, playgrounds, swimming pools, courts, tracks walking
trails, paths, porches, and other similar uses typically located in open
space areas or parks and served by parking facilities, spectator areas,
restroom facilities, and exterior lighting, where appropriate.
10-16
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Addition
An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or
structure.
Adjacent
A parcel of land or development that shares all or part of a common lot
line or boundary with another parcel of land, or a parcel of land that
would about another parcel of land, but for the fact a street or
right-of-way divides the parcels.
Adopted Policy
Guidance
The combined future land-use policy guidance provided by the
adopted Community Growth Vision , the comprehensive land
development plan (also referred to as the Comprehensive Land
Development Plan ), area plans prepared for specific parts of the Town,
and system plans related to the Town's infrastructure systems.
Adult
Entertainment
The following definitions relate to adult entertainment uses:
a) Adult arcade (also
known as "peep
show")
A place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so displayed
depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas.
b) Adult bookstore
or adult video store
A commercial establishment which as 1 of its principal business
purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one
or more of the following:
1) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or
describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
2) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
c) Adult cabaret
A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial establishment that
regularly features, exhibits or displays as one of its principal business
purposes:
1) persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or
2) live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
3) films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which depict or describe "specified sexual activities "or"
specified anatomical areas."
10-17
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
d) Adult motel
A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
1) offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that depict or describe "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as one of its principal
business purposes; or
2) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
10 hours; or
3) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the
room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
e) Adult motion
picture theater
A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration,
films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown as one of its principal business
purposes that depict or describe "specified sexual activities "or"
specified anatomical areas."
f) Adult theater
A person who, for tips or any other form of consideration, agrees or
offers to act as a date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
h) Escort agency
A person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to
furnish escorts as one of its principal business purposes, for a fee, tip, or
other consideration.
i) Nude model
studio
A place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude, or who
displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration for such right. Nude Model Studio shall not include a
proprietary school licensed by the State of North Carolina or a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or in part by public
taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
in a structure:
1) that has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is
available for viewing; and
2) where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least 3 days in advance of the class; and
3) where no more than 1 nude or semi-nude model is on the
premises at any one time.
j) Nude or a State of
nudity
1) the appearance of a human anus, male genitals, or female genitals;
or
2) a State of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male
genitals, or female genitals.
10-18
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
k) Semi-nude
A State of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals,
pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the
body covered by supporting straps or devices.
l) Sexual encounter
center
A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical
contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the
opposite sex, or activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a State
of nudity or semi-nude.
m) Specified
anatomical areas Human genitals in a State of sexual arousal.
n) Specified sexual
activities
Any of the following:
1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or
2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or
3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or
4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in 1. through 3. above.
Affected Party
Owners of land adjoining the land subject to an application and any
other person who could suffer an adverse effect to a property interest
from a proposed development.
Aggrieved Party
A person with a legally recognized interest (i.e., fee simple ownership)
and standing to appeal, that is injuriously affected by a decision from
any decision-making body of the Town, including any officer or agent
of the Town.
Alley
A roadway set aside primarily for vehicular service access to the back
or side of lands otherwise abutting a street or open space.
Alternative
Landscape Plan
A plan or other proposal to deviate from the basic landscaping or tree
planting standards in this Unified Development Ordinance.
Alternative Parking
Plan
A plan or other proposal to utilize one or more of the alternative
parking provisions as a means of providing more off-street parking
spaces than typically allowed, fewer spaces than required, or
alternative surfacing materials.
Applicant
A person who has submitted a development application for review
under applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
Application
The completed form or forms and all accompanying documents,
exhibits, and fees required of an applicant by the appropriate Town
department or board as part of the development review processes.
Arbor
A structure with an open roof system providing partial shading and
which may also have non-opaque fencing on the outside perimeter.
Arcade A series of arches supported by piers or columns.
10-19
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Arch A curved, semicircular opening in a wall.
Architectural
Lighting
Exterior lighting that is designed to highlight structures, plantings, or
significant architectural features in a direct or indirect fashion
Area of Shallow
Flooding
A designated AO zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with
base flood depths from 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and
velocity flow may be evident.
As-Built Plans
A set of engineering or site drawings that delineate the specific
permitted development as actually constructed.
Assessed Value
The monetary price that a parcel of land, portion of land, improvement
on land, or other commodity assigned by property appraiser's office for
the purposes of taxation.
Authorized Agent A person with express written consent to act upon another's behalf.
Awning
A plastic, canvas, or metal porch or shade supported by a frame and
often foldable that is placed over a storefront, doorway, or window.
Banner
A temporary sign of lightweight fabric or similar material which is
rigidly mounted to a pole or a building by a rigid frame at two or more
opposite sides. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official
flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
Base Flood
The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
Base Flood
Elevation
A determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as
published in the flood insurance study. The base flood elevation, when
combined with the "freeboard", establishes the "regulatory flood
protection elevation".
Basement
An area of a building with a floor located below ground level on all
sides.
Berm
An elongated earthen mound typically designed or constructed on a
site to separate, screen, or buffer adjacent uses.
Best Management
Practice
A structural or non-structural management-based practice used
singularly or in combination to reduce nonpoint source inputs to
receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals.
Bio-retention
Device
A stormwater infiltration device consisting of an excavated basin that
is refilled with engineered soil and mulch that allows stormwater
run-off to collect and percolate through the engineered soil where it is
treated prior to infiltrating into the surrounding undisturbed soil. Also
known as a rain garden or bio-cell.
Block The land lying within an area bounded on all sides by streets.
Block Face
A specific side of a block referenced in relationship to the setback,
bulk, height, or uses on the block.
10-20
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Block Length
The distance, measured along the right-of-way of each side of a street,
between one intersecting through street (not a cul-de-sac or loop
street) and the next intersecting through street.
Breakaway Wall
A wall not part of the structural support of a building and intended to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation
system.
Brew Pub
An eating and drinking establishment that produces less than 15,000
barrels of malt beverages per year.
Borrow
Fill material which is required for on-site construction and is obtained
from other locations.
Buffer, Perimeter
Landscaping
An area of natural or planted vegetation adjoining or surrounding a
use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building, structure, paving or
portion of such use, for the purposes of screening and softening the
effects of the use, no part of which buffer is used for recreation or
parking.
Buffer, Perimeter
Landscaping
Vegetative material and structures (i.e., walls, fences) that are used to
separate uses from each other as required by this Ordinance, including
but not limited to the Type A Opaque, Type B Semi-Opaque, Type C
intermittent, and Type D Basic.
Building
A structure having a roof supported by walls or columns constructed
or used for residence, business, industry, or other public or private
purposes.
Building Elevation
A fully dimensioned drawing of the exterior front, side or rear of a
building showing architectural features such as windows, doors and
roof lines, and which may also contain information regarding exterior
materials, colors, and fixtures.
Building Marker
A sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental
information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry
surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
Building Mass The visual form of a building that includes the exterior walls,
projections, recesses, roof features, and any attachments.
By Right Land uses that are permitted in a zoning district without requiring
special use review.
Caliper
Measurement for determining the size of trees at time of planting.
Caliper is the quantity in inches of the diameter of trees measured at 6
inches above the ground.
Canopy
A permanent structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or
other material attached or unattached to a building for the purpose of
providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature
on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure.
10-21
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Canopy Tree
A species of tree which normally grows to a mature height of 40 feet
or more with a minimum mature crown width of 30 feet.
Change of Use
The change in the principal use of a structure or land. Change of
principal use includes a change from one primary use type to another
primary use type.
Channel
A natural water-carrying trough cut vertically into low areas of the land
surface by erosive action of concentrated flowing water or a ditch or
canal excavated for the flow of water.
Channelization
Any improvements or other construction activity which occurs within
or in the vicinity of an existing natural drainageway or perennial
stream which directs or relocates said waterway along some desired
course, by increasing its depth or by the use of piping or any other
man made storm drainage structures.
Citizen Information
Meeting
A meeting conducted by an applicant on a proposed development
before an application for the development permit or approval is
reviewed by the PB Commission.
Commercial
Message
A sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly,
names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or
other commercial activity.
Condominium
A development containing individually owned dwelling units and
jointly owned and shared areas and facilities that is subject to the
North Carolina Unit Ownership Act (North Carolina General Statutes
Section Ch. 47A) and/or the North Carolina Condominium Act (North
Carolina General Statutes Section Ch. 47C).
Conservation
Subdivision
The division of a tract of land into 2 or more lots, building sites, or other
divisions along with additional land area set aside as open space for
conservation and/or recreation purposes.
Construction
The erection of any building or structure or any preparations
(including land disturbing activities) for the same.
Contiguous
Abutting directly or immediately adjacent to a boundary or separated
only by a street, railroad, or public utility right-of-way.
Cornice
Any horizontal member, structural or nonstructural, of any building,
projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roof line, including
eaves and other roof overhang.
Cross-Access
Vehicular access provided between the vehicular use areas of 2 or
more development sites or parcels of land intended to allow travel
between the sites without the use of a public or private street.
Crosswalk
A right-of-way dedicated to public use which cuts across a block to
facilitate pedestrian access to adjacent streets and properties.
Cul-de-Sac Street
A short local street having one end open to traffic and the other end
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
10-22
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Cupola
A dome like structure on top of a roof or dome, often used as a lookout
or to admit light and air.
Cut-off Fixture
A cut-off light fixture that emits none of its light above the horizontal
plane of the fixture (90 degrees) and no more than 10 percent of its
emitted light between 80 degrees and 90 degrees.
Cut-out Letter
Lighting
Lighting so arranged that only the outlines of letters, numerals, or
symbols are illuminated from an internal lighting source while the
remainder of the sign is covered with non transparent materials that
prevent illumination.
Deck
A structure, without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal building
which has an average elevation above finished grade.
Density Credit
The potential for a portion of a development or subdivision, expressed
in dwelling units or other measures of intensity, that may be
transferred to other portions of the same lot, tract, or site that is part of
a common development plan.
Determination
A final decision by a local jurisdiction's officer with the highest level of
authority to make the determination, including those with authority to
hear appeals.
Developer A person engaging in land, site, or building development.
Development
Any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to: buildings or other structures; mining;
dredging; filling; grading; paving; excavation; drilling operations; or
storage of equipment or materials.
Diameter at Breast
Height (DBH)
Measurement for determining the size of existing trees to be credited
towards landscaping requirements or for violations of this Ordinance.
DBH is the measurement of the diameter of an existing tree trunk
taken at a height of 4 ½ feet above the ground. Trees with multiple
trunks should be treated as multiple trees and the DBH for each trunk
added to aggregate diameter measurement.
Disabled Motor
Vehicle
A motor vehicle that meets one of more of the following criteria:
- It does not display a current license plate;
- It is partially dismantled or wrecked;
- It cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner originally
intended; or
- It is more than 4 years old and appears to be worth less than
$500.00.
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to apply to any vehicle in
an enclosed building or vehicle on the premises of a business
enterprise being operated in a lawful place and manner and the
vehicle being necessary to the operation of the business enterprise, or
to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained
in a lawful place and manner by the Town.
Discharge Point The point at which stormwater runoff leaves a tract of land.
10-23
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Ditch
A man made, open drainageway into which surface water or
groundwater from land, stormwater runoff, or floodwaters flows either
continuously or intermittently.
Drainageway
A natural or manmade channel that carries surface runoff from
precipitation.
Drainage Easement
An easement which grants the right to maintain, relocate, or, utilize
land within the easement for the improvement of drainage and
stormwater flow.
Dripline
A vertical line extending from the outermost portion of a tree's canopy
to the ground.
Driveway
A private road or vehicular accessway providing access to parking
areas, garages, dwellings, drive-up windows, or other similar features.
Drive-Through
A facility designed to enable a person to transact business while
remaining in a motor vehicle.
Dwelling
A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively for human
habitation.
Dwelling Unit
One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as
separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities
provided therein.
Easement
A grant of 1 or more property rights by the property landowner to, or
for use by, the public, a corporation, or other entity.
Eave
The projecting lower edges of a roof that overhangs the wall of a
building.
Egress
An exit from a building or site.
Elevation The front, side, or rear of a structure.
Encroachment
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, the advance or
infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or
development into a special flood hazard area, which may impede or
alter the area's flooding flow capacity.
Erosion
The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water, gravity,
or any combination thereof.
Erosion Control
Measure
A device which controls the soil material within the land area under
responsible control of the person conducting a land-disturbing
activity.
Expansion
An increase in the floor area of an existing structure or building, or the
increase of area of a use.
Extensive Erosion
Control Measure
Erosion control devices that are designed by a registered professional
engineer, architect, landscape architect, certified professional in
10-24
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
erosion and sedimentation control (CPESC), or a registered surveyor to
the extent permitted by North Carolina laws.
Facade
The entire exterior wall of a building facing a lot line measured from
the grade to the eave or highest point of a flat or mansard roof.
Facades may be on the front, side, or rear elevation of the building.
Family
One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
household unit.
Fence
A physical barrier or enclosure consisting of wood, stone, brick, block,
wire, metal, or similar material used as a boundary or means of
protection or confinement, but not including a hedge or vegetation.
Financial Guarantee
Cash or other guarantee provided by an applicant in-lieu of
completion of public infrastructure or installation of required private
site features prior to issuance of a building permit or other
development approval.
Flood or Flooding
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters or the
unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any
source.
Flood Insurance
The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance
Program.
Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM)
The official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) that depicts special flood hazard areas and risk
premium zones applicable in the Town.
Flood Insurance
Study (FIS)
An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards,
corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard
risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The flood insurance study
report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary
and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.
Floodproofing
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
land or development.
Floodway
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than 1 foot.
Floodway Fringe
The land located between the floodway and maximum elevation
subject to inundation by the base flood.
Flood Zone
A geographical area on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood
Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
10-25
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Floor
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, the top surface of
an enclosed area in a building (including the basement), such as the
top of the slab in concrete slab construction or the top of the wood
flooring in wood frame construction.
Footcandle
A unit of measure of the intensity of light falling on a surface. It is often
defined as the amount of illumination the inside surface of a
1-foot-radius sphere would be receiving if there were a uniform point
source of 1 candela in the exact center of the sphere. 1 footcandle is
equal to 1 lumen per square foot.
Freeboard
The height added to the BFE to account for unknown factors that
could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated
for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action,
blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed.
Front Facade
The side or elevation of a structure that contains the structure's
architectural front, or the portion of the structure facing the street
from which the structure derives its street address.
Full Cut-off Lens
An artificial outdoor lighting fixture designed to ensure that no light is
directly emitted above a horizontal line parallel to the ground.
Gable
A triangular area of an exterior wall formed by 2 sloping roofs.
Glare
The effect produced within the visual field by a high intensity or
insufficiently shielded light source that is significantly brighter than
the level to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance,
discomfort, or loss of visual performance or visibility of objects.
Glazing
The portion of an exterior building surface occupied by glass or
windows.
Governing Body The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Aberdeen
Grading
Excavating, filling (including hydraulic fill) or stockpiling of earth
material, or any combination thereof, including the land in its
excavated or filled condition.
Green Roof
The roof of a building that is partially or completely covered with
vegetation and a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing
membrane. It may also include additional layers such as a root barrier
and drainage and irrigation systems.
Greenway
Public open space under the control and maintenance of the Town
which has been designated on an officially adopted greenway or open
space plan and developed in accordance with the adopted greenway
or open space plan.
Ground Cover
Any vegetation, masonry, paving, rip-rap, or other material or materials
which render the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion.
10-26
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Group Development
A development in which, in-lieu of the division of a tract of land into
separate lots for separate principal buildings, a tract of land is divided
into 2 or more principal building sites for the purpose of building
development (whether immediate or future) and occupancy by
separate families, firms, businesses, or other enterprises.
Hazardous or Toxic
Substance
Generator
A use listed as a "Hazardous Waste Facility" by the North Carolina
Department of Human Resources, Solid and Hazardous Waste
Management Division, or a use included on the U.S. EPA's "Categorical
Pretreatment List".
Hazardous or Toxic
Substance Handler
A use engaged in the permanent or temporary storage, treatment,
transporting, and/or disposal of hazardous or toxic substances
including a building, structure or use of land devoted , or intended to
be devoted to, changing by any method, technique, or process, the
physical, chemical, or biological character of any hazardous or toxic
substance so as to neutralize such material or render it non hazardous
or nontoxic, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for
storage or reduced in bulk, or to reprocess the hazardous or toxic
substance to form a new material, or for the temporary or long term
storage of hazardous or toxic substance(s). Such uses may also be
considered temporary storage facilities normally associated with these
operations and of sufficient size to conduct a commercial feasible
operation.
Historic Structure
Any structure that is: 1) listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places (a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior)
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 2) certified
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; 3) individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places; 4) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with a Certified Local Government (CLG) Program; or 5)
certified as contributing to the historic significance of a historic district
designated by a community with a Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program. Certified Local Government Programs are approved by the
US Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina
Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic
Preservation Officer as having met the requirements of the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended.
Home Occupation
Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted in the
resident's dwelling unit.
Human Scale
Features of a building or built environment that are sized and
configured in accordance with the typical human frame. Human-scale
details and features are most often configured for observation and
recognition by people who are walking.
10-27
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Illumination, Direct
Illumination from a light source that is contained within the sign,
where the light source is internal to the sign.
Illumination,
Indirect
Illumination from a light source that is not contained within the sign,
where the light source is external and projected onto the sign.
Improved Walkway
An improved walkway is a walkway dedicated to pedestrian access
that has a width of at least four feet and includes a paved, all-weather
surface (excluding gravel or cinders) that is graded and configured to
ensure safe pedestrian movement.
Improvement
The construction of buildings and the establishment of basic services
and amenities associated with development, including, but not limited
to streets and sidewalks, parking areas, water and sewer systems,
drainage system, property markers and monuments, recreation
facilities (i.e., lakes, swimming pools, tennis courts, golf courses, riding
stables, club houses, cabanas, marinas, docks and the like) and other
similar construction or establishment.
Infill
Development, redevelopment, and re-use of existing sites and
buildings in the Town's existing neighborhoods and commercial
corridors.
Ingress Access or entry to a building or site.
Just Cause Legitimate cause; legal or lawful ground for action.
Land Clearing and
Inert Debris (LCID)
Landfill
A landfill limited to concrete, brick, concrete block, uncontaminated
soil, rock, gravel, untreated wood, limbs, leaves and stumps. LCID does
not include materials that have been painted or coated with sealants
or finishes.
Land Disturbing
Activity
Any movement of earth or substrate, manually or mechanically,
including but not limited to any modification of existing grade by
dredging, demolition, excavation or fill, grading, scraping, vegetation
removal, landscaping, coring, well drilling, pile driving,
undergrounding utility lines, trenching, bulldozing, sheeting, shoring
and excavation for laying or removing foundations, pilings or other
purposes.
Land Use Class
A numeric value denoting the intensity of an individual use type for
the purposes of determining applicable perimeter landscape yard
requirements.
Landowner
As applied to the standards related to vested rights, an owner of a
legal or equitable interest in real property, including the heirs,
devisees, successors, assigns, and personal representative of the
owner.
Landscaping
The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass, shrubs,
and trees. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds,
ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary, and objects designed
and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect.
10-28
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Landscaping Strip,
Perimeter
Vegetative material associated with the perimeter landscaping
required for a vehicular use area.
Large Vehicle
A vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 14,000 or more pounds, a
recreational vehicle, or a school or church bus.
Loading Space
Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and
deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles, and not considered as part of the
minimum required off-street surface parking.
Local Government
Any county, incorporated municipality, or any combination of counties
and/or incorporated municipalities acting through a joint program
pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Lot
A legally described piece of contiguous land that has been or may be
developed as a unit. This term is synonymous with "parcel."
Lot of Record
A lot that has been recorded in the office of Moore County Register of
Deeds and which was in conformance with the Unified Development
Ordinance in effect at the time of recording.
Lowest Floor
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, the lowest floor of
the lowest enclosed area (including basement) that is typically an
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure that does not include habitable
space.
Lumen
A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light emitted by a light
source.
Maintenance
Guarantee
Cash or other guarantee provided by an applicant to ensure public
infrastructure functions as intended following acceptance by the
Town.
Mansard Roof
A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a
building wall.
Marquee
A permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or
building wall generally designed and constructed to provide
protection from the weather.
Maximum Extent
Practicable
No feasible or practical alternative exists, as determined by the Town,
and all possible efforts to comply with the standards or regulation to
minimize potential harmful or adverse impacts have been undertaken
by an applicant. Economic considerations may be taken into account
but shall not be the overriding factor determining "maximum extent
practicable."
Mean Sea Level
The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other
vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying
elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood elevations on the
FIRM are referenced.
10-29
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Membrane
Structure
A structure, building, or tent composed of a membrane material, such
as canvas, plastic, or other fabrics, that is supported by a rigid
framework of metal, plastic, or other material.
Mixed-Use
Development
A tract of land or structure developed for 2 or more different uses, such
as, but not limited to, residential, office, retail, institutional, public, or
entertainment. Such uses are functionally integrated and share
vehicular use areas, ingress/egress, and pedestrian access.
Motor Vehicle
A vehicle required by the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles
to be registered under North Carolina State Law.
Multiple Lot
Development
A development containing 2 or more lots, and 2 or more businesses
that is planned, organized, and managed to function as a single
development or single zone lot for the purposes of development
standards.
Natural Infiltration
Areas
A type of stormwater management device that relies on vegetation,
soil, or other natural matrix configured to allow stormwater runoff to
enter, filter, and be re-released with fewer pollutants.
New Construction
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of the flood damage prevention standards.
Nit
A measurement of a sign's luminance measured in the number of
candela per square meter (cd/m2).
Non-Encroachment
Area
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than 1 foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
Nonconforming Lot
A lot of record that that was lawful at the date on which it was
established, but does not conform to the current dimensional
standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming
Sign
A lot of record that that was lawful at the date on which it was
established, but does not conform to the current dimensional
standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming
Structure
Any sign that was lawful at the date on which it was established, but
does not meet the standards of this Ordinance.
Nonconforming
Structure
A structure that was lawful at the date on which it was established, but
does not conform to current dimensional standards, elevation,
location, or other requirements of this Ordinance.
Nonconforming Use
A use which was lawful at the date on which it was established, but is
now not a permitted use of that parcel or structure under this
Ordinance.
Nonconformity
Any land use, development, structure, or site, including any lot of
record, that was legally established, but that is not presently in full
compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
10-30
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Non-occupiable
Space
A room or enclosed space, that is not used for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking, and that is not designed for human occupancy or used for
such activities as rest, amusement, treatment, education, dining,
shopping, employment, labor, assembly or other similar purposes.
Examples of non-occupiable space are closets, toilet rooms,
mechanical equipment rooms and storage rooms.
North Carolina
Sediment Pollution
Control Act
North Carolina General Statutes Section 113A-50 et seq., and all rules
and orders adopted pursuant to it.
Notice of Violation
A notice indicating a violation of this Ordinance not associated with a
fine.
Official Zoning Map
The Official Zoning Map upon which the boundaries of various zoning
districts are drawn and which is an integral part of this Ordinance.
Opacity
A measurement indicating the degree of obscuration of light or
visibility.
Open Space
An area of land or water intended to provide light, air, amenity,
recreation and/or resource protection set aside in some permanent
manner for public or private use and enjoyment. Open space includes,
but is not limited to, preserves, parks, passive and active recreation
areas, floodplains, plazas, squares, greenways, and waterbodies.
Ordinance A legislative enactment of the Town of Aberdeen, North Carolina.
Outdoor Display
The placement of any goods, merchandise or vehicles outside an
enclosed building for exhibition, sale or rent, typically in an area
accessible by the public.
Outdoor Storage
The keeping of any goods, material, merchandise or vehicles outside
an enclosed building for a period of time exceeding 24 hours, typically
in an area inaccessible by the public.
Outparcel
A subdivided or leased parcel within a group development,
multiple-lot development, or shopping center.
Owner's Association
An organization of homeowners or property owners of lots or land in a
particular subdivision, condominium, or planned development. The
owners association is responsible for maintaining and enhancing the
shared private infrastructure (e.g., stormwater, streets, and sidewalks)
and common elements recreation.
Parapet
A building facade that rises above the roof level, typically obscuring a
gable or flat roof as well as any roof-mounted equipment.
Parcel See "Lot."
Parking Lot Drive
Aisle
A vehicular accessway located within an off-street parking or vehicular
use area which serves individual parking stalls and driveways.
10-31
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Parking Space,
Accessible
A space designated for the parking or temporary storage of 1 motor
vehicle in addition to the space necessary for the ingress and egress
from the vehicle by a disabled person and any equipment needed for
that purpose.
Parking Space,
Off-Street
A space that is designated for the parking or temporary storage of 1
motor vehicle located outside of a dedicated street right-of-way,
vehicular travel way, or parking aisle.
Parking, Off-Site
An off-street parking area provided on a different parcel than the use it
is intended to serve.
Parking, On-Street
A location or area within the right-of-way of a public or private street
that is reserved for the parking of vehicles. Such areas may or may not
be formally designated with signage, striping, or parking meters.
Parking, Shared
Off-street parking facilities shared by 2 or more uses that are in close
proximity to one another and the parking area, and that have different
operational characteristics such that use of the parking facilities by
one use will not generally overlap with the use of the parking area by
the other use(s).
Passive Recreation
Area
Open space areas designated for passive recreation uses including
walking trails, pathways, gazebos, picnic areas, fountains, plazas, and
similar areas. Such areas may also include undisturbed natural
vegetation.
Patio
An area, usually paved, adjoining a building - used as an area for
outdoor lounging, dining, or gathering.
Pedestrian Amenity
Seating, outdoor play areas, bicycle racks, kiosks, water features, public
art, freestanding structures such as a clock tower or similar amenities,
intended primarily for use by pedestrians.
Pedestrian
Connection
Interconnected paved walkway that provides a pedestrian passage
through blocks running from street to street, vehicular use areas, or
other locations.
Pedestrian -
Orientation
Development elements, such as density, building placement, street
and path connections, and mixture of uses designed with pedestrians
in mind and intended to encourage and promote pedestrian activity.
Pennant
A lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or
string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
Person
Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or
private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, or public or
private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, or other legal
entity.
Pilaster
A rectangular column with a capital and base that is attached or
affixed to a wall as an ornamental design feature.
10-32
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Planned
Development
An area of land under unified ownership or control to be developed
and improved as a single entity under a Planned Development Master
Plan in accordance with this Ordinance.
Planting Season
The dormant time of the year for trees beginning with leaf drop and
ending with bud break; generally late fall to early spring.
Planting Strip
An area usually within or adjacent to a right-of-way or lot line that
contains required vegetation.
Plat
A surveyed map or plan for a parcel of land which is to be, or has been,
subdivided.
Playbill
A sign announcing entertainment offered or to be offered at a
business location on the site where the sign is displayed.
Plaza
An open space at the intersection of important streets or adjacent to
important structures, set aside for civic purposes and commercial
activity, which may include parking, consisting of durable pavement,
and formal landscaping or tree plantings.
Porch
A covered projection (can be glazed or screened) from the main wall of
a building, with a separate roof, that is not used for livable space.
Portico
A large porch usually with a pediment usually associated with an
entrance, supported by columns.
Post-Firm
Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
Pre-Firm
Construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
Primary Drive Aisle
The main aisle(s) that extends from the street right-of-way, or from the
driveway entrance(s) serving a development along the front of the
building it serves.
Primary Entrance
The place of ingress and egress to a building, parcel, or development
used most frequently by the public.
Principal Building
A building in which is conducted the principal use(s) of the lot on
which it is located or, in a group development, of the building site on
which it is located. Any dwelling is considered a principal building
unless it is an accessory dwelling.
Principal Building
Facade
The entire exterior wall of a building facing a lot line measured from
the grade to the eave or the highest point of a flat or mansard roof. The
principal building facade is the front of the building, or the side that
contains the primary building entrance.
Principal Building
Line
A line or horizontal plane that is measured from the portion of the
building closest to the lot line laterally along the lot line.
10-33
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Principal Dwelling
Any principal building or structure which is used and designed for
human habitation including living, sleeping, cooking, and eating
activities, excluding dormitories, hotels, motels, shelters for the
homeless, or other structures designed for transient residents.
Principal Use A primary or predominant use of a lot or parcel.
Principal Structure
A structure in which is conducted the principal use(s) of the lot on
which it is located.
Private Drive
A vehicular travelway that is not a public street or a private street that
provides access to a parking lot(s) or a principal building(s).
Private Street
A vehicular travelway not dedicated or offered for dedication as a
public street but resembling a local street by carrying traffic from a
series of driveways to the public street system.
Projecting Bay
A space projecting outward from the main walls of a building and
forming a bay in a room, often incorporating a window.
Property Owner See "Landowner."
Public Hearing,
Quasi-judicial
A formal public hearing involving the legal rights of specific parties
conducted by the Board of Commissioners or the Board of Adjustment
based on evidence and sworn testimony presented during the public
hearing. Decisions made during such hearings are based upon and
supported by the record developed at the hearing, and typically
involve findings of fact made by the decision-making body.
Public
Infrastructure
Aspects of the public realm owned and maintained by the Town or the
State that serve the public at large, including streets, highways,
sidewalks, curb and gutter, potable water distribution systems,
sanitary sewer systems, stormwater drainage retention and
conveyance features, street lights, on-street parking spaces, and
similar aspects located within a public right-of-way or public
easement.
Public Street
A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic and
street rights-of-way offered for dedication, but not yet accepted, in
which the roadway design and construction have been approved
under public standards for vehicular traffic.
Public Tree
A tree in the public street right-of-way, in a park, or other areas owned
or controlled by the Town.
Quorum
The minimum number of board or commission members that must
be present in order to conduct official business or take official action.
Rain Garden
A planted depression that allows rainwater runoff from impervious
urban areas like roofs, driveways, walkways, parking lots, and
compacted lawn areas the opportunity to be collected in a single
location and absorbed.
10-34
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Recreational Vehicle
A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, designed to be self-propelled
or permanently towable by a light duty vehicle (including a travel
trailer), and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
Reference Level
The top of the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard
areas designated as zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.
Regulatory
Floodplain Elevation
The base flood elevation plus the freeboard. In special flood hazard
areas where BFEs have been determined, this elevation is the BFE plus
3 feet of freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has
been established, this elevation is at least 3 feet above the highest
adjacent grade.
Reservation
An obligation, shown on a subdivision or site plan, to keep land free
from development and available for public acquisition for a stated
period of time.
Retaining Wall
A structure, either masonry, metal, or treated wood, designed to
prevent the lateral displacement of soil, rock, fill, or other similar
material.
Right-of-Way
An area dedicated to public or private use for pedestrian and vehicular
movement, which may also accommodate public utilities.
Roof Line
The top edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the
top line of a building.
Rural Character
Patterns of land use and development in which open space, the
natural landscape, and vegetation predominate over the built
environment.
Sediment
Solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that is transported
by water, air, gravity, or ice from its site of origin.
Sedimentation
The process by which sediment resulting from accelerated erosion is
transported off-site by land-disturbing activity.
Severe Pruning
The pruning, cutting, or otherwise damaging of the natural form of a
tree or shrub, whether existing or planted, such that a significant or
noticeable portion of the crown system is removed (e.g., 25 percent of
the crown removed from a tree, or the continued cutting/trimming of
trees previously pruned illegally, or pruning of trees that must grow
naturally to meet the landscaping requirements), and/or if more than
1/3 of the overall circumference of a tree is exposed by pruning cuts.
Shielded Fixture
A light fixture constructed and installed in such a manner that all light
emitted by it, either directly from the lamp (bulb) or a diffusing
element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the
fixture, is projected below the horizontal plane of the fixture.
10-35
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Shielded Silhouette
Lighting
Lighting achieved by an illumination source located behind individual
letters or parts of a sign but not visible directly through such letters or
parts of the sign to the viewer.
Shrub
A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems
emerging from the ground, or small branches near the ground. Shrubs
may be deciduous or evergreen.
Sidewalk
A paved area public right-of-way running parallel to the street for the
purposes of pedestrian travel and to facilitate pedestrian access to
adjacent streets and land.
Sign
An object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, which is used to
advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or
location by any means, including but not limited to words, letters,
pennants, banners, emblems, trademarks, trade names, insignias,
numerals, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or
projected images or any other attention directing device.
Sign, A-Frame
A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent
structure, that is displayed for a limited period of time, and is
constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or tent-like shape,
hinged or not hinged at the top; each angular face held at an
appropriate distance by a supporting member. Also known as a "menu
board" or "sandwich board sign."
Sign, Animated
A sign which flashes, revolves, rotates, or swings by mechanical means
or which uses a change of lighting to depict action or to create a
special effect or scene.
Sign, Attached
A sign that is affixed directly or indirectly to the exterior of any surface
of any building, to a projecting structure of a building, or to any
outdoor structure.
Sign, Awning Any sign which is a part of a fabric or other non structural awning.
Sign, Canopy
A sign which is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other
fabric-like or plastic protective structure which is extended over a door,
window, or entranceway.
SIgn, Changeable
Copy
A sign which displays messages in which the copy may be arranged or
rearranged by hand.
Sign, Construction
A sign which identifies the architects, engineers, contractors, and
other individuals or firms involved with construction of development,
the name of the building or development, the intended purpose of the
building or development, and/or the expected completion date.
10-36
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Sign, Electronic
Changeable Copy
A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, non-pictorial text
information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol
is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different
combinations of light emitting diodes (LED's), fiber optics, light bulbs,
or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic
changeable copy signs include computer programmable,
microprocessor controlled electronic displays, and also include
projected images or messages with these characteristics onto
buildings or other objects. Electronic changeable copy signs do not
include traffic control or other official signage.
Sign, Flashing
A type of animated sign which contains an intermittent, blinking,
scintillating, or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of
intermittent or flashing light, or an externally mounted intermittent
light source.
Sign, Freestanding
A sign which is placed on or anchored in the ground with one or more
supports that are not part of a building or other structure.
Sign, Governmental
A sign erected by or on behalf of a governmental body to post a legal
notice, identify public property, convey public information of
significant importance, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
Sign, Ground
Surface
A sign composed of manmade or organic materials displayed upon
the surface of the ground.
Sign, Historical or
Memorial
A sign which commemorates a historical person, structure, place, or
event or which denotes, honors, celebrates, or acknowledges an
historical person, structure, place, or event.
Sign, Identification
A sign used to display the name, address, logo or other identifying
symbol of an individual, family, business, institution, service, or
organization occupying the premises; the profession of the occupant;
the name of the building on which the sign is attached; or directory
information in group developments or buildings with multiple tenants.
Sign, Instructional
A sign that provides assistance, with respect to the premises on which
it is maintained, for the direction, safety, or convenience of the public
such as "entrance," "exit," "one way," "telephone," "parking," "no
parking," and similar instructions.
Sign, Marquee A sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.
SIgn, Monument
A monolithic sign in which the bottom of the sign is flush with the
ground.
Sign Owner
A person holding legal title or legal right to occupy or carry on
business in a structure or any facility and shall include each and every
person who shall have title to or benefit of a sign, or for whose benefit
any type sign is erected or maintained. Where there is more than 1
landowner, as defined, their duties and obligations under this
10-37
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Ordinance are joint and several, and shall include the responsibility for
such sign.
Sign, Portable
A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent
structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including but not
limited to signs: designed to be transported by means of wheels;
converted to A- or T- frames; menu and sandwich board signs; gas or
hot-air filled balloons; umbrellas used for advertising; signs attached to
or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way,
unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the
business.
Sign, Projecting
A sign end-mounted or otherwise attached to an exterior wall of a
building which forms an angle with the wall.
Sign, Real Estate
A sign displayed for the purpose of offering for sale, lease, or rent the
land on which the sign is erected, affixed, or otherwise established.
Sign, Roof
A sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof on a
building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.
Sign, Special
Promotion
An advertising activity or circumstance of a business which is not part
of its daily activities or normal routine and in which the display and/or
sale of merchandise, ware, or other tangible items is the sole purpose
for the promotion.
SIgn, Suspended
A sign which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane
surface and is supported by the surface.
Sign, Temporary
A sign that is displayed for a limited period of time and/or is not
permanently mounted.
Sign, Video
A sign consisting of a single computer monitor, video projector or
television set, or multiple computer monitors, video projectors, or
television sets tiled together contiguously or overlapped in order to
form one large screen. Typical display technologies include, but are not
limited to, LCD panels, LED arrays, DLP tiles and rear projection
screens. Such signs may display static text, animation, images or
photos, electronic changeable copy including the use of changing
light to depict action or create special effects, video, or any
combination thereof.
Sign, Wall
A sign attached parallel to, painted on the wall surface of, or erected
and confined within the limits of the outside wall, mansard roof
structure, penthouse, or parapet of any building or structure, which is
supported by a wall, building, or structure, but does not extend
vertically above the highest portion of the roof, and which displays only
1 sign surface.
Sign, Warning
A sign with no commercial message that displays information
pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the public such as
signs warning of high voltage, "no trespassing," and similar directives.
10-38
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Sign, Window
A sign which is painted on, affixed to, or designed to be visible through
a window, excluding displays of merchandise.
Siltation
Sediment transported from its point of origin within the site of a
land-disturbing activity that is deposited on land or is in suspension in
water.
Small Wind Energy
Conversion System
A wind energy facility, constructed as an accessory use, consisting of a
wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics,
which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW per year and a
maximum tower height of 120 feet or less.
Soil and Water
Conservation
Control Plan
The graphic plan and narrative required as a prerequisite for a land
disturbance permit that explains existing conditions, proposed
grading, and measures undertaken to control accelerated soil erosion
and sedimentation.
Solid Waste
Collection Facility
Containers and structures designed to collect and hold solid waste
on-site until transported to a solid waste management facility,
including but not limited to, dumpsters, compactors, bins for trash and
recyclables, etc.
Special Event
A temporary, short-term use of land or structures, not otherwise
allowed as a principal or accessory use by this Ordinance, for concerts,
carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals, exhibitions, religious events and
similar community events.
Special Flood
Hazard Area
The land in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of
being flooded in any given year.
Square
An open space that is defined by streets or adjacent buildings that is
set aside for civic purposes, with landscaping consisting of paved
walks, lawns, trees, and may contain civic buildings.
Stacking Lane
A portion of the vehicular use area on a site that is dedicated to the
temporary storage or "standing" of vehicles engaged in drive-through
use of the site or development. Parking or storage of vehicles is not
permitted within the stacking/standing area.
Start of
Construction
As used in the flood damage prevention standards, the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a
manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or
footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
10-39
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Storm, 100 Year
The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to
be equaled or exceeded, on average, once in 100 years.
Storm, 10 Year
The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to
be equaled or exceeded, on average, once in 10 years.
Storm, 25 Year
The surface runoff resulting from a rainfall of an intensity expected to
be equaled or exceeded, on average, once in 25 years.
Stormwater or
Stormwater Runoff
The direct runoff of water resulting from precipitation in any form.
Stream A watercourse that collects surface runoff.
Street Frontage The length of a lot abutting a public right-of-way or private street.
Street, Collector
A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between cul-de-sac,
local streets and streets of higher classification but which may also
provide direct access to abutting lands. Term also includes sub
collector streets.
Street, Industrial
An existing public or private street that serves as access to industrially
zoned properties exclusively, or serves as access to properties that are
developed with, or are planned to be developed with, wholesale,
transportation, warehousing, utility, manufacturing or other industrial
land uses.
Street, Local
A street whose primary function is to provide access to abutting lands.
This term includes both residential and industrial streets.
Street,
Thoroughfare
An interstate, other freeway, expressway, or parkway links, or other
major street that provides for the expeditious movement of high
volumes of traffic within and through urban areas. Term includes both
major and minor thoroughfare streets.
Street Name and
Address
Assignment
Guidelines and
Policies
A set of guidelines and policies to provide the Planning Board with
direction when naming and assign street names and addresses.
Street Right-of-Way
A strip of land whose legal title rests with the Town or State and is
occupied or intended to be occupied by a travelway for vehicles and is
also available, with the consent of the appropriate governmental
agency, for installation and maintenance of traffic control devices,
traffic signs, street name signs, historical marker signs, water lines,
sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, gas lines, power lines, and
communication lines.
Street Stub
A non permanent dead end street intended to be extended in
conjunction with development on adjacent lots or sites.
Street Tree
A canopy tree planted or existing within or along either side of a street
right-of-way.
10-40
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Streetscape
An area within a public or private street right-of-way that may contain
sidewalks, street furniture, landscaping, street trees, bus shelters,
street lighting, building projections, and other features that create
interest and interaction at the street level.
Structure
Any material constructed, erected or placed in or upon the ground,
including buildings.
Subdivider A person who subdivides land.
Subdivision
All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into 2 or more lots, building
sites, or other divisions when any one or more of those divisions is
created for the purpose of sale or building development (whether
immediate or future) and includes all divisions of land involving the
dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. The following
are not included within this definition and are not subject to any
subdivision regulations in this Ordinance:
a. The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots if the total number of lots is not
increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards
of this Ordinance.
b. The division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres if no street
right-of-way dedication is involved.
c. The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets, or for public transportation system
corridors.
d. The division of a tract in single ownership, the entire area of which
is not greater than 2 acres, into not more than 3 lots, where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are
equal to or exceed the standards of this Ordinance.
e. The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of
a probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under
Chapter 29 of the North Carolina General Statutes.
Subdivision, Minor
A subdivision of land meeting either of the following, that is reviewed
and approved as a final plat with no preliminary plat approval required:
a. Consisting of not more than four (4) lots, fronting on an existing
street, not requiring any new street(s) for access to interior property,
and not requiring extension of public water or sewer lines, OR
b. The entire area of the tract or parcel to be divided is greater than
five (5) acres, no more than three (3) lots result from the division, and
no part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been subdivided in the
ten (10) years prior to this division.
Subordinante
A staff member designated to fulfill the function of the Planning and
Inspections Director or Public Works Director, as appropriate.
10-41
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Substantial
Improvement
Any repair, reconstruction, expansion, or improvement of a structure,
the cost of which exceeds 50 percent of the assessed value of a
structure (derived by tax records) as determined either before the
expansion or improvement begins or before the damage occurred
giving rise to the repair or reconstruction. Substantial improvement
does not include, however, any repair or improvement required to
bring the structure into compliance with existing State or county
health, sanitary, safety, or building ordinance specifications necessary
to ensure safe habitation of the structure.
Surface Water
Buffer
A natural, vegetated, or revegetated area through which stormwater
runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become
channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and
filtering of pollutants.
Sustainable
Development
Features
One or more development features voluntarily provided by an
applicant or developer as a means of promoting sustainable
development and/or taking advantage of available sustainable
development practice incentives.
Tenant
A person who alone or jointly or severally with others occupies a
building under a lease or holds a legal tenancy.
Town The Town of Aberdeen, it's Staff or representatives
Traffic Calming
Device
A natural or constructed feature located within or adjacent to a street
that is designed to reduce motorist speed or vehicle volumes, while at
the same time increasing safety for pedestrians and non-motorized
vehicles.
Traffic Impact
Analysis
A study conducted to evaluate the capacity and safety impacts on the
transportation system from a proposed development and identify
necessary improvements or management strategies to mitigate
negative impacts. Such studies shall be performed by a licensed
professional engineer in accordance with the Traffic Impact Analysis
Policy adopted by the Town of Aberdeen in this Unified Development
Ordinance.
Understory Tree
A species of tree which normally grows to a mature height of 15 to 35
feet.
Use
The purpose or activity for which land or structures are designed,
arranged or intended, or for which land or structures are occupied or
maintained.
Utility Easement
An easement which grants the right to install and maintain utilities
including, but not limited to, water lines, sewer lines, storm sewer lines,
electrical power lines, telephone lines, natural gas lines, and
community antenna television systems.
Vegetation, Native
Any indigenous tree, shrub, ground cover or other plant adapted to
the soil, climatic, and hydrographic conditions occurring on the site.
10-42
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
Vehicular Use Area
Areas used for the parking and circulation of automobiles, trucks, and
motorcycles. Vehicular use areas do not include individual driveways
serving single-family detached residential development.
Vehicular Use Area,
Landscaping
Vegetative material, structures (walls or fences), berms, and associated
ground cover located around the perimeter of a parking lot, or other
vehicular use area.
Velocity
The average velocity of flow through the cross section of the main
channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest. For the purposes of
this definition, the cross section of the main channel is the area
defined by the geometry of the channel plus the area of flow below
the flood height defined by vertical lines at the main channel banks.
Vested Right
A development right that cannot be changed or altered by changes in
regulation.
Wall
For purposes of signage, the vertical exterior surface of a building. The
area of all parallel vertical surfaces along a single building elevation
regardless of offsets shall be counted as one wall. The front of each
unit of a multiple tenant commercial building shall be counted as a
separate wall. The area of an angled wall surface shall be counted as
part of whichever adjoining wall surface it is most parallel with. A 45
degree angled wall may be counted as part of the area of either
adjoining wall, but not as a part of both.
Wall Pack
An exterior lighting device that is flush-mounted on a vertical wall
surface.
Wall, Parapet
A low protective or decorative wall or railing along the edge of a raised
structure such as a roof or balcony.
Water Dependant
Structure
Structure which requires access or proximity to surface waters to fulfill
its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks, and
bulkheads.
Water Quality
Conservation
Easement
A permanent easement conveyed to the Town for the protection of
water quality in which no structures or land-disturbing activities are
allowed.
Water Supply
Watershed
The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a designated
water supply reservoir.
Water Surface
Elevation
The height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas.
Wetlands
Those areas that are inundated or saturated by an accumulation of
surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal conditions do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Wireless
Telecommunication
s Facility
The following definitions relate to wireless telecommunications
facilities:
10-43
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
(a) Abandonment
Cessation of use of a wireless support structure for wireless
telecommunication activity.
(b) Accessory
Equipment
Equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless facility
or wireless support structure. The term includes utility or transmission
equipment, power supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment
buildings, cabinets and storage sheds, shelters or similar structures.
(c) Antenna
Communications equipment that transmits and receives
electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of
wireless telecommunications services.
(d) Base Station
A station at a specific site authorized to communicate with mobile
stations, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennae, coaxial
cables, power supplies and other associated electronics.
(e) Collocation
The placement or installation of wireless facilities on existing
structures, including electrical transmission towers, water towers,
buildings and other structures including wireless support structures
that are capable of supporting the attachment of such facilities in
compliance with applicable codes and ordinances.
(f) Concealed
Wireless Facility
(Stealth Wireless
Facility)
A wireless facility that is integrated as an architectural feature of an
existing structure or any new wireless support structure designed to
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers so the
purpose of the facility or support structure is not readily apparent to a
casual observer.
(g) Electrical
Transmission Tower
An electrical transmission structure used to support high voltage
overhead power lines. The term shall not include any utility pole
(h) Equipment
Compound
An area surrounding or near the base of a wireless support structure
within which are located wireless facilities.
(i) Existing Structure
A wireless support structure, erected prior to the application for
collocation or substantial modification under the wireless
telecommunication facility provisions, that is capable of supporting
the attachment of wireless facilities, including but not limited to
electrical transmission towers, buildings and water towers. The term
shall not include any utility pole.
(j) Fall Zone
The area in which a wireless support structure may be expected to fall
in the event of a structural failure, as measured by engineering
standards.
(k) Monopole
A single, freestanding pole type structure supporting one or more
antennae. The term shall not include any utility pole.
10-44
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
(l) Ordinary
Maintenance
Ensuring that wireless facilities and wireless support structures are
kept in good operating condition. Ordinary maintenance includes
inspections, testing and modifications that maintain functional
capacity and structural integrity. Examples are: strengthening a
wireless support structure's foundation or the structure itself;
replacing antennae of similar size, weight, shape and color; replacing
equipment within an existing equipment compound; and relocating
antennae to different height levels on an existing monopole or tower
upon which it is currently located.
(m) Replacement
Pole
A pole of equal proportions and of equal height - or such other height
that would not constitute a substantial modification to an existing
structure - in order to support wireless facilities or to accommodate
collocation. A replacement pole requires the removal of the wireless
support structure it replaces.
(n) Substantial
Modification
The mounting of a proposed wireless facility or facilities on a wireless
support structure which:
(i) Increases the existing vertical height of the wireless support
structure by the greater of;
(a) more than 10 percent, or
(b) the height of 1 additional antenna array with separation from
the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, or
(ii) Involves adding an appurtenance to the body of a wireless
support structure that protrudes horizontally from the edge of the
support structure more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the
support structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is
greater (except where necessary to shelter the antenna from
inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the support structure
via cable), or
(iii) Increases the square footage of the existing equipment
compound by more than 2,500 square feet, or
(iv) Adds antennae that would increase the girth (width) of the
support structure by more than 20 feet.
(o) Temporary
Wireless
Communications
Facility
A portable, self-contained wireless facility that can be moved to a
location and set up to provide wireless services on a temporary or
emergency basis. Also known as a "COW" or "cell-on-wheels". A COW is
normally vehicle mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the
antenna support structure.
(p) Tower
A general term used to describe wireless support structures other than
for concealed wireless facilities. Includes lattice-type structures (guyed
or freestanding) and monopoles that support one or more antenna.
(q) Utility Pole
A structure, usually a wooden or metal pole, owned and/or operated by
a public utility, municipality, electric membership corporation or rural
electric cooperative that is specifically for and used to carry lines,
cables, or wires, primarily for local distribution, and/or to provide
lighting.
10-45
Town of Aberdeen - Unified Development Ordinance Chapter 10 : Measurements & Definitions (v3a)
(r) Water Tower or
Tank
A water storage tank, standpipe or elevated tank situated on a support
structure, constructed for use as a reservoir or facility to store or deliver
water.
(s) Wireless Facility
The set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the
wireless support structure, necessary to provide wireless
telecommunications services, including but not limited to; antennae,
accessory equipment, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power
supplies, and cabling.
(t) Wireless Support
Structure
A freestanding structure such as a monopole or lattice tower designed
to support wireless facilities, or a building or other structure proposed
for and capable of supporting such facilities.
Zone Lot
One or more lots of record in 1 undivided ownership with sufficient
total area, area exclusive of easements and flood hazards, total
dimensions, street access, and frontage to permit construction
thereon of a principal building together with its required parking and
landscape yards. In multi-family or single-family attached
developments, the zone lot shall be considered to be the entire
development.
Zoning Map, Official See "Official Zoning Map".
10-46