
Bessemer City, NC Code of Ordinances


CITY OF BESSEMER CITY,
NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2018 S-13 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through HB 993, passed 6-13-18
State legislation current through 2018 Legislative Service, Pamphlet No. 3





Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com




CHARTER



Section



CHAPTER I.  ORGANIZATION AND POWERS



Article A.  Incorporation of City; Corporate Powers




   1.10   Incorporation of City and corporate powers





   1.12   Exercise of power





   1.14   Powers granted by Charter not exclusive




Article B.  Municipal Corporate Boundaries




   1.16   Corporate limits defined





   1.18   City map




Article C.  Charter Amendments




   1.20   City Attorney to recommend changes




CHAPTER II.  MAYOR AND COUNCIL



Article A.  Council; Composition, Terms, Qualifications, and Compensation




   2.10   Composition of the City Council





   2.12   Terms, qualifications, and vacancies





   2.14   Compensation and reimbursement of officials





   2.16   Rules of business




Article B.  Organization and Procedures




   2.20   Organizational meeting





   2.22   Regular and special meetings




Article C.  Powers and Duties




   2.30   Exercise of powers




Article D.  Ordinance Procedures




   2.40   Applicable general law





   2.42   Effect of ordinances on City property





   2.44   Code of ordinances




CHAPTER III.  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES



Article A.  Organization of City Government




   3.10   Organization




Article B.  City Manager




   3.20   Appointment





   3.22   Powers





   3.24   Interim City Manager





   3.26   Qualified candidates




Article C.  Personnel




   3.30   Hiring, compensation, and benefits





   3.32   Defense of employees and officers




Article D.  City Clerk




   3.42   City Clerk




Article E.  City Attorney




   3.52   City Attorney




Article F.  Tax Collector




   3.62   Tax Collector




Article G.  Police Chief




   3.72   Police Chief




Article H.  Miscellaneous




   3.80   Official bonds





   3.82   Reimbursement of City officials





   3.84   Appointive City officers




Article I.  Finance and Fiscal Matters




   3.90   General authority to levy and collect taxes





   3.92   Fiscal year; adoption of annual budget





   3.94   Inspection of records




Article J.  Procurement and Property Management




   3.102   Contracting, purchasing, bidding, and property management
procedures





   3.104   Sale and disposition of property





   3.106   Easements





   3.108   Conflict of interest




Article K.  Audits




   3.120   Audits




CHAPTER IV.  REGULATORY AND    PLANNING FUNCTIONS



Article A.  Administration of Justice




   4.10   Administration of justice




Article B.  Planning, Zoning, Building Regulations, and Related Measures




   4.20   Authority





   4.22   Public hearings on zoning changes




Article C.  Utility Regulations




   4.30   Operation of water, sewer, and gas systems and other utilities





   4.32   Connection by abutting property owners





   4.34   Utility charges





   4.36   Deposits





   4.38   Water and sewer connection





   4.40   Natural gas





   4.42   Public utility franchises




Article D.  Vehicles and Traffic




   4.50   Council to adopt regulations




Article E.  Roads and Streets




   4.60   General authority





   4.62   Power to classify streets and establish building setback lines





   4.64   Enforcement




Article F.  Improvements and Special Assessments




   4.70   Local improvements





   4.72   Special assessments





   4.74   Planting strip and driveway maintenance




Article G.  Annexation




   4.76   Annexation




CHAPTER V.  ELECTIONS




   5.10   Regular and special elections. Time





   5.12   Form of voting





   5.14   Wards





   5.16   Polling places and ballots





   5.18   Absentee voting





   5.22   Statutes governing City elections





   5.26   Contract services




CHAPTER VI.  MISCELLANEOUS



Article A.  Claims Against the City




   6.10   Claims




Article B.  Claims by the City




   6.12   Claims




Article C.  Insurance




   6.14   Insurance




Article D.  Continuance of Contracts in Effect Prior to Charter




   6.16   Contracts




Article E.  Continuance of Ordinances in Effect Prior to Charter




   6.18   Ordinances




Article F.  Continuance and Ratification of Action Taken Prior to Charter




   6.20   Prior action




Article G.  Repeal of Laws in Conflict with Charter




   6.22   Repeal




Article H.  Severability Clause




   6.24   Severability




Article I.  Applicability of Charter




   6.26   Applicability




Article J.  Structure and Language




   6.28   Headings





   6.30   Gender




Article K.  Statutory References




   6.32   References




CHAPTER I.  ORGANIZATION AND POWERS



ARTICLE A.  INCORPORATION OF CITY; CORPORATE POWERS



SECTION 1.10.  INCORPORATION OF CITY AND CORPORATE POWERS.



   (a)   The inhabitants of the City of Bessemer City, in the County of
Gaston, State of North Carolina, shall continue to be and constitute a body
politic incorporated within the boundaries as estab- lished in Article B of
this Chapter, or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, may
have and use a corporate seal, and shall have perpetual succession and shall
be a city under the name and style of “Bessemer City.” Under such name
the City shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of
property which now belong to the cor- poration; may sue and be sued; may
contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and
personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold, or in any manner conveyed or
dedicated to, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, or otherwise acquired by
it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same;
may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will and shall have
and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers,
functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature
whatsoever.



   (b)   In addition to the foregoing, the City shall have, acting
through its Council, among other things, power to make and provide for the
execution of such ordinances for Bessemer City (hereinafter referred to as
“the City”) as they may deem proper not incon- sistent with the laws of
the State of North Carolina, now or hereafter granted to municipalities under
the general law of the State of North Carolina, and the City is specifically
granted in addition to the fore- going, the following powers which are in
addition to all other powers and authority set out in this Charter:



      (1)   Eminent Domain. To condemn land required for any
governmental purpose, both within and without the City limits, and in such
excess as may be required to protect or preserve same, under the same
procedure as now or hereafter provided in the General Statutes.



      (2)   Exercise of Police Power. To adopt and enforce within
its corporate limits and within one mile thereof police, sanitary, and other
police power regulations not inconsistent with the General Statutes and all
amendments thereto, including extraterritorial zoning authority as authorized
by the General Statutes which are hereby declared to be applicable to the
City, provided, however, that the boundaries of such corporate limits and the
one-mile area be defined in terms of geographical features identifiable on
the ground, to the extent feasible, as provided by general statute.



      (3)   Borrow Money. To borrow money within the limits
prescribed by law.



      (4)   Appropriate Money. To appropriate the money of the City
for all lawful purposes in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
General Statutes.



      (5)   Payment of Debt. To provide for the payment of existing
legal indebtedness and of any binding obligation that may be made from time
to time by the City and to appropriate funds and levy taxes for that purpose.



      (6)   Ordinances to Preserve Order. To pass ordinances for the
due observance of Sunday and for maintenance of order in the vicinity of
churches, schools, and public buildings.



      (7)   Cemeteries. To own, establish, regulate and operate one
or more cemeteries and to regulate the burying of the dead.



      (8)   Ownership of Public Facilities. To own, operate,
maintain, or cease to maintain, parks, hospitals, auditoriums, swimming
pools, community centers, playgrounds, stadiums, athletic parks and fields,
and such other facilities for the benefit and welfare of its citizens and to
finance same out of tax revenue or any portion of the General Fund; provided
such appropriations do not exceed 10% of the gross tax receipts during any
fiscal year.



      (9)   Storm Drainage. To require that all property owners
provide adequate drainage facilities to the end that their premises be kept
free of standing water and permit the natural flow of water thereon to be
taken care of, and that in case of failure on the part of such owner or
owners to provide the same, after due written notice, to go upon the premises
and construct the necessary facilities and charge the costs thereof against
said premises to be collected as in the case of taxes.



      (10) Automobiles. To control, regulate, or prohibit the licensing
and operating of junk yards and auto wrecking companies in the City.



      (11) Ordinance Enforcement. To prescribe fines, forfeitures, and
penalties for the breach of any ordinance enforcing the powers granted in
this Charter or by general law and to provide for recovery of such fines and
forfeitures and cost of enforcement of such penalties.



      (12) Ordinances to Maintain Peace and Welfare. To pass such
ordinances as are expedient for maintaining peace, good government, and the
welfare of the City and the morals and happiness of its citizens, and for the
performance of all municipal functions.



      (13) General Duties and Powers. To do and perform all other
duties and powers authorized by law; and those prescribed by General Statute
and those necessarily implied by law.



   No liability shall accrue to the City or its officers, agencies,
employees, or elected officials for the failure of said City or its officers,
employees, agencies, or elected officials to perform any duty or exercise any
powers above enumerated or hereafter set out in this Charter, the General
Statutes, or the general laws of the State of North Carolina.



   Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, or the general laws of
North Carolina, the City Council shall have authority to determine by whom
and in what manner the powers granted by this section shall be exercised.



SECTION 1.12.  EXERCISE OF POWER.



   All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the City,
its officers, agencies, employees, or elected officials shall be carried into
execution as provided by this Charter or, if this Charter makes no provision,
as provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, and as provided
by the general laws of North Carolina pertaining to municipalities, and their
officers, agencies, employees, and elected officials.



SECTION 1.14.  POWERS GRANTED BY CHARTER NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The enumeration of particular powers, rights, privileges, franchises,
and immunities by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive,
but in addition to the powers enumerated or implied therein, or as
appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City shall have and may exercise all
other powers which under the Constitution and laws of North Carolina are now
granted or may be granted in the future to muni- cipalities. The powers
herein granted are in addition to and not in substitution of existing powers,
or powers hereafter granted to municipal corporations under the Constitution
and laws of North Carolina. Except as limited or restricted or prohibited by
the Constitution of North Carolina or this Charter, the City shall have and
may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and
immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.



ARTICLE B.  MUNICIPAL CORPORATE BOUNDARIES



SECTION 1.16.  CORPORATE LIMITS DEFINED.



   The corporate limits of the City shall be those existing at the time of
ratification of this restated Charter with such alterations as may be made
from time to time in the manner provided by law.



SECTION 1.18.  CITY MAP.



   The city engineer or such other appropriate and qualified person shall
prepare a map of such boundaries to be entitled “Map of Bessemer City
Limits” and shall also prepare a written description of the corporate
boundaries as shown on said map to be designated “Description of Bessemer
City Limits.” The city manager, if any, or Mayor shall at all times
maintain said map and description in his office as the official map and
description of the corporate boundaries of the City and shall be open to
inspection by any person at any time during normal business hours; provided,
however, that the City shall have authority to extend its corporate limits in
any fashion as provided for by the general laws of North Carolina. The city
engineer or such other appropriate person shall indicate any alteration by
making appropriate changes in or additions to said map and description.
Photographic, typed, or other copies of said official map or description,
certified by the city clerk, shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and
shall have the same force and effect as would the original map or
description. When required from time to time, the City Council may provide
for the redrawing of the official map or the rewriting of the official
description. A redrawn map and a rewritten description shall supersede the
earlier map and description which are replaced.



ARTICLE C.  CHARTER AMENDMENTS



SECTION 1.20.  CITY ATTORNEY TO RECOMMEND CHANGES.



   As soon as possible after the adjournment of each General Assembly, the
city attorney shall present to the City Council copies of all local laws
relating to the property, affairs, and government of the City that were
enacted by such General Assembly, whether or not in terms amending this
Charter, which he recom- mends to be incorporated into this Charter. Such
recommendations may include suggestions for re- numbering or rearranging the
provisions of such laws, for providing titles and catch lines, and for such
other changes in arrangement and form that do not change the law as may be
thought necessary to implement the purposes of this section. After
considering the recom- mendations of the city attorney, the City Council may
provide for the incorporation of such laws into this Charter in order to
maintain at all times a current and accurate Charter.



CHAPTER II.  MAYOR AND COUNCIL .



ARTICLE A.  COUNCIL: COMPOSITION, TERMS, QUALIFICATIONS, AND COMPENSATION



SECTION 2.10.  COMPOSITION OF THE CITY COUNCIL.



   The membership of the City Council shall consist of a Mayor and six
Council members who shall be elected in the manner provided in this Charter.



SECTION 2.12.  TERMS, QUALIFICATIONS, AND VACANCIES.



   (a)   The term of office for the Mayor shall be a four (4) year
term, beginning the day and hour of the organizational meeting of the
Council, and shall continue until their successor is elected and qualified.
The terms of office for all members of City Council shall be four (4) years
staggered, beginning the day and hour of the organizational meeting of the
Council, and shall continue until their successors are elected and qualified.



   (b)   No person shall be eligible to be elected to the City Council
or to serve thereon unless he is a qualified voter and resident of the City.
Any qualified elector of the City who has been a resident of the ward from
which he is elected for at least 30 days prior to election shall be eligible
to serve as a Council member for such ward.



   (c)   If any person elected as a Council member shall refuse to be
qualified, or for any reason cannot be qualified, or if there is a vacancy
occurring after his election and qualification as a result of death,
resignation, removal of the place of residence of a Council member from
Bessemer City or the ward for which such Council member was elected,
conviction of or submission to a felonious charge, a declaration of lunacy,
or for any other cause as decreed by a court of competent jurisdiction or by
operation of law, or if any such person becomes unable to discharge the
duties of the office of Council member, the Council shall choose some
qualified person who has been a resident of the ward in which the vacancy
occurred for at least four months prior to the date of appointment to serve
as Council member in his place and stead for such unexpired term. Council
members so selected shall have all authority and powers given by this Charter
to regularly elected Council members. Such Council member shall be elected by
a majority vote of the remaining members of the City Council in regular or
special meeting. The City Council shall have authority to fill any vacancy
resulting from a failure of candidates filing.



   (d)   If any person elected as Mayor shall refuse to be qualified,
or for any reason cannot be qualified, or if there is a vacancy occurring
after his election and qualification as a result of death, resignation,
removal of residence from Bessemer City, conviction of or submission to a
felonious charge, a declaration of lunacy, or for any other cause as decreed
by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law, or if any such
person becomes unable to discharge the duties of the office of Mayor, Council
shall choose some qualified person residing in the City for such unexpired
term to act as Mayor in his place and stead. A Mayor so selected shall have
all authority and powers given by this Charter to a regularly elected Mayor.
Such Mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the remaining members of
the City Council in regular or special meeting.



   (e)   No person elected to the City Council, whether he qualifies or
not, shall, during the term for which he was elected, be appointed to or
serve in any other position or office of trust or profit in the City
government. However, when a vacancy exists or shall occur in the office of
Mayor, a Council member shall not be barred from selection as Mayor for the
unexpired term.



(Am. Ord. passed 2-9-15)



SECTION 2.14.  COMPENSATION AND REIMBURSEMENT OF OFFICIALS.



   The City Council may fix the compensation of the Mayor and the Council
members and any other elected officers of the City in such sums as may be
just and reasonable. Any increase in the compensation of Mayor or Council
member shall not take effect until after the next succeeding regular
municipal election. The Mayor, Council members or other elected officers
shall be entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the course
of performing their official duties at rates not in excess of those allowed
to other City officers and employees.



SECTION 2.16.  RULES OF BUSINESS.



   The City Council shall determine its own rules and order of business.



ARTICLE B.  ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES



SECTION 2.20.  ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.



   On the first regular meeting date in December following the election in
the immediately preceding November, the newly elected Mayor and Council
members shall meet at its usual place for holding its meetings in Bessemer
City, and the newly elected Mayor and Council members shall take their oath
of office and assume the duties of their office. The Council members shall
choose from its members a Mayor Pro Tem, who shall hold office for a term of
two years. The organization of the Council shall take place notwithstanding
the absence, death, refusal to serve, or nonelection of one or more members;
provided that at least four of the persons entitled to be members are present.



SECTION 2.22.  REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (a)   Regular Meetings. Following the organiza- tional meeting, the
Council shall designate the time for its regular meetings by resolution or
ordinance and shall convene for such regular meeting not less than once each
month.



   (b)   Special Meetings. The Mayor, or in the absence of the Mayor,
the Mayor Pro Tem, or a majority of the Council members at any time may call
a special meeting of the City Council by causing written notice stating the
time, place and purpose of the special meeting, to be delivered to each
member or left at his dwelling and also at his place of business at least six
hours before such special meeting. Only the business stated in the written
notice may be transacted at a special meeting so called, except when the
Mayor and all Council members are present and consent to the transaction of
other business. Meetings of the Council may also be held at any time the
Mayor and all Council members are present and consent thereto or when called
or announced at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Council at which time
all members of the Council are present.



   (c)   Attendance and Quorum. The Mayor and City Council members
shall be expected to attend all Council meetings, both regular and special,
and shall endeavor to attend at least 75% of such meetings. A majority of the
City Council shall constitute a quorum. In determining whether a quorum is
present, the Mayor shall be counted as a member of the City Council.



   (d)   All Meetings Public. Unless otherwise provided by law, all
meetings shall be open to the public, and the Council shall sit with open
doors at all of its legislative sessions.



   (e)   Minutes of Meeting to Be Kept. The City Council shall keep a
journal of its proceedings which, except as to those matters exempted by law,
shall be a public record. All minutes shall be maintained by the city clerk.



   (f)   Mayor to Preside. The Mayor, who shall be the official head of
the City, shall preside at all meetings of the Council, if present. In the
absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside, and in the absence of
both, a chairman pro tem shall be chosen to preside at such meeting.



   (g)   Voting.



      (1)   Mayor and Council Obligated to Vote.  Neither the Mayor
nor any Council member shall be excused from voting except upon matters
involving the consideration of his own official conduct, or involving matters
in which he has a financial or prejudicial interest. An unexcused failure to
vote by the Mayor or a Council member who is present shall be deemed an
affirmative vote and shall be so recorded. A Council member who has withdrawn
from a meeting without being excused shall be counted as present for the
purpose of determining whether or not a quorum is present, and if a vote is
taken during the absence of a Council member, his vote shall be deemed an
affirmative vote as set forth above.



      (2)   Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor shall have no vote
except in the case of a tie. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem,
or the Chairman Pro Tem shall vote as herein provided for the Mayor.



      (3)   Quorum. A majority of the members present shall be
sufficient to pass any motion, resolu- tion, or ordinance unless a greater
vote is required by law or is set out herein.



      (4)   Public Hearings. The Council may con- tinue any public
hearing without further advertise- ment. If a quorum is not present at the
time fixed for such hearing, it shall automatically be continued to the next
regular Council meeting.



ARTICLE C.  POWERS AND DUTIES



SECTION 2.30.  EXERCISE OF POWERS.



   (a)   City Council. The City Council shall direct the exercise of
all of the powers of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter.
In addition to other powers conferred upon it by law, the City Council may
adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, rules and regulations
as may be necessary or appropriate for the preservation of the comfort,
convenience, security, good order, better government, or general welfare of
the City and its inhabitants. The Council may enforce the same by imposing
penalties for violations and may compel the performance of the duties imposed
upon others by suitable penalties.



   (b)   Mayor. The Mayor shall be the official representative of the
City and shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The powers and
duties of the Mayor shall be such as are conferred upon him by this Charter,
by the General Statutes, and by general law, together with such others as may
be conferred by the Council.



   (c)   Mayor Pro Tem. During the absence or disability of the Mayor,
the functions of his office shall be maintained by the Mayor Pro Tem. The
Mayor Pro Tem shall preside at all meetings of the Council in the absence of
the Mayor, but shall only vote when so presiding as herein provided for the
Mayor.



   (d)   Council to be Judge of Elections. The City Council shall be
the judge of the elections and qualifications of its members and the Mayor,
and in such cases shall have power to subpoena witnesses and compel the
production of all pertinent books, records, and papers; but the decision of
the City Council in any case shall be subject to review by a Court of
competent jurisdiction.



ARTICLE D.  ORDINANCE PROCEDURES



SECTION 2.40.  APPLICABLE GENERAL LAW.



   Except as otherwise herein provided, the adop- tion, amendment, and
repeal of ordinances shall be governed by provisions of general laws applying
to municipalities.



SECTION 2.42.  EFFECT OF ORDINANCES ON CITY PROPERTY.



   Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance, all ordinances shall apply
to property and rights-of-way belonging to the City and located outside the
corporate limits.



SECTION 2.44.  CODE OF ORDINANCES.



   The Council shall adopt and issue a copy of its ordinances known as the
“Code of Ordinances of Bessemer City.” The code may be reproduced by
printing, mimeographing, photoduplication, offset or similar process, and may
be issued as a securely bound book or books with periodic separately bound
supplements or as a loose leaf book maintained by replacing pages.



CHAPTER III.  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES



ARTICLE A.  ORGANIZATION OF CITY GOVERNMENT



SECTION 3.10.  ORGANIZATION.



   The Council may create, change, abolish, and consolidate offices,
positions, departments, boards, commissions, and agencies of the City
government and generally organize and reorganize the City government in order
to promote orderly and efficient administration of City affairs, except as
may be other- wise provided by this Charter and by the applicable general
laws of the State of North Carolina.



ARTICLE B.  CITY MANAGER



SECTION 3.20.  APPOINTMENT.



   The City Council shall appoint a city manager to serve at its pleasure.
He shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative
qualifica- tions, and the city manager need not be a resident of the City at
the time of his appointment but shall be required to become a resident of the
City within six months following his appointment. The individual appointed
city manager is eligible to serve in more than one appointive capacity but
not as an elected official. He shall receive such compensation as the Council
may fix.



SECTION 3.22.  POWERS.



   The city manager shall be the chief administrator of the City. He shall
be responsible to the Council for administering all municipal affairs placed
in his charge and shall have the powers and duties set out in the applicable
provisions of the General Statutes. However, the city manager shall not have
any authority to hire or fire the City Clerk, City Attorney, or the Police
Chief.



SECTION 3.24.  INTERIM CITY MANAGER.



   When the position of city manager is vacant, the Council shall
designate a qualified person to exercise the powers and perform the duties of
manager until the vacancy is filled.



SECTION 3.26.  QUALIFIED CANDIDATES.



   Any duly qualified person shall be eligible for the position of city
manager other than the Mayor or members of the City Council.



ARTICLE C.  PERSONNEL



SECTION 3.30.  HIRING, COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS.



   (a)   Pay and Allowances. The Council shall approve the schedule of
pay, expense allowance, and other compensation of all City employees and may
adopt position classification plans. The Council may purchase life insurance
and health insurance for the benefit of all or any class of City employees as
a part of their compensation, and may provide other fringe benefits for City
employees.



   (b)   Ordinances and Regulations. The Council may adopt or provide
for rules and regulations or ordinances concerning but not limited to annual
leave, sick leave with full pay, or with partial pay supplementing workers'
compensation payments for employees injured in accidents arising out of and
in the course of employment, hours of employment, holidays, working
conditions, service award and incentive award programs, other personnel
policies, and any other measures that promote the hiring and retention of
capable, diligent and honest career employees.



SECTION 3.32.  DEFENSE OF EMPLOYEES AND OFFICERS.



   Upon request made by or in behalf of any employee or officer, or former
employee or officer, the Council, in its discretion, may provide for the
defense of any civil or criminal action or proceeding brought against such
employee or officer either in his official or in his individual capacity, or
both, on account of any act done or omission made, or any act allegedly done
or omission allegedly made, in the scope and course of his employment or duty
as an employee or officer of the City. The defense may be provided by the
City by its counsel, or by employing other counsel, or by purchasing
insurance which requires that the insurer provide the defense.



ARTICLE D.  CITY CLERK



SECTION 3.42.  CITY CLERK.



   The city manager shall appoint a city clerk to serve at the city
manager’s pleasure. The city clerk shall give notice of meetings of the
Council, keep a journal of the proceedings of the Council, be custodian of
all City records entrusted to him, and shall perform any other duties that
may be required by law, by the Council, or by the city manager. In addition,
the city manager may appoint or provide for one or more deputy city clerks
who shall have full authority to exercise and perform any of the powers and
duties of the city clerk that the city manager may specify.



(Am. HB 993, passed 6-13-18)



ARTICLE E.  CITY ATTORNEY



SECTION 3.52.  CITY ATTORNEY.



   The Council may appoint a city attorney to serve at its pleasure, shall
prescribe his duties and approve his rate of compensation. The Council may
appoint or provide for one or more associates or assistant city attorneys who
shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the Council and shall have
full authority to exercise and perform any of the powers and duties of the
city attorney that may be specified by the Council or the city attorney.



ARTICLE F.  TAX COLLECTOR



SECTION 3.62.  TAX COLLECTOR.



   The Council shall appoint a tax collector to collect taxes levied by
the Council. The Council may in its discretion designate some official or
employee of the City who has other duties to perform also the duties of tax
collector. The Council shall fix the compensation of the tax collector and
the tax collector shall serve at its pleasure. It shall be the duty of the
tax collector to employ all lawful means to collect all taxes levied by the
Council and to perform such other duties as are prescribed by law or as might
be directed by the Council. The Council at its discretion may appoint one or
more deputy tax collectors to serve at its pleasure and to receive such
compensation as fixed by the Council. Deputy tax collectors shall have the
authority to do and perform under the direction of the tax collector any act
which the tax collector himself might perform unless the scope of authority
of the deputy tax collector is specifically limited by the Council or by law.



ARTICLE G.  POLICE CHIEF



SECTION 3.72.  POLICE CHIEF.



   The City Council may appoint a police chief to serve at its pleasure,
shall prescribe his duties, and fix his compensation.



ARTICLE H.  MISCELLANEOUS



SECTION 3.80.  OFFICIAL BONDS.



   The officers, employees, and elected officials of the City, both
elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts
and upon such terms and conditions as the Council may from time to time
require. The City may purchase and pay the premium for such bonds if it
elects to do so.



SECTION 3.82.  REIMBURSEMENT OF CITY OFFICIALS.



   The City Council is hereby authorized and empowered to reimburse any
City official for expenses incurred while upon official business.



SECTION 3.84.  APPOINTIVE CITY OFFICERS.



   The Council may appoint one person to fill any two or more positions
listed in this Article.



ARTICLE I.  FINANCE AND FISCAL MATTERS



SECTION 3.90.  GENERAL AUTHORITY TO LEVY AND COLLECT TAXES.



   To raise revenue for defraying expenses and incident to the proper
government of the City, the Council may, except as otherwise provided by law,
levy and collect:



   (1)   A tax on real and personal property and on all other property
subject to taxation;



   (2)   A tax on all trades, occupations, pro- fessions, businesses,
and franchises carried on within the City;



   (3)   Any other taxes authorized by general law, by local act of the
General Assembly or by a vote of the citizens of the municipality as provided
by law. The power to impose the tax shall include the power to impose
reasonable penalties for failure to declare tax liability, if required, or to
impose penalties or interest for failure to pay taxes lawfully due within the
time prescribed by law or ordinance. The power to impose the tax shall also
include the power to provide for its administration in the manner not
inconsistent with the statute authorizing the tax.



SECTION 3.92.  FISCAL YEAR; ADOPTION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.



   The fiscal year of the City shall be from July 1 through June 30.
During such fiscal year, the City shall operate under an annual balanced
budget which shall be adopted and administered in accordance with Chapter
159, Article 3 of the General Statutes. The City shall be required to adopt a
financial budget by September 1 of each year for the next year.



SECTION 3.94.  INSPECTION OF RECORDS.



   All records and accounts in every office and department of the City
shall be open for inspection by any citizen or representative of the press at
all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the City
Council, except records or documents the exposure of which would tend to
defeat the lawful purpose which they are intended to accomplish or otherwise
made confidential by law.



ARTICLE J.  PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT



SECTION 3.102.  CONTRACTING, PURCHASING, BIDDING, AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT
PROCEDURES.



   All contracts, except as otherwise provided for in this Charter, or by
law, shall be authorized and approved by the Council and reduced to writing
in order to be binding upon the City.



   Before making any purchase of contract supplies, materials, equipment,
or contractual services, oppor- tunity shall be given for competition, under
such rules and regulations and with such exceptions as the City Council may
prescribe by ordinance. Unless other- wise limited by ordinance, all expenses
for supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services involving sums
greater than the limits imposed by the General Statutes shall be made on a
written contract, and such contract shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder after such public notice and competition as may be
prescribed by ordinances and in accordance with applicable provisions of the
General Statutes.



   Before beginning any City improvement costing more than the maximum sum
permitted by the General Statutes, an opportunity shall be given for
competition, under such rules and regulations and with such exceptions as the
City Council may pre-scribe by ordinance. Unless otherwise limited by
ordinance, all City improvements costing more than the maximum limits imposed
by the General Statutes shall be executed by written contract except where
such improvement is authorized by the City Council to be executed directly by
a City department in conformity with detailed plans, specifications and
estimates. All such contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible
bidder after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed by
ordinances and in accordance with G.S. § 143-129 provided the City Council
shall have the power to reject any or all bids and exercise its discretion in
the selection of a bid.



SECTION 3.104.  SALE AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY.



   The City by private sale, sale on sealed bids, or public auction may,
in accordance with applicable provisions of the General Statutes upon such
terms and conditions as it deems wise exchange, enter into agreements
regarding the joint use of, lease or sale of any interest in real or personal
property which it may legally own.



SECTION 3.106.  EASEMENTS.



   The City shall have authority without complying with the provisions of
this Article to grant easements over, through, under, or across any City
property or the right-of-way of any public street or alley that is not a part
of the State highway system. Easements in a street or alley right-of-way
shall not be granted if the easement would substantially impair or hinder the
use of the street or alley as a way of passage.



SECTION 3.108.  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   Any officer, department head, employee, or member of the Council who
has financial interest, direct or indirect, in any proposed contract with the
City or in any proposed sale of any land, materials, supplies, or services to
the City or to a contractor supplying the City shall make known that interest
and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise partici- pating in the making
of such contract or sale. Any officer, department head, employee, or member
of the Council who willfully violates the requirements of this section shall
be guilty of malfeasance in office or position. A violation of this section
with the know- ledge expressed or implied of the person or corpora- tion
contracting with or making a sale to the City shall render the contract void.



ARTICLE K.  AUDITS



SECTION 3.120.  AUDITS.



   The City Council shall order an independent audit made of all accounts
of the City government by a certified public accountant selected by the City
Council and said accountant shall have no personal interest directly or
indirectly in the financial affairs of the City government or its officers.
This audit shall be made annually at the end of the fiscal year. The City
Council shall have the authority to order an independent audit at any other
time they should so desire. The annual audit herein provided for shall be
made available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk.



CHAPTER IV.  REGULATORY AND PLANNING FUNCTIONS



ARTICLE A.  ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE



SECTION 4.10.  ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE.



   The Council may offer and pay rewards for the conviction of any person
or persons alleged to have committed criminal offenses which, in the judgment
of the Council, involve serious danger to the public peace or public safety.
The Council shall fix the terms, conditions, and amounts of such rewards. The
rewards shall be paid only by order of the Council from nontax revenues in
the general fund of the City; and the Council shall, in its discretion,
determine who shall be entitled to the collection of any reward. In addition,
the Council may allocate funds from nontax revenues in the general fund of
the City for payment of informant's fees concerning such criminal offenses.



ARTICLE B.  PLANNING, ZONING, BUILDING REGULATIONS AND RELATED MEASURES



SECTION 4.20.  AUTHORITY.



   (a)   Authority Granted. For the purpose of pro- moting the orderly
growth, expansion, and develop- ment of the City and the surrounding one-mile
area, the Council is hereby authorized to exercise any planning, zoning,
subdivision, and building regulation powers (including plumbing, heating,
cooling, or electrical regulation powers) now or hereafter con- ferred upon
the City and vested in the Council by this Charter, the General Statutes, or
any other law applicable to the City.



   (b)   City May Contract for Services. The City Council may contract
with another governmental unit, agency or department for the performance of
the services authorized pursuant to this Article as allowed by statute.



   (c)   Enforcement. In order to enforce properly the provisions of
any planning, zoning, or subdivision ordinance or building regulation the
Council shall require by ordinance that prior to the beginning of any
construction, reconstruction, or alteration of any building or structure or
for plumbing, heating, cooling, or electrical installations within said area
a permit or permits be obtained therefor from the inspections superintendent
of the City.



   (d)   Powers Granted Not Exclusive. The powers herein granted to the
City are intended to be supple- mentary to any powers now or hereafter
conferred upon it.



SECTION 4.22.  PUBLIC HEARINGS ON ZONING CHANGES.



   Before adopting or amending any zoning regula- tions, restrictions, or
boundaries, the Council after first referring the matter to the Bessemer City
Planning and Zoning Commission (commonly referred to as the “Planning
Board”) for its recom-mendation shall hold a public hearing in accordance
with the applicable ordinance.



ARTICLE C.  UTILITY REGULATIONS



SECTION 4.30.  OPERATION OF WATER, SEWER, AND GAS SYSTEMS AND OTHER
UTILITIES.



   (a)   Authority Granted. Subject to the General Statutes, Federal
Law and Regulations, and applicable general law, the City Council may:



      (1)   Provide for the construction or acquisi- tion and
operation of utilities and utility systems;



      (2)   Acquire any real or personal property necessary or
incidental thereto, including equipment machinery, and all manner of rights
or interests in or relating to land and water, and appurtenances thereto;



      (3)   Establish rates of charge for utility services and the
use of utility facilities;



      (4)   Adopt rules and regulations concerning the management of
utilities and utility systems, with regard to such matters as maintenance,
operation and improvement thereof, or require the pretreatment of waste;



      (5)   Adopt rules and regulations concerning charges for
utility services.



   (b)   Definition of the Term “Utility.” As used in this Charter,
unless the context otherwise requires, the term “utility” includes water
supply, water distribution, sewerage, waste disposal, electric power, natural
or manufactured gas, and public transportation.



SECTION 4.32.  CONNECTION BY ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.



   The Council may require that within 30 days after a water main or sewer
line is completed and made ready for use, the owner of every abutting lot
whereon such utility is supplied for any human use shall cause the lot to be
connected thereto.



SECTION 4.34.  UTILITY CHARGES.



   In the event any charge for utility service or for the use of utility
facilities is not paid within 10 days after it becomes due, the same shall be
delinquent and if authorized by the General Statutes become a lien upon such
real property served or in connection with which the service or facility is
used or upon all personal property situated upon such real property for both.
The charge may at any time after becoming delinquent be collected either by
suit or by the City tax collector.



SECTION 4.36.  DEPOSITS.



   A deposit by an owner or tenant of the premises to be served by a
utility service or the use of utility facilities may be levied as per adopted
ordinances and regulations of the City and held by the City for the duration
of the service without interest. If a utility charge is not paid in a timely
manner, the same may be deducted from the deposit and utility service may be
cut off and not be turned on again until the balance of the deposit is
increased to the original amount. An owner or tenant of property being
serviced should give notice that the property is going to be vacated, in
order to receive a refund of the deposit amount remaining subject to offset
for charges due. In the event the owner or tenant shall vacate the premises
without notifying the City and having utility cut off, the owner or tenant
shall be liable to the City for any utility charges which accrue after the
owner or tenant vacated the premises and shall forfeit to the City any
balance of such deposit remaining after the utility service charge due has
been deducted.



SECTION 4.38.  WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION.



   Before any person, firm, or corporation shall connect in any manner,
except a sewer or water lateral from the meter to the premises, any privately
owned water or sewer line or lines with any water or sewer line or lines of
the City, such person, firm, or corporation shall, by proper instrument, in
considera- tion of making such connection and the benefits to be derived
therefrom, dedicate, give, grant, and convey such water or sewer line or
lines to the City whether such connection and line or lines be within or
without the City limits. No connection to any water or sewer line or lines or
any other local public utility shall be made without the express approval of
the City, nor shall such connection be effected except by the forces or
employees of the City, for which a reasonable charge may be made. Should any
person, firm, or corporation connect any privately owned water or sewer line
or lines with any City water or sewer line or lines without first dedicating,
giving, granting and conveying same to the City, the act of connecting such
water or sewer line or lines to the water or sewer line or lines for the City
shall be conclusively deemed and held to be a dedication, gift, grant, and
conveyance of such water or sewer line or lines to the City; provided, that
the City may enter into contracts, with any person, firm or corporation
whereby sewer or water lines may be laid within or without the City limits
and connected to the systems of the City under such terms as may be agreed
upon, notwithstanding any provisions of this section.



SECTION 4.40.  NATURAL GAS.



    The City shall be authorized to purchase such quantities of natural or
manufactured gas as necessary to effectively service the utility needs of the
City and its inhabitants and obtain the most reasonable price from the
provider. Such purchases by the City may be made through informal filing and
bidding pro-cedures and do not require the approval of the City Council if in
excess of $10,000.



SECTION 4.42.  PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES.



   The Council may grant franchises for any public utility or cablevision
company in the manner provided by law, and, in its discretion, may hold a
referendum at the expenses of the applicant on the question of granting a
franchise.



ARTICLE D.  VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



SECTION 4.50.  COUNCIL TO ADOPT REGULATIONS.



   (a)   Authority to Adopt Traffic Ordinances. The Council may adopt
ordinances regulating the speeds of vehicles upon any City streets and may
establish truck routes (or other required routes for limited classes of
vehicles or traffic) applicable to any City street. As used in this section,
the term “city streets” includes all public highways, roads and streets
within the City limits, including numbered State highways, and highways,
roads and streets maintained, repaired, constructed, reconstructed or widened
in whole or in part with State funds.



   (b)   State Numbered Highways. An ordinance concerning vehicle
speeds, truck routes, or other required routes that applies to numbered State
highways shall be subject to approval by the North Carolina State Highway
Commission.



ARTICLE E.  ROADS AND STREETS



SECTION 4.60.  GENERAL AUTHORITY.



   The Council shall have general authority and control over all public
streets, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, and other ways of public passage as
provided in the General Statutes.



SECTION 4.62.  POWER TO CLASSIFY STREETS AND ESTABLISH BUILDING SETBACK
LINES.



   The Council not only within the corporate limits of the City but also
within the territory beyond the corporate limits as now or hereafter fixed
for a distance of one mile in all directions may:



      (1)   Classify all or a portion of any existing or proposed
street according to its size, present and anticipated traffic load, and other
characteristics relevant to the achievement of the purposes of this Article;



      (2)   Establish by ordinance minimum distances that buildings
constructed along each class or type of street shall be set back from the
right-of-way line or the center line of the street. The Council may classify
portions of any street in a manner different from other portions of the same
street where the characteristics of the portions differ.



SECTION 4.64.  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any setback line ordinance may provide for enforcement through the
issuance of building permits and may be coordinated with the enforcement of
the building code, the zoning ordinance and the sub- division ordinance.



ARTICLE F.  IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



SECTION 4.70.  LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS.



   The City has all the power and authority granted to municipalities by
the general laws of the State with respect to local improvements such as, but
not limited to, grading, regrading, widening, paving and repaving of public
streets and alleys; constructing, recon- structing and altering of sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, and storm drains in the public streets and alleys; and laying
or relaying sanitary sewer and water lines. The authority granted by this
Article is in addition to that granted by any other law and with respect to
any particular local improvement, the City may exercise any one or more of
the alternative powers available to it.



SECTION 4.72.  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   In making special assessments, the City may employ the following
procedures:



      (1)   Petition. Upon receipt of a petition from one or more
owners of abutting property which 50% or more of the total street frontage is
in one ownership, the Council may order the making of any local improvement.
The Council may assess the cost thereof against the abutting property in the
same manner and following the same procedures set out in the general laws of
the State for making special assessments against property benefited by local
improvements.



      (2)   Limited Assessment Permitted.  The Council may order
the making of any local improve- ment and assess the cost thereof, except the
City's portion, if any, against only a limited number of abutting properties
if the owners of those properties submit a petition asking that the
improvement be made and that the total amount to be assessed for the
improvement be assessed only against their properties.



      (3)   Assessment by Council without Petition. If, in the
Council's judgment, which shall be con- clusive, the abutting property to be
assessed will be benefited in an amount at least equal to the assess- ment,
no petition for local improvements shall be necessary and the Council may
order the making of any such local improvement and assess the cost thereof
against abutting properties in the following cases:



         a.   Streets.



            1.   When any street or part of a street is unsafe.



            2.   The improvement of a street or part of a
street not more than 1,500 linear feet in length is necessary to connect a
street already paved; or the improvement of a street or part of a street is
necessary to connect a paved street, or portion thereof, with a paved
highway; or the improvement of a street or part of a street is necessary to
provide a paved approach to a railroad, street grade, separa-tion, or bridge;
or the widening of any street or part of a street is necessary to accommodate
present and anticipated volumes of traffic.



         b.   Storm Drains.  When any street or part of a
street, or any property, is without storm sewer or other surface drainage
improvements and storm sewer or other surface drainage should be provided in
the public interest.



         c.   Sidewalks.  When any street or part of a street is
without sidewalks and sidewalks should be provided in the public interest.



         d.   Water and Sewer. When any property is without water
and sewer lines and water and sewer lines should be provided in the public
interest.



      (4)   Repair of Sidewalks and Driveways. If the Council
determines that the public interest requires repair of a sidewalk or portion
of a driveway within the public right-of-way, the Council may order the
making of the repair and assess the total cost against the property abutting
the sidewalk or driveway repaired. Before an assessment may be made for the
repair, at least 30 days written notice shall be given to the abutting
property owner personally or by registered or certified mail to his last
known address or his address as shown on the tax records. The notice shall
state that he is required to make the repair at his own expense in conformity
with the sidewalk standards adopted by the City, and that if he shall fail to
make the repair thereupon the City may make the repair and assess the cost.
If the Council finds that any sidewalk or driveway is in need of immediate
repair, the Council may adopt a resolution setting out its finding and
directing that the repair be made immediately and that the cost be assessed
against the abutting property without prior notice to the property owner
affected.



SECTION 4.74.  PLANTING STRIP AND DRIVEWAY MAINTENANCE.



   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain any
property, driveway, steps or walkway servicing the premises between the
property line and the curb of a paved street including any property located
between a sidewalk and the abutting street. The City Council may exercise any
reasonable amount of enforcement necessary to maintain such areas at the
expense of the property owner should it be necessary.



ARTICLE G.  ANNEXATION



SECTION 4.76.  ANNEXATION.



   The City Council shall have the authority to exercise all powers of
annexation as provided in the General Statutes.



CHAPTER V.  ELECTIONS



SECTION 5.10.  REGULAR AND SPECIAL ELECTIONS. TIME.



   For the purpose of electing a Mayor, the several Council members and
all other elective officers of the City, there shall be held in the City, on
the Tuesday following the first Monday in November, and biennially thereafter
on the odd-numbered years beginning in 1973, a regular municipal election as
provided in the General Statutes. The City Council may, by resolution and in
accordance with the General Statutes and applicable law, order a special
election, fix the time for holding the same, and provide all means for
holding such special election, including rules and regulations governing
registration of voters.



SECTION 5.12.  FORM OF VOTING.



   The qualified voters of the City, voting at large, shall elect one
Council member from each of the six wards. Each voter in the City shall be
entitled to vote for one candidate from each ward, and the candidate from
each ward who receives the largest number of votes cast for Council members
from his ward shall be declared elected.



SECTION 5.14.  WARDS.



   For the purpose of electing Council members, the City shall be divided
into six geographical subdivisions to be known as wards as established by
ordinance duly adopted by the Council after hearing. The current wards are
described as follows:



      Ward 1:   Beginning at the intersection of Virginia Avenue and
12th Street and running westerly along said avenue to Skyland Avenue; thence
con- tinuing westerly a straight line to where the northerly line of the city
limits is intersected by Highway No. 1403, commonly known as Ramseur Road;
thence easterly along the northerly city limits line to Highway No. 1448;
thence southerly along said Highway and 12th Street to the beginning.



      Ward 2:   Beginning at the intersection of Mickley Avenue and
the southerly line of the city limits and running westerly along said city
limits line to the southwesterly corner of the city limits line; thence
easterly along the city limits line to where it is intersected by Highway
1403; thence easterly a straight line to the westerly end of Virginia Avenue
in the Mountain Road; thence southerly along the Mountain Road to Mickley
Avenue; thence southerly along Mickley Avenue to the beginning.



      Ward 3:   Beginning at the intersection of Virginia Avenue and
12th Street and running southerly along 12th Street to the southerly city
limits line; thence westerly along the city limits line to Mickley Avenue;
thence northerly along Mickley Avenue to the Mountain Road; thence northerly
along the Mountain Road to the westerly end of Virginia Avenue; thence
easterly along Virginia Avenue to the beginning.



      Ward 4:   Beginning at the intersection of Virginia Avenue and
12th Street and running easterly along Virginia Avenue to 8th Street; thence
southerly along 8th Street to the southerly city limits line; thence westerly
along the city limits line to 12th Street; thence northerly along 12th Street
to the beginning.



      Ward 5:   Beginning where the southerly city limits line is
intersected by 8th Street and running northerly along 8th Street to the
northerly end of the street and continuing northerly a straight line to the
northerly city limits line; thence easterly along the city limits line to the
northeasterly corner of the city limits line; thence westerly along the
southerly city limits line to the beginning.



      Ward 6:   Beginning at the intersection of 8th Street and
Virginia Avenue and running westerly along Virginia Avenue to 12th Street;
thence northerly along 12th Street and Highway No. 1448 to the northerly city
limits line; thence along the old and new city limits line to a point in the
city limits line northeasterly from the northerly end of 8th Street; thence a
straight line along 8th Street in a southerly direction to the beginning.



SECTION 5.16.  POLLING PLACES AND BALLOTS.



   The City Council shall establish one or more polling places for the
City. There shall be one ballot prepared for each local election. The full
names of all candidates for Mayor and all candidates for the City Council
shall be printed on the official ballots in the alphabetical order of the
surnames in rotation without party designation.



SECTION 5.18.  ABSENTEE VOTING.



   In any City election, including a primary or general election or
referendum, conducted by the County Board of Elections, absentee voting shall
be permitted. Absentee voting shall not be permitted in any City election
which is not conducted by the County Board of Elections. The appropriate pro-
visions of the General Statutes shall apply to absentee voting with the
exception that the earliest date by which absentee ballots shall be available
to voters is 30 days prior to the date of the municipal primary or election
or as quickly following the filing deadline specified in the General Statutes
as the County Board of Elections is able to secure the official ballots.



SECTION 5.22.  STATUTES GOVERNING CITY ELECTIONS.



   City elections shall be conducted as far as possible in all things and
in all details, other than as provided in this Charter, in accordance with
the general election laws pertaining to municipal elections and particularly
in accord with the appropriate provisions of the North Carolina General
Statutes. However, where the General Statutes herein referred to are in
conflict with any provision in this Charter then said provision of this
Charter shall supersede the general laws of North Carolina.



SECTION 5.26.  CONTRACT SERVICES.



   The City Council shall have the authority to con- tract with any
governmental unit, agency, or depart- ment for performing the services
described in this Chapter as permitted by the General Statutes.



CHAPTER VI.  MISCELLANEOUS



ARTICLE A.  CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY



SECTION 6.10.  CLAIMS.



   No formal legal action shall be instituted or maintained against the
City upon any claim or demand whatsoever of any kind or character unless the
claimant shall have first presented in writing his claim or demand to the
Council or to the City Manager and said Council or City Manager shall have
declined to pay or settle the same as presented. Nothing contained herein
shall be construed to inter-fere with the running of any statute of
limitations.



ARTICLE B.  CLAIMS BY THE CITY



SECTION 6.12.  CLAIMS.



   The city manager is hereby authorized to execute releases of persons,
firms, and corporations because of damages to personal property belonging to
the City, when the full amount of damages to such property is ascertained and
a statement thereof has been furnished to the city manager by the city
attorney and the amount of such release does not exceed $5,000.



ARTICLE C.  INSURANCE



SECTION 6.14.  INSURANCE.



   The City may contract to insure itself and any of its officers, agents,
employees and elected officials against liability for wrongful death or
negligent or intentional damage to person or property, and against absolute
liability for damage to person or property, caused by an act or omission of
the City or any of its officers, agents, employees, or elected officials when
acting within the scope of their authority or the course of their employment.
The Council shall deter-mine what liabilities and what officers, agents,
employees, and elected officials shall be covered by any insurance purchased
pursuant to this Article.



ARTICLE D.  CONTINUANCE OF CONTRACTS IN EFFECT PRIOR TO CHARTER



SECTION 6.16.  CONTRACTS.



   All contracts entered into by the City, or for its benefit, prior to
the effective date of the restated Charter shall continue in full force and
effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under
laws or the Charter provision existing at the time of the effective date of
this Charter may be carried to completion in accordance with the pro- vision
of such existing law and Charter provision.



ARTICLE E. CONTINUANCE OF ORDINANCES IN EFFECT PRIOR TO CHARTER



SECTION 6.18.  ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances of the City not inconsistent with the provision of this
restated Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered,
amended, or repealed by the City Council.



ARTICLE F.  CONTINUANCE AND RATIFICATION OF ACTION TAKEN PRIOR TO CHARTER



SECTION 6.20.  PRIOR ACTION.



   All actions of the City, its various Council members both past and
present, its Mayors both past and present, and its city managers both past
and present, prior to the effective date of the restated Charter shall
continue in full force and effect and are hereby validated, approved,
ratified, and confirmed regardless of whether such actions were within or
outside the scope of the Charter or general law then in effect. Said
validation and approval shall include but not be limited to any and all alley
closings which were completed or contemplated prior to the effective date of
this restated Charter.



ARTICLE G.  REPEAL OF LAWS IN CONFLICT WITH CHARTER



SECTION 6.22.  REPEAL.



   All laws and clauses of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby
repealed and specifically any provision, Charter, or amendment thereto to the
City in conflict are specifically repealed. The following acts are
specifically repealed: Chapter 828, Session laws of 1967, and Chapter 22,
Session Laws of 1971. No such repeal shall affect any act done or any right
accruing or accrued or established or any suit had or commenced in any case
before the time when such appeal shall take effect; provided, that no law
heretofore repealed shall be revived by the repeal or any act repealing such
law; provided, that all persons who at the time that said repeal shall take
effect shall hold any office under any of the acts hereby repealed shall
continue to hold the same according to the tenure thereof, except those as to
which a different provision shall have been made to this Charter.



ARTICLE H.  SEVERABILITY CLAUSE



SECTION 6.24.  SEVERABILITY.



   Should any provision of this Charter be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, that declaration
shall not affect the validity of any part, clause, phrase, section, sub-
section, or sentence of this Charter not specifically declared to be invalid
or unconstitutional.



ARTICLE I.  APPLICABILITY OF CHARTER



SECTION 6.26.  APPLICABILITY.



   This Charter shall apply only to the City of Bessemer City, Gaston
County, North Carolina and the geographic territory described in Chapter I,
Article B hereof and includes the  one-mile territory immediately
surrounding the corporate boundaries.



ARTICLE J.  STRUCTURE AND LANGUAGE



SECTION 6.28.  HEADINGS.



   The headings used in this Charter are provided for convenience only and
should not be construed as binding on the terms of the provisions contained
herein.



SECTION 6.30.  GENDER.



   For purposes of this Charter, the terms “he,” “him,” and
“his” are intended in the generic sense and shall be deemed to include
both the female and male gender.



ARTICLE K.  STATUTORY REFERENCES



SECTION 6.32.  REFERENCES.



   Reference to a section or other subdivision of the General Statutes of
the State of North Carolina shall be deemed to refer to such section or
subdivision as amended or to any other section or subdivision to which the
same has been transferred or by which the same has been superseded. Whenever
any section of this Charter refers to or cites a section of the General
Statutes and that section is later amended or superseded, the Charter
provision shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the
section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. The reference
“G.S.” shall be construed to refer to the General Statutes of North
Carolina. Whenever a Code provision contains the language “as provided in
G.S.     ,” any further explanation of the cited General Statute is only
a summary of its content and it is included for information purposes only,
and any violation of the cited General Statute will be enforced as
specifically provided therein.



In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 26th day of
July, 1990.



(General Assembly of North Carolina, 1989 Session, Ratified Bill; Chapter
1018, House Bill 2241)



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      11.   CITY SEAL



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Extraterritorial jurisdiction boundaries



   10.03   Interpretation



   10.04   Application to future ordinances



   10.05   Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances



   10.06   Captions



   10.07   Definitions



   10.08   Rules of interpretation



   10.09   Severability



   10.10   Reference to other sections



   10.11   Reference to offices



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Official time



   10.14   Reasonable time



   10.15   Ordinances repealed



   10.16   Ordinances unaffected



   10.17   Effective date of ordinances



   10.18   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   10.19   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.20   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Bessemer City,
North Carolina" and may be so cited. Such code may also be cited as "The
Bessemer City Code."



('75 Code, § 1-1)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal codes of ordinances generally, see G.S. § 160A-77



   Pleadings and proof of municipal ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-79



§ 10.02  EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION



BOUNDARIES.



   (A)   The city hereby establishes boundaries for the
extraterritorial enforcement of the following ordinances or chapters of this
code:



      (1)   Zoning Code (see Chapter 155 of this code).



      (2)   Subdivision Regulations (see Chapter 154 of this code).



      (3)   N.C. State Building Code.



      (4)   Minimum Housing Standards Code (see Chapter 150 of this
code).



      (5)   Ordinances creating:



         (a)   The municipal Planning Board.



         (b)   The municipal Inspection Depart-ment.



   (B)   Such boundaries are delineated on the face of the map,
entitled "Extra-territorial Jurisdiction of the City of Bessemer City," which
is hereby adopted by reference, as amended by ordinance from time to time.



('75 Code, § 1-9)



§ 10.03  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
inter-pretation of this code as those governing the inter-pretation of state
law.



§ 10.04  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.05  PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are
substantially the same as those of ordinances of the city as of the passage
date of the ordinance adopting this code of ordinances, shall be considered
as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.



('75 Code, § 1-3)



§ 10.06  CAPTIONS.



   The captions of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the con-tents of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.



('75 Code, § 1-4)



§ 10.07  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The city of Bessemer City, North Carolina.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of Bessemer City, North Carolina.



   CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   COUNTY.  Gaston County, North Carolina.



   GENDER.  Words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter genders.



   JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   NUMBER.  Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural
includes the singular number.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.  Whenever certain hours are named in this
code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in this city.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COM-MISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this muni-cipality unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



   OWNER.  The word OWNER applied to any property, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or a part of such property.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms



   PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
or agents thereof.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes every species of property except real
property, as herein defined.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  Any portion of a street, between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of North Carolina.



   STREET.  Includes any public way, road, high-way, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto
within the town, and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, desig-nated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have sub-chapters.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   TIME.  Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.



   TIME, COMPUTATION OF.  The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if
the last day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



§ 10.08  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.09  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional or other-wise invalid by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitu-tionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this code, since
they would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in
this code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.



('75 Code, § 1-5)



§ 10.10  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were con-tained in the text as originally published. No
altera-tion shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.13  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10.14  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.17  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publica-tion shall
take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.18  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a sub-sequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.19  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.20  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.



   Example:  (G.S. § 160A-49)(Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-85).



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



            This municipality shall make available to any person
for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by
state law.



         Statutory reference:



            For provisions concerning the inspection of public 
    records, seeG.S. § 139-1 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1975 and subsequently amended, the 1975
code section number shall be indicated in the history by "('75 Code, §    
  )."



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Wherever in this code or in any ordinance of the city or in
any rule, regulation, order or notice of any officer or agency of the city,
under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such
code, ordinance, regulation, order, or notice the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an
offense or misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance, rule,
regulation, order, or notice shall be a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. §
14-4 and shall subject each such violator to the punishment provided in that
section of the General Statutes.



   (B)   Pursuant to the authority of G.S. § 160A-175 the city may
secure injunctions and abatement orders to further insure compliance with
this code and other city ordinances as provided by this section.



   (C)   Any provision of this code or other ordinance of the city, for
the enforcement of which an appropriate remedy in equity exists, may be
enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice has jurisdiction
under G.S. § 160A-175 to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it is
declared by that section of the General Statutes that it shall not be a
defense to the application of the city for such equitable relief that there
is an adequate remedy at law.



   (D)   When there occurs a violation of any pro-vision of this code
or other ordinance which makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made
of real property the city may, pursuant to authority of G.S. § 160A-175,
apply to the appropriate division of the general court of justice for a
mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the
defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of
the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and
rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in
general and Rule 65 in particular, as required by the above-cited section of
the General Statutes.



   (E)   Subject to the express terms thereof, any portion of this code
or any other ordinance of the city may be enforced by any one, all, or a
combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this section and by
G.S. § 160A-175.



   (F)   Unless otherwise provided, each day's continuing violation of
any provision of this code or other ordinance shall be a separate and
distinct offense.



   (G)   The City Council may establish a system for the assessment of
civil penalties for violations of this code. Penalty amounts may be spelled
out in specific sections of the code. If there is not a specific penalty
spelled out then a civil penalty amount shall be $25 per violation. Failure
to pay the assessed penalty within ten days shall result in an additional $25
late payment penalty. All such civil penalties shall be collected in the same
manner as any public or private debt. The City Manager shall establish a
system of "citations" for violations of this code and shall designate those
officials authorized to issue such citations.



('75 Code, § 1-6) (Am. Ord. 94-9-2, passed 9-12-94)



CHAPTER 11:  CITY SEAL



Section



   11.01   City seal



§ 11.01  CITY SEAL.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall be custodian of the city seal.



   (B)   The city seal shall be as depicted on this page.







 



('75 Code, § 1-8)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY COUNCIL



      31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



      32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



      33.   FEE SCHEDULE



      34.   FINANCE; PURCHASES



      35.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Regular meetings



   30.02   Hearing; procedure



   30.03   Publication of ordinances and bond orders



   30.04   Rules; appointing committees



§ 30.01  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Council
chamber of the City Hall on the second Monday of each month, beginning at
such hour as may be prescribed by resolution; provided, that when a second
Monday falls upon a holiday or when a meeting of the Council on a second
Monday conflicts with another meeting which Council members should attend in
the interests of the city, the Council may, by resolution or by motion duly
put, carried and entered in the minutes, fix another date for its regular
meeting in such month; and provided further, that whenever the Council
chamber may be unavailable, the members of the Council may designate another
place within the city for its regular meeting.



('75 Code, § 2-11)



Statutory reference:




Regular meetings; special meetings, see G.S. § 160A-71.




§ 30.02  HEARING; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person or group of persons desiring to appear before the
City Council shall register his or their names with the City Clerk before
10:00 a.m. on the Monday next before the date of the meeting at which he or
they desire to be heard. (Ord. passed 4-15-85)



   (B)   The City Clerk shall furnish the Mayor and each Council member
with a list of persons desiring to be heard, and the subject matter of their
appearance.



('75 Code, § 2-12) (Ord. passed 3-24-66; Am. Ord. passed 9-10-67)



§ 30.03  PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES AND BOND ORDERS.



   As soon as may be practicable following the passage of each ordinance,
the City Clerk shall notify representatives of the news media serving the
city that such ordinance has been passed and will be open to their inspection
in his office during all regular business hours; and within ten days
following the passage of each ordinance, the City Clerk shall post on the
City Hall bulletin board a notice setting forth in brief the substance of
such ordinance.



('75 Code, § 2-13)



§ 30.04  RULES; APPOINTING COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt such rules, not
inconsistent with the City Charter, state law, or this code, for the
transaction of its business, the exercise of its powers and the performance
of its duties as the Council may deem appropriate for such purposes. 



   (B)   Such rules may include, among other subjects not mentioned in
this section:



      (1)   The order of business at its meetings.



      (2)   Rules of parliamentary procedure.



      (3)   Official conduct of its members.



      (4)   The conduct of public hearings and investigations.



      (5)   Appointment and jurisdiction of standing and special
committees.



      (6)   Such other subjects as may be deemed appropriate.



('75 Code, § 2-14)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section




General Provisions




   31.01   Bond required for handling of city funds



   31.02   Compensation of city officers and employees



   31.03   Claims or judgments against officers or employees



   31.04   Social security coverage




City Officers




   31.20   Limited authority to administer oaths; false swearing



   31.21   Authority of deputies, assistants, and acting city officers



   31.22   Dual office holding; appointment of relatives



   31.23   Property and property insurance inventories



   31.24   Mayor



   31.25   City Manager; Budget Officer



   31.26   City Clerk and Deputy City Clerk



   31.27   Finance Officer



   31.28   Tax Collector



   31.29   City Attorney



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  BOND REQUIRED FOR HANDLING OF CITY FUNDS.



   (A)   Every officer, employee, and agent of the city who handles or
has custody of more than $100 of the city's funds at any time shall, before
assuming his duties as such, be required to enter into bond with good
sureties, in an amount sufficient to protect the city, payable to the city,
and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties and a true
accounting for all funds of the city which may come into his hands, custody,
or control, which bond shall be approved by the City Council and deposited
with the City Clerk.



   (B)   The bond of the treasurer shall be in an amount not less than
$100,000; the bond of the Tax Collector shall be in an amount not less than
$100,000; and the amount of the bonds of all persons required by division (A)
of this section to be bonded shall be as prescribed by resolution or order of
the City Council.



   (C)   When one person holds two or more positions concurrently, each
of which requires the giving of bond under division (A) of this section, such
person shall give bond in an amount not less than the highest amount required
for any one of such positions.



   (D)   In lieu of individual bonds, the City Manager, with the
approval of the City Council, may provide for a blanket bond covering all
persons required by division (A) of this section to be bonded; provided, that
the condition of such bond and the amounts as required by division (A) of
this section shall be included in such blanket bond.



   (E)   All bonds required or authorized by this section shall be
approved as to substance by the City Council and as to form and legality by
the City Attorney and the sureties thereon shall be bonding or casualty
companies licensed to do business in this state.



   (F)   The premium on all such bonds shall be paid by the city.



('75 Code, § 2-1)



§ 31.02  COMPENSATION OF CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The Mayor, Council members, and other city officers and
employees shall receive such salaries and wages as may be provided for them
from time to time by the City Council in the annual budget or other
ordinances.



   (B)   Fees paid to officers and employees of the city for services
rendered in the course of their official duties shall be turned over by them
to the Treasurer as other money belonging to the city.



('75 Code, § 2-3)



§ 31.03  CLAIMS OR JUDGMENTS AGAINST OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   It shall be the policy of the city to pay defense costs,
expenses, judgments, interest on judgments, deductibles on insurance
policies, and other related costs on behalf of its officers and employees
against civil claims and judgments, and to satisfy same either through the
purchase of insurance or otherwise, provided adoption of this section shall
not be deemed an assumption of liability for payment of claims or judgments
in addition to any insurance coverage or any combination of such a fund and
insurance coverage.  Further, the city will not defend a claim or lawsuit or
pay a claim or judgment when the officer or employee willfully:



      (1)   Acts or fails to act because of actual fraud,
corruption, or actual malice.



      (2)   Acts or fails to act as a result of or at a time when
his self-indulgence substantially impaired his judgment (as, for example, an
officer or employee who causes damage or injury while intoxicated or under
the influence of drugs while on the job).



      (3)   Acts or fails to act, except in emer- gencies or the
existence of extenuating circumstances, directly contrary to instructions
from his superior, or directly contrary to advice of the City Attorney.



      (4)   Acts or fails to act in such manner as to constitute a
criminal act (as, for example, misappropriation of the property or funds).



   (B)   The City Manager, or his designee, after consultation with the
City Attorney shall determine whether or not a claim or suit filed against an
officer or employee meets the requirements specified herein for providing a
defense of such officer or employee. If the City Manager or his designee
determines that a claim or suit does not meet the requirements specified
herein, the affected officer or employee may appeal said determination to the
City Council.  The City Council shall afford the officer or employee a
hearing on the matter and shall decide whether or not the claim or suit meets
the requirements of this resolution.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the terms OFFICER and
EMPLOYEE as used herein shall mean present or past Mayors and members of the
Council, officers, employees, or volunteers, and present and past appointed
members of city boards, agencies, committees, and commissions who might
hereafter have claims or judgments entered against them.



   (D)   The policies specified herein shall not be applicable unless
notice of the claim or suit is given to the City Council through the City
Manager or City Attorney prior to the time the claim is settled or civil suit
is litigated and judgment is entered.



   (E)   This section shall not be interpreted in any way to relieve
any insurance company of its obliga- tion under any insurance policy to
protect the interests of any insured under the policy, or to reduce or
eliminate the rights of any officer or employee of the city against any other
party.  Further, except as expressly stated herein, this section is not to
be inter- preted as a waiver of any rights the city has against any party,
nor shall the adoption of this section be construed to waive the defense of
governmental immunity.



(Ord. passed 12-11-89)



§ 31.04  SOCIAL SECURITY COVERAGE.



   The prior Board of Commissioners of the city, having elected by
resolution adopted September 15, 1955, to exercise its option to extend the
benefits of Title II of the Federal Social Security Act to all eligible
municipal officers and employees, as provided in G.S. § 135-23, with
coverage to be effective upon the October 15, 1955, declares that the plan
sub- mitted to and approved by the state agency, as such plan is in force on
the effective date of this code, shall continue in full force and effect and
that the city shall conform to all applicable provisions of G.S. § 135-23
and other applicable provisions of the General Statutes of North Carolina
relating to federal social security for eligible officers and employees of
municipalities in the state.



('75 Code, § 2-10)



CITY OFFICERS



§ 31.20  LIMITED AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER OATHS; FALSE SWEARING.



   (A)   The City Manager, the presiding officer of the City Council or
any committee thereof, the presiding officer of any board, commission, or
other body of the city government, the City Clerk, the Tax Collector, and
each other officer, deputy, or assistant officer of the city to whom any
sworn statement, whether oral or in writing, is required to be made or
submitted by any person pursuant to any provision of the Charter, this code,
or other ordinance or resolu- tion of the City Council shall have authority
to administer the oath so required; provided, that nothing in this section
shall be construed as purporting to authorize the administration of any oath
which, by law, is required to be administered by a judicial officer, notary
public, or other officer authorized by statute to administer oaths, nor shall
this section be construed as purporting to authorize the taking of any
acknowledgment of any signature or seal for the purpose of recording in the
office of the clerk of any court or elsewhere other than in the office of the
City Clerk or some other office of this city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom an oath has been
administered pursuant to this section to knowingly make any false
certificate, affidavit or statement, oral or written, concerning any matter
whatsoever in violation of such oath.



('75 Code, 2-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.21  AUTHORITY OF DEPUTIES, ASSISTANTS, AND ACTING CITY OFFICERS.



   (A)   Authority vested in and duties imposed upon city officers by
state law, the Charter, this code, or other ordinances and resolutions of the
City Council may, when they so authorize, be exercised or performed by their
deputies, assistants, and other subordinates, to the extent not prohibited by
state law, the Charter, this code, or other ordinance or resolu- tion of the
City Council.



   (B)   When any city officer or employee is absent or disabled, or
when any office or position in the city government is vacant, the person
designated by competent authority to act in the place of such absent or
disabled officer or employee or to hold temporarily the vacant office or
position shall have the powers and perform the duties of such absent or
disabled officer or employee or appertaining to such vacant office or
position.



('75 Code, § 2-16)



§ 31.22  DUAL OFFICE HOLDING; APPOINTMENT OF RELATIVES.



   (A)   Any city appointive officer may be desig- nated to hold one or
more other offices of the city government concurrently, except in any case
other- wise provided by state law, the city Charter, this Code or other
ordinance or resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   No person shall be eligible to hold or to be offered an
appointment or position of employment as City Manager, City Clerk, or
department head within the city government who is related by blood or
marriage to any elected official, officer, employee within his or her
prospective department, or any person holding an appointive position with the
city, when such relationship is to a degree which is nearer in kinship than
first cousin.



   (C)   Any person holding a position of appoint- ment or employment
within the city government shall immediately resign or be terminated from his
or her



employment upon the election of any person to office in the city government
who is related by blood or marriage to the person within the prohibited
degree.



('75 Code, § 2-17) (Ord. passed 7-11-83)



Cross-reference:



   For Charter provisions as to one person holding two or more offices
concurrently, see Charter, §§ 22, 23.



§ 31.23  PROPERTY AND PROPERTY INSURANCE INVENTORIES.



   (A)   The City Manager shall maintain on file in his office an
inventory of all real property owned or leased to the city. This inventory
shall be maintained in current status, and during January of each year shall
be revised, as may be appropriate, to show changes in value due to
depreciation, or to repairs, renovations, and the like.  For each building
or lot, such inventory shall also show a brief description, a reference to
the deed, devise, lease or other instru- ment whereby the city acquired title
to or the use thereof, the department, office or agency charged with custody,
the purpose or use, the insurance of all types thereon, together with notes
as to premiums payable and anniversary dates, and for property owned by the
city and leased to other persons, copies of such leases and appropriate notes
as to the revenues derived therefrom.



   (B)   Each city officer having custody of items of nonexpendable
personal property of value greater than $25 owned by or leased to the city
shall, during January of each year, prepare in duplicate an itemized
inventory of such property, showing for each item its value and a brief
description, together with identification (by serial number, where
applicable), a reference to the instrument, if any, whereby title or use was
acquired, the department, office, or agency having custody, the purpose or
use, and the insurance of all types, if any, together with notes as to
premiums payable and anniversary dates. The original copy of each such
inventory shall be filed in the office of the City Manager before February 1
of each year, and the duplicate copy shall be retained on file in the office
of the person who prepared it.



('75 Code, § 2-18)



§ 31.24  MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall be the official head of the city, having the powers and
performing the duties pre- scribed for his office by state law, the City
Charter, this code, and other ordinances and resolutions of the City Council.



('75 Code, § 2-19)



§ 31.25  CITY MANAGER; BUDGET OFFICER.



   (A)   The City Manager shall be the chief admini- strative officer
of the city, having the powers and performing the duties prescribed for his
office by state law, the City Charter, this code, and other ordinances,
resolutions and orders of the City Council.  He shall receive such
compensation as may be specified in his contract or agreement of employ-ment,
which shall be included in each annual budget.



   (B)   The City Manager shall be ex-officio Budget Officer.  The
Budget Officer shall have the powers and perform the duties provided by law
for Municipal Budget Officers.



('75 Code, § 2-20)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-148



Cross-reference:



   City Manager, see Charter §§ 3.20 through 3.26



§ 31.26  CITY CLERK AND DEPUTY CITY CLERK.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of all city records,
books, documents, and other papers for which no other person is designated as
custodian; he shall be responsible for the preparation and filing of the
journal or minutes of the City Council and its committees and the filing of
ordinances and resolu- tions of the City Council; and he shall be the
corresponding secretary of the City Council and its committees.  He shall
have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be specified for
his office by state law, the City Charter, this code, and other ordinances,
resolutions, and orders of the City Council.



   (B)   The office of the City Clerk is hereby desig- nated as the
principal point of contact between the city government and the public, and it
shall be the duty of the City Clerk and his office personnel to keep
themselves informed as to the general powers, duties, and activities of the
several departments and offices of the city government so as to be able to
answer pertinent questions of callers and render appropriate courtesies to
them.  Pursuant to policies established by the City Council and the City
Manager, the office of the City Clerk shall render clerical assistance not
otherwise available to other city departments and offices, when to do so
would not impose an undue burden on the office of the City Clerk.



   (C)   When there is an incumbent deputy City Clerk, he shall have
such powers and perform such duties as may be delegated to him by the City
Council or the City Clerk; and when the City Clerk is absent or disabled, or
when the office of City Clerk is vacant, the Deputy City Clerk shall have all
the powers and perform all the duties of the City Clerk.



('75 Code, § 2-21)



§ 31.27  FINANCE OFFICER.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Officer to receive from
the Tax Collector and all other persons, all money, negotiable instruments
and securities belonging to the city and to keep full and accurate accounts
thereof, to include but not be limited to the name of the person from whom
received, and where applicable, the name of the person on whose behalf
payment was made, date of payment, amount of payment, and where applicable,
an itemization as to amount paid on principal, interest, penalty, and the
like, purpose of the payment, and the account to which credited, and he shall
give his receipt for each payment received by him.  All city funds so
received shall be deposited by him in a depository designated for such
purpose by the City Council pursuant to law, except for such amount as may be
authorized by the City Council to be kept in a secure place in his office as
a petty cash fund.



   (B)   The Finance Officer shall disburse city funds only upon
appropriation by the City Council, upon warrants signed by him and
countersigned by the City Manager; provided, that the City Council shall by
resolution designate alternate officers for such purposes to act during the
absence or disability of either or both the Finance Officer or City Manager
or during a vacancy in either or both such offices.  The Finance Officer
shall keep full and accurate accounts of all disbursements to include but not
be limited to the name of the person to whom paid, and where applicable, the
name of the person on whose behalf such disbursement was made, the date of
dis- bursement, the amount of disbursement, and, where applicable, an
itemization as to the amount of principal, interest, and the like, the
purpose of dis- bursement, and the fund from which the disbursement was
made.  The Finance Officer shall take a receipt for each disbursement made
by him.



   (C)   The Finance Officer, under the direct supervision of the City
Manager, shall have the powers and perform the duties of Municipal Finance
Officers as provided by law.



   (D)   The Finance Officer shall have such other powers and perform
such other duties as may be provided for his office by state law, the City
Charter, this code, and other ordinances, resolutions, and orders of the City
Council and orders and admini- strative regulations of the City Manager.



('75 Code, § 2-22)



§ 31.28  TAX COLLECTOR.



   The Tax Collector shall collect all real and personal property taxes
and all other taxes due the city, and where no other city officer is
designated by state law or this code or other ordinance to collect license
and business privilege taxes, the Tax Collector shall collect such taxes and
issue such licenses.  The Tax Collector shall pay over to the Treasurer each
day all money collected by him for the city and render to the Treasurer a
statement showing the source of each sum so collected and the purpose
thereof.  He shall issue a receipt to each person from whom he makes
collection, and shall keep accurate records of all collections in accord with
directives of the Finance Officer.  The Tax Collector shall perform such
other duties as may be imposed upon him by law, this code, or by the City
Council or City Manager.



('75 Code, § 2-23)



§ 31.29  CITY ATTORNEY.



   The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the City Council when
requested so to do by the Mayor or any Council member; he shall prosecute and
defend suits for and against the city and for and against city officers and
employees acting in their official capacity; he shall approve all official
bonds as to form; he shall approve all draft ordinances as to form, and, at
the request of any Council member, he shall approve any draft resolution as
to form; he shall draft or approve all deeds, contracts and other instruments
relating to the business of the city; he shall advise the Mayor and City
Council, and other city officers, as to the legality and legal consequences
of proposed courses of action; and, in general, the City Attorney shall be
the legal counselor of the city.



('75 Code, § 2-24)



CHAPTER 32:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



   32.01   Composition; Chief of Police; chain of command



   32.02   Duties of the Chief of Police



   32.03   Rules and regulations



   32.04   Attendance of police officers at fires



§ 32.01  COMPOSITION; CHIEF OF POLICE; CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   (A)   The Police Department shall consist of such regular,
auxiliary, and special members and such quarters, vehicles, equipment, and
other property as may from time to time be authorized by the City Council.



   (B)   The organization of the Police Department shall be as provided
by regulations adopted pursuant to § 32.03 of this chapter.



   (C)   The Chief of Police, under the general supervision of the City
Manager, shall have direct control of the members and property of the Police
Department and shall be in command of the members. Members of the Police
Department shall assume command in order of rank, as prescribed in
departmental rules and regulations.



('75 Code, § 12-1)



Statutory reference:




Municipal law enforcement; police officers, see  G.S. § 160A-281




§ 32.02  DUTIES OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.



   In addition to his duties as commanding officer of the Police
Department, the Chief of Police shall perform all duties prescribed for him
by this code and other ordinances and by the General Statutes of North
Carolina, and by the City Council and the City Manager.



('75 Code, § 12-2)



§ 32.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Police Chief, in consultation with the City Manager, shall prepare
rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department and the
per- sonnel thereof.  Such rules and regulations, which may be amended from
time to time, shall be con- sistent with the personnel policies of the city
and shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.  It shall be
unlawful for any member of the Police Department to violate any such rule or
regulation which has been approved by resolution of the City Council and
placed on file in the office of the City Clerk, and a copy of all such
approved rules and regulations shall also be placed on file at Police
Department headquarters.



('75 Code, § 12-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.04  ATTENDANCE OF POLICE OFFICERS AT FIRES.



   Police officers while on duty may be required to attend any fire within
the city to protect any property removed from any building by reason of any
fire and otherwise render such assistance to the Fire Depart- ment as they
may be able to do.



('75 Code, § 12-4)  (Ord. 16, passed 10-15-53)



CHAPTER 33:  FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   33.01   Fee Schedule adopted by reference



§ 33.01  FEE SCHEDULE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



Cross-reference:



   Cemetery fees, see also Ch. 56 and Appendix



   Development fees, see also Ch. 150 and Unified Development Ordinance



   Natural gas rates, charges and fees, see also Ch. 53



   Sewer rates, charges and fees, see also Ch. 51



   Solid waste and recycling rates, charges and fees, see also Ch. 54



   Subdivision fees, see also Ch. 154 and Unified Development Ordinance



   Water rates, charges and fees, see also Ch. 52



   Zoning fees, see also Ch. 155 and Unified Development Ordinance



CHAPTER 34:  FINANCE; PURCHASES



Section




General Provisions




   34.01   Payments of city money to Finance Officer



   34.02   Disbursement of city funds



   34.03   Access to public records and documents



   34.04   Returned check charge



   34.05   Tax on gross receipts derived from retail short-term leases
and rental of motor vehicles




Purchasing Policies and Procedures




   34.15   Purpose



   34.16   Statutory provisions



   34.17   General purchases



   34.18   Informal bids



   34.19   Formal bids



   34.20   Purchase order requirement



   34.21   Emergency purchases



   34.22   Sign and return



   34.23   Negotiating prices



   34.24   Lowest responsible bidder



 



   34.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01  PAYMENTS OF CITY MONEY TO FINANCE OFFICER.



   All taxes, fees, and other money belonging to the city shall be paid
over by the recipients thereof to the Finance Officer not less frequently
than once each week, as may be provided by resolution or order of the City
Council.



('75 Code, § 2-4)



§ 34.02  DISBURSEMENT OF CITY FUNDS.



   No money shall be disbursed from the city treasury except by approval
of the City Council and then only if there are on hand sufficient funds
appropriated for the purpose of such disbursement and not otherwise
obligated.  All checks on city depositories shall be signed by the treasurer
and counter signed by the City Manager; provided, that the City Council may
by resolution provide alternate officers for such purposes to act when the
Finance Officer or City Manager are absent or disabled.



('75 Code, § 2-8)



§ 34.03  ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS AND DOCUMENTS.



   No person shall remove any record, document, book, or other paper
belonging to the city, or any other city property, from the office or place
where it properly belongs, without authority from the custodian thereof, who
may require a receipt therefor, except on written order from the City Council
or the City Manager or pursuant to a valid subpoena duces tecum.  All public
records and accounts shall be available to the citizens and representatives
of the press for inspection and use during all regular business hours in the
offices where maintained.



('75 Code, § 2-9)



Cross-reference:



   Destruction of records regulated, see Ch. 33, Appendix § 106



§ 34.04  RETURNED CHECK CHARGE.



   A fee equal to the maximum amount permitted by G.S. § 25-3-512 shall
be collected for processing all returned checks presented to the city for
payment.



(Ord. 94-9-1, passed 9-12-94)



§ 34.05  TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS DERIVED FROM RETAIL SHORT-TERM LEASES AND
RENTAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section,  the following
definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CUSTOMER.  Any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a
short-term lease or rental basis.



      GENERAL STATUTES.  The North Carolina General Statutes, and any
reference to a particular section thereof shall include the same as may be
from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded.



      GROSS RECEIPTS.  The total lease or rental price charged to a
customer for the short-term lease or rental at retail of vehicles, excluding
sales taxes and excluding the taxes imposed by this section.



      LEASE or RENTAL.  A transfer of possession or control of
tangible personal property for a fixed or indeterminate term for
consideration. The term does not include any of the following:



         (a)   A transfer of possession or control of property
under a security agreement or deferred payment plan that requires the
transfer of title upon completion of the required payments.



         (b)   A transfer of possession or control of property
under an agreement that requires the transfer of title upon completion of
required payments and payment of an option price that does not exceed the
greater of $100 or 1% of the total required payments.



         (c)   The providing of tangible personal property along
with an operator for a fixed or indeterminate period of time if the operator
is necessary for the equipment to perform as designed. For the purpose of
this division, an operator must do more than maintain, inspect, or set up the
tangible personal property.



(G.S.  § 105-164.3(17)).



      LONG-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL.  A lease or rental made under a
written agreement to lease or rent property to the same person for a period
of at least 365 continuous days. (G.S.  § 105-187.1(3)).



      PERSON. Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary,
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship,
company, firm, or other legal entity.



      SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL.  Any lease or rental of a vehicle
that is not a long-term lease or rental.  (G.S. § 160A-215. 1(e)(2) and
G.S. § 105-187.1(4)).



      TAX COLLECTOR.  That individual appointed by the governing body
pursuant to G.S. § 105-349, to collect taxes on behalf of the city, and any
other person authorized to carry out the duties and functions of that
individual.



      VEHICLE.  Shall mean any of the following:



         (a)   A motor vehicle of the private passenger type,
including a passenger van, minivan, or sport utility vehicle.



         (c)   A motor vehicle of the cargo type, including a
cargo van, pickup truck, or truck with a gross vehicle weight of 26,000
pounds or less, used predominantly in the transportation of property for
other than commercial freight, and that does not require the operator to
possess a commercial driver's license.



         (c)   A trailer or semitrailer with a gross vehicle
weight of 6,000 pounds or less (G.S. § 160A-215.1(e)(1)).



   (B)   Levy of tax.  A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount
equal to 1.5% of the gross receipts derived from the short-term lease or
rental of vehicles at retail to the general public. This tax on gross
receipts is in addition to the privilege taxes authorized by G.S. § 160A-211.



   (C)   Collection of the tax. Every person engaged in the business of
the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public
shall collect at the time of the lease or rental the tax herein levied, place
the tax so collected in a segregated account, and thereafter remit the tax to
the Tax Collector in accordance with the provisions of this section. The
taxpayer shall include a provision in each retail short- term lease or rental
agreement, stating that the percentage amount of the total lease or rental
price enacted by this section, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax
on gross receipts. The amount of the tax shall be stated separately from the
lease or rental and shown separately on the taxpayer's records. The tax shall
be paid by the customer to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the
city. The taxpayer shall be liable for the collection thereof and for its
payment to the Tax Collector, and the taxpayer's failure to charge or to
collect the tax from the customer shall not affect that liability.



   (D)   Report and payment of tax.  Taxes levied under this section
are due and payable when a return is required to be filed. Every taxpayer
shall, within the time specified, submit a return to the Tax Collector on the
form prescribed by the Tax Collector. A return must be signed by the taxpayer
or the taxpayer's agent. Returns of taxpayers are due to the Tax Collector
each month on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month in
which the tax accrues. As provided in G.S. § 160A-208.1, a return shall not
be considered a public record and information contained in a return may be
disclosed only in accordance therewith.



   (E)   Taxpayer to keep records.  The taxpayer shall keep and
preserve suitable records of the gross receipts received in the conduct of
business and any other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the
amount of the tax for which the taxpayer is liable under the provisions of
this section. It shall be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a
period of three years all records of gross receipts and other books and
accounts described. All records, books and accounts herein described shall be
open for examination at all reasonable hours during the day by the Tax
Collector or his duly authorized agent.



   (F)   Tax Collector to provide forms.  The Tax Collector shall
design, prepare, print and make available to all taxpayers operating within
the municipal boundaries of the city, forms and instructions for filing
returns to insure a full collection of and an accounting for taxes due. The
failure of any taxpayer to obtain or receive forms shall not relieve the
taxpayer from the payment of the tax at the time and in the manner provided.



   (G)   Situs.  The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied
shall be deemed to have occurred at the locale of the entity from which the
customer taxes delivery of the vehicle. (G.S. § 160A-215.1(b))



   (H)   Administration.  The Tax Collector shall administer and
collect the taxes levied herein from every person engaged in the business of
short-term leasing or rental of vehicles, and the Tax Collector may
promulgate additional rules and regulations necessary for implementation of
the taxes. In addition to the provisions herein, the levy and collection of
the taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the same manner
as the Sales and Use Tax, as provided in G.S. Ch. 105, Article 5, Subchapter
1. (G.S. § 160A-215.1(d))



   (I)   Assessment procedure.



      (1)   If the Tax Collector discovers that any return or tax is
due from a taxpayer, the taxpayer shall be notified in writing of the failure
to file and of the proposed assessment, if known by the Tax Collector. The
assessment may be made on the best information of the Tax Collector. A
proposed assessment is presumed to be correct. The notice shall be delivered
either in person or by United States mail sent to the taxpayer's last known
address. The notice is presumed to have been received by the taxpayer unless
the taxpayer makes an affidavit to the contrary within 90 days after the
notice was mailed. If the taxpayer makes this affidavit, the time limitations
for a request for hearing as hereafter provided apply as if the notice had
been delivered on the date the taxpayer makes the affidavit.



      (2)   A taxpayer who objects to the proposed assessment or to
the requirement to file a return is entitled to a hearing upon written
request within 30 days after the date the notice was mailed or within 30 days
after the date of personal delivery. If no timely request for a hearing is
made, the proposed assessment becomes final without further notice.



      (3)   If a taxpayer files a timely request for hearing, the
Tax Collector shall set a hearing date within 90 days, and notify the
taxpayer at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Within 90 days after
the hearing, the Tax Collector shall notify the taxpayer of the final
decision. The taxpayer may then appeal the decision as set forth in division
(J) of this section. The Tax Collector shall have no authority to waive or
compromise any interest or penalty imposed by this section.



   (J)   Appeals.  The City Council, exercising the powers of the
Secretary of Revenue in collecting sales and use taxes, designates the City
Manager, or his designee, to act as deputy for the purpose of compromising or
forgiving for good cause shown any penalty or additional tax imposed herein,
and for conducting any hearings and making decisions to determine the
validity of a tax imposed by the Tax Collector. If a taxpayer claims that a
tax, additional tax, penalty or interest is excessive, a notice of appeal
must be filed by the taxpayer within 30 days after the final notice of the
Tax Collector is mailed or personally delivered to the taxpayer as provided
in division (I) of this section. The final decision of the deputy shall be
made and mailed or delivered to the taxpayer within 30 days after the
hearing. The taxpayer may file suit for a refund in the Superior Court of
Gaston County pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 105-241.7.



(Ord. passed 7-10-00)  Penalty, see § 34.99



PURCHASING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES



§ 34.15  PURPOSE.



   The city intends to establish good purchasing policies and procedures
to ensure compliance with state law and to exercise control over spending. 
With sound purchasing practices, the city can provide for a proper accounting
of its revenue, and the city's administration has a better overall
understanding of the city's fiscal condition, and thus can manage its
resources more effectively.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)



§ 34.16  STATUTORY PROVISIONS.



   The General Statutes provide specific guidance to local governments in
regard to purchasing. The statutes provide varying cost thresholds as a means
of determining specific procedures to be followed.  All purchases and
contracts for construction or repair in excess of $5,000 will require the use
of either the informal or formal bid procedures found in G.S. §§ 143.129
and 143.131.  For example, at the time of this codification, the general
requirements of the statutes were represented in the following table:



Formal Bids               Informal Bids
(G.S. § 143-129)            (G.S. § 143-131)



Construction and repair,         Construction and repair,



$100,000 or more            $5,000 - $99,999



Purchases, $20,000            Purchases, $5,000 - $19,999



or more



Must be advertised for at         Secure at least three informal



least one week               quotes when possible



Sealed bids required            Documentation of quote should
include price, date, and company



Three bids required in most         The public has a right to



cases                  inspect informal quotes



Performance bonds are required



for construction and repair, but



not purchases



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)2008 S-9



§ 34.17  GENERAL PURCHASES.



   (A)   Whenever a department employee deter- mines that they need
supplies, equipment or services, they may contact vendors to determine the
availability of goods, prices, and other relevant information.  Every effort
should be made to obtain the lowest responsible price for the city.



   (B)   Once the employee has selected a vendor and item to be
purchased, he must fill out a requisition form.  The employee shall not
place the order with the vendor at this time.  If an order is placed and
goods are delivered or services performed before the Finance Officer has had
an opportunity to preaudit the obligation, the employee may be personally
liable for the payments of those goods and/or services.



   (C)   When the employee has completed the requisition, it is
submitted to the appropriate department head for review.  The department
head performs a proper review of the requisition and authorizes the
requisition by placing their signature in the designated space. The
requisition is then submitted to the City Manager for review. Quantity, an
accurate description of the item, unit cost, total cost, date, department,
and account number must be provided. The City Manager, after determining that
the requisition details an appropriate expenditure, will sign the requisition
and forward it to the Finance Officer or his designee.



   (D)   Once the Finance Officer obtains the authorized requisition,
they will preaudit the requisition to determine that:



      (1)   Funds were appropriated in the budget to accommodate the
expense.



      (2)   Funds remain in the appropriate line item to accommodate
the expense.



   (E)   Once the purchase order is issued and the expense encumbered,
the department head is free to place the order with the vendor.



   (F)   When goods or services have been received by a department, the
department head or his designee



shall notify the Finance Officer and authorize payment.  Payment shall be
authorized only when goods or services have been received.  The city will
not pay any bill or invoice until payment is authorized by the department
head or his designee.  It is the department head's responsibility to see
that all receiving tickets, packing lists, and the like are submitted to the
Finance Officer. All such documentation must be signed by the person
acknowledging actual receipt of the goods or service.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)



§ 34.18  INFORMAL BIDS.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city and state law to require that
informal quotes be obtained as per G.S. § 143.131. At the time of this
codification, informal quotes were required for the following:  construction
and repair cost between $5,000 and $99,999; and purchases between $5,000 and
$19,999.  A record of these quotes should be maintained and submitted with
the requisition form. Documentation of informal quotes should include price,
date, time, company, and contact person. Once the requisition containing
informal bid information is submitted, it follows the same review procedure
as specified in § 34.17 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)



§ 34.19  FORMAL BIDS.



   (A)   City policy and procedures and G.S. § 143-129 govern
contracts made by the city for: construction or repair work that cost an
estimated $100,000 or more; and the purchase or lease/ purchase of materials,
supplies, or equipment that cost more than $20,000.



   (B)   There are some exceptions to this policy and the Finance
Department can provide guidance for items that would not ordinarily be
subject to the formal bid requirements.



   (C)   The city can perform a construction project with its own
forces if the project does not cost more than $75,000 on a cost accounting
basis.  Otherwise, the city must follow the bidding requirements of formal
bids.



   (D)   It is city policy to obtain at least three bids whenever
possible.  As least three bids are required by state law if, and only if,
contract is for construction or repairs and the estimated cost is $50,000 or
more.



   (E)   Dividing contracts in order to evade these requirements is
prohibited.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.20  PURCHASE ORDER REQUIREMENT.



   The purchase order and encumbrance system is designed to prevent
overspending in the budget and is concerned mainly with large, irregular
items of expenditure.  The city recognizes there are times a department will
need to purchase less costly items that, most likely, will not create a
deficit situation. For these items, the Finance Department does not prepare a
purchase order and does not encumber an amount equal to the expenditure. 
Rather, the Finance Officer is notified of the purchase after the goods are
bought.  The threshold limit for purchases not requiring a purchase order is
$200.  Purchases below this limit do not require a purchase order, but do
require swift reporting action. Any invoice associated with a purchase below
$200 shall be submitted to the Finance Officer within two working days of
purchase.  All tickets must be signed by the department head and have an
account number assigned prior to being submitted to the Finance Officer.
Dividing purchases to evade the $200 threshold is prohibited.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94; Am. Ord. passed 12-10-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.21  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   If there is an emergency situation for which a purchase must be made,
the department head shall notify the Finance Officer of the emergency and ask
that a purchase order be issued over the phone. A requisition must be
received by the Finance Officer as soon as possible for these purchases. 
All emergency purchases shall be thoroughly reviewed by the Finance
Officer.  Emergency purchases shall be infrequent in nature.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)



§ 34.22  SIGN AND RETURN.



   The city recognizes that there may be a time when a department needs to
purchase a category of goods or services over an extended time from a single
vendor.  Most likely, these purchases or services will be systematic and
payment for them will be based on a regular schedule (that is, telephone
bill, power bill).  When these invoices are received by the Finance Officer,
they will be forwarded to the appropriate department head for review.  If in
order, the department head is responsible for assigning an account number to
the purchase and placing their signature upon the invoice.  Once this is
completed, the invoice is returned to the accountant and the payment is
considered authorized per the department head's signature.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)



§ 34.23  NEGOTIATING PRICES.



   On purchases that fall below the thresholds established for formal bid
procedures, department heads or their designees may negotiate with vendors
after obtaining initial bids in an effort to obtain lower prices.  This
practice should be undertaken with great caution and should be thoroughly
documented.  The original low bidder shall be given every opportunity to
upset any negotiated lower bid. All original and negotiated bids shall be
documented per guidelines established in § 34.18 of this section.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)



§ 34.24  LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.



   City policy and state law states that a bid should be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder or bidders taking into consideration quality,
performance, and the time specified in the proposals for the performance of
the contract.



(Ord. passed 10-10-94)



§ 34.99PENALTY. 



   (A)   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties
applicable to Subchapter VIII (Local Government Sales and Use Tax) of G.S.
Ch. 105, Article 5 and Article 9, Subchapter 1 thereof, shall be applicable
in like manner to the tax authorized to be levied and collected under this
section, to the extent that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions
hereof. The governing body of the city may exercise any power the Secretary
of Revenue may exercise in collecting sales and use taxes. (G.S. §
160A-215.1(f))



   (B)   Without limiting the foregoing, and subject to any changes in
the General Statutes with respect to penalties, interest and remedies, the
following shall be applicable with respect to the levy and collection of the
taxes imposed herein:



      (1)   Any taxpayer who fails to file a return on the date it
is due, determined with regard to any extension of time for filing, shall pay
a penalty equal to 5% of the amount of the tax if the failure to file is for
not more than one month, with an additional 5% for each additional month or
fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the
aggregate, or $5, whichever is greater.



      (2)   Any taxpayer who fails to pay the tax levied herein when
due, without intent to evade the tax, shall pay a penalty equal to 10% of the
tax, except that the penalty shall in no event be less than $5.



      (3)   Taxes shall be payable at par or face amount if paid on
or before the filing date as set forth in division (B)(4). Taxes paid after
the filing date will be delinquent and shall be subject to interest charges.
Interest shall accrue at the rate of 0.75% per month or fraction thereof
until the principal amount of the taxes, the accrued interest, and any
penalties are paid.



      (4)   When the bank upon which any uncertified check tendered
to the Tax Collector in payment of taxes, penalties or interest returns the
check because of insufficient fiends or the nonexistence of an account of the
drawer, the Tax Collector shall assess a penalty equal to 10% of the check,
subject to a minimum of $1 and a maximum of $1,000.



      (5)   Any taxpayer who willfully attempts, or any person who
aids or abets any taxpayer to attempt in any manner to evade or defeat a tax
imposed herein or its payment, shall, in addition to other penalties provided
by law, be guilty of a Class H felony.



      (6)   Any taxpayer required to collect, withhold, account for,
and pay over any tax, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account
for and pay over the tax shall, in additional to other penalties provided by
law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.



      (7)   Any taxpayer required to pay any tax, to make a return,
to keep any records, or to supply any information, who willfully fails to pay
the tax, make the return, keep the records, or supply the information, at the
time or times as required by law, or rules issued pursuant thereto, shall, in
addition to other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor. If a corporation or a limited liability company fails to file
any return or pay the tax required for 90 days after it is due, the Tax
Collector shall inform the Secretary of State of this failure pursuant to the
provisions of G.S. § 105-230.



      (8)   The Tax Collector shall have the rights of attachment
and garnishment as set forth in G.S. § 105-242 and G.S. § 105-368 in
enforcing the collection of taxes imposed herein, in addition to any other
remedies authorized by law.



(Ord. passed 7-10-00)



CHAPTER 35:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES



Section



   35.01   Determination of state of emergency



   35.02   Proclamation by Mayor; restrictions to be imposed



   35.03   Limitations and exemptions authorized in proclamation



   35.04   Extension, amendment, and appeal of proclamation



   35.05   Authority to request state police and military forces



   35.06   Termination of restrictions and emergency



 



   35.99   Penalty



§ 35.01  DETERMINATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, for any reason,
during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or
similar public emergency, the public safety authorities of the city are
unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or
property.



('75 Code, § 5-1) (Ord. passed 4-10-68)



§ 35.02  PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR; RESTRICTIONS TO BE IMPOSED.



   (A)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health, and welfare of the people within the
city, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is
hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to
all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in order to more
effectively protect the lives and property of



people within the city, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions
hereinafter authorized in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the
Mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions.



      (1)   Prohibit or regulate the possession of explosives,
firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind off one's own
premises, and prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer, or other disposi- tion
thereof.



      (2)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer,
wine, or intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or
consumption off one's own premises.



      (3)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march,
vigil, or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways
or upon any public property.



      (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, or any other explosive or flammable fluids or substances.



      (5)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street or
roadway or upon any other public property, except those in search of medical
assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the
well-being of themselves, or their families, or some member thereof.



      (6)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on
of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places
of business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly.



      (7)   Prohibit or regulate, by what is commonly called a
curfew, persons being upon any or all streets, sidewalks, public places and
vacant lots within the city during such periods of day or night, or both day
and night, as he or she may specify.



('75 Code, § 5-2) (Ord. passed 4-10-68)



§ 35.03  LIMITATIONS AND EXEMPTIONS AUTHORIZED IN PROCLAMATION.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the
proclamation the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any
area specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the
city and to specify hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any
part of such restrictions law enforcement officers, firefighters, and other
public employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals, and other medical
facilities; on-duty military personnel whether state or federal; on-duty
employees of public utilities, public transportation companies, and
newspaper, magazine, radio broad-casting, and television broadcasting
corporations operated for profit; and such other classes of persons necessary
to serve the safety, health, and welfare needs of the people within the city.



('75 Code, § 5-3) (Ord. passed 4-10-68)



§ 35.04  EXTENSION, AMENDMENT, AND APPEAL OF PROCLAMATION.



   Any proclamation may be extended, altered, or repealed in any
particular during the continued or threatened existence of a state of
emergency by the issuance of a subsequent proclamation.



('75 Code, § 5-4) (Ord. passed 4-10-68)



§ 35.05  AUTHORITY TO REQUEST STATE POLICE AND MILITARY FORCES.



   If, in the sound discretion of the Mayor, it shall appear that the
emergency is, or that the threatened emergency is likely to be, of such
proportions that the means available to the city to maintain law and order
are insufficient for such purpose, the Mayor shall promptly, and by the most
expeditious means of communication, inform the Governor of the situation and
request that such necessary police or military forces of the state be
provided promptly; and if, during an actual state of emergency, the Mayor
shall find that the civil courts having jurisdiction within the city are
unable to perform their lawful duties and that, by reason of widespread
lawlessness, writs and other process cannot be served or executed in the
city, the Mayor shall inform the Governor of his findings and may recommend
to him that a state of martial law be proclaimed to exist within the city.



('75 Code, § 5-5)



§ 35.06  TERMINATION OF RESTRICTIONS AND EMERGENCY.



   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of a pro- claimed state of emergency
or all or any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances
warrant or when directed to do so by City Council.



('75 Code, § 5-6) (Ord. passed 4-10-68)



§ 35.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it
shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction
imposed by any proclamation authorized by this chapter.



   (B)   The violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any
restriction imposed by any pro- clamation authorized by this chapter, shall
constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding
$500, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. § 14-4, and
§ 10.99 of this code.



('75 Code, § 5-7) (Ord. passed 4-10-68)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   UTILITIES



      51.   SEWERS



      52.   WATER



      53.   NATURAL GAS



      54.   SOLID WASTE



      55.   STREETS; SIDEWALKS; PUBLIC PLACES



      56.   CEMETERIES



      APPENDIX:  RULES AND REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Access to premises



   50.02   Title to installations



   50.03   Prohibited activities



   50.04   Unauthorized utility services; prima facie evidence



   50.05   Unauthorized service connections to vacant premises



   50.06   Waiver of water, sewer and gas tap fees for annexed areas




City and Consumer Responsibilities




   50.20   City’s responsibility and liability



   50.21   Consumer's responsibility and liability




Service Termination and Reinstatement




   50.30   Termination or interruption of service by city



   50.31   Procedure for service termination and reinstatement



   50.32   Termination at consumer’s request



Cross-reference:



   Water rates and charges, see § 52.06



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  ACCESS TO PREMISES.



   Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all reasonable
hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing,
maintaining, or removing city property, inspecting piping, apparatus, or
wiring, reading or testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection
with the city’s service or facilities. In the event of an emergency, the
city shall have immediate access. Application for service shall constitute
consent by the consumer to access to his premises for these purposes.



§ 50.02  TITLE TO INSTALLATIONS.



   Any plumbing or gas equipment, apparatus or meters installed by the
city within its right-of-way or on a consumer's premises shall at all times
be and remain the property of the city.



§ 50.03  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No unauthorized person may:



   (A)   Without the written consent of the city, supply, sell, assign,
or otherwise dispose of any service provided by the city or carry away water
from any hydrant, public water fountain, or other such public outlet;



   (B)   Without the written consent of the city, introduce any service
upon the premises of the consumer in conjunction with or supplementary to the
service provided by the city, either by means of a water cross-connection or
by other means;



   (C)   Manipulate, tamper with, or harm in any manner whatsoever any
service line or appurtenance or any other part of the water or sewer system,
including, but not limited to, any testing or inspection device used to
measure the character or concentration of wastes discharged into the sanitary
sewer system;



   (D)   Tamper with a water or gas meter so as to alter the true
reading for the amount of water or gas consumed;



   (E)   Attach or cause to be attached any connection to a service
line before the service meter;



   (F)   Without the written consent of the city upon the specific
authorization of the council build, construct, erect or reconstruct or cause
to be built, constructed, reconstructed or erected any building or structure
of any kind over or on any of the city's water mains, sanitary sewer mains,
gas mains, storm sewers or drains, or any portion of any of the city's
rights-of-way for such water mains, sanitary sewer mains or storm sewers or
drains;



   (G)   Operate valves on city-owned water lines or gas lines; or



   (H)   Tamper with city manhole rings and covers.



§ 50.04  UNAUTHORIZED UTILITY SERVICES; PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to obtain or receive
unauthorized city utility services. Any person or entity who/which is a
beneficiary of unauthorized utility services shall be prima facie in
violation of the section and shall be liable for such services. After it is
established that a person/entity was a beneficiary, the burden shall shift to
that person/entity charged to show that there was no violation of this
section or that the person/entity did not benefit therefrom.



§ 50.05  UNAUTHORIZED SERVICE CONNECTIONS TO VACANT PREMISES.



   The owner of leased premises shall be liable for any unauthorized
connection of services provided to the premises or separately metered unit
therein while the premises/unit is vacant.



§ 50.06  WAIVER OF WATER, SEWER AND GAS TAP FEES FOR ANNEXED AREAS.



   (A)   The water, sewer and gas tap fees are waived within the
confines of the annexed areas only.



   (B)   The city intends that this waiver be available for a period of
two years and that system development fees for water and sewer will still be
applicable and excess flow valve fees will still be applicable for natural
gas. Also, once application for service is completed, the customer will have
a period of 12 months to complete installation before another application is
required including applicable fees.



(Res. passed 11-14-11)



Cross-references:



   Fee Schedule, see § 33.01



   Natural gas tap fees, see § 53.03



   Sewer fees, see § 51.016



   Water tap fees, see § 52.02



CITY AND CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITIES



§ 50.20  CITY’S RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.



   The city shall:



   (A)   Maintain all service lines within the city's rights-of-way and
easements as well as all city-owned equipment and apparatus installed on
consumer's premises;



   (B)   Reserve the right to refuse or to interrupt or terminate
service to any premises in which the plumbing or gas lines and equipment has
not been properly installed, inspected or maintained in accordance with
applicable city ordinances or state laws;



   (C)   Reserve the right to refuse service if there is a
cross-connection to a private water supply, no backflow protection, or no
sewer cleanout;



   (D)   Assume liability for damage only if such damage results
directly from the city’s negligence; but in no event shall the city be
liable for damage or injuries resulting from its failure to supply any
service contracted for;



   (E)   Assume no liability for damage done by or resulting from any
defects in the piping, fixtures, or appliances on the consumer's premises;



   (F)   Assume no liability for the negligence of third persons; and



   (G)   Reserve the right to remove its property at any time after the
termination of any contract, or if the consumer’s property is attached or
sold under mortgage or the consumer is otherwise dispossessed.



§ 50.21  CONSUMER'S RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.



   The consumer shall:



   (A)   Maintain the piping system on his property at his expense in a
safe and efficient manner. The city shall not undertake to repair the
customer's connec- tions to the water or sewer line until it has been
determined that the disrepair, stoppage, or other cause or impediment to the
proper functioning of such line exists within the portion of the lateral
between the main line and the property line;



   (B)   Guarantee protection for city facilities or equipment located
on the consumer's property;



   (C)   Pay the cost of relocating city-owned facilities and equipment
if done at the consumer's request;



   (D)   Not make or cause to be made any cross- connection with a
private water supply;



   (E)   Install proper and adequate backflow prevention devices;



   (F)   Install a pressure-reducing valve if deemed necessary by the
Public Works Director;



   (G)   Install a sewer cleanout to city specifications if deemed
necessary by the Public Works Director;



   (H)   Before piping any building or installing any gas equipment,
give the city notice in writing of the location of his building, together
with a list of devices which are to be attached to the city's lines; and the
city shall specify the style and character of supply it will furnish, the
point where service shall enter the premises and the location of the meter;



   (I)   Properly maintain and keep in a good state of repair all
utility equipment on the consumer's premises; and



   (J)   Be responsible to the city for damage to city property that is
the fault of the consumer. The cost of repairing or replacing such property
will be added to the consumer’s bill.



SERVICE TERMINATION AND REINSTATEMENT



§ 50.30  TERMINATION OR INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE BY CITY.



   (A)   The city may terminate service for any of the following
reasons:



      (1)   Refusal by the consumer to pay in full an account that
remains delinquent the 15th of the month following billing;



      (2)   Violations of any permit issued pursuant to this
chapter, or fraud or abuse by a consumer; or



      (3)   Failure of the consumer to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or any state or federal laws governing the
installation, inspection or maintenance of plumbing or wastewater handling
and treatment facilities or gas equipment or any other facilities or
equipment related to the city's systems used by the consumer.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to discontinue or interrupt
service temporally without notice for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Emergency repairs or other emergency situations
threatening the public health or safety;



      (2)   Insufficient supply or treatment capacity; or



      (3)   Strike, riot, flood, accident, act of God, or any other
unavoidable cause.



   (C)   The city shall make a good-faith effort to notify affected
consumers before service is dis- continued or interrupted as provided in
division (B) of this section. However, the consumer, by making application
for service, agrees to hold the city harm- less from liability for any
damages that may occur due to discontinuance or interruption of service for
the above-mentioned causes.



§ 50.31  PROCEDURE FOR SERVICE TERMINATION AND REINSTATEMENT.



   (A)   Service termination shall be affected only by authorized
agents of the city.



   (B)   When service is terminated, discontinued or interrupted for
any reason set forth in § 50.30, it shall be unlawful for any person other
than a duly authorized agent or employee of the city to do any act that
results in the resumption of service.



   (C)   When service is terminated for nonpayment of bills, the
service application deposit may be applied to the outstanding bill.



   (D) If there are deposit funds remaining after the deposit is applied
to the outstanding bill, the excess shall be refunded to the consumer. If a
portion of the bill remains outstanding, the city may proceed to collect the
balance in the usual way provided by law for the collection of debts.



   (E)   Before service will be reinstated, the consumer shall be
required to make full payment of any charges still outstanding on his account.



   (F)   A charge for service reinstatement shall be made.



§ 50.32  TERMINATION AT CONSUMER’S REQUEST.



   The consumer shall request that service be dis- continued (for a change
in occupancy or other reason) at least two working days before the consumer
desires the termination to become effective.



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.001   Purpose and policy



   51.002   Definitions and abbreviations



   51.003   Construction; headings



General Sewer Use Requirements



   51.015   Prohibited discharge standards



   51.016   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards



   51.017   Local limits



   51.018   State requirements



   51.019   Right of revision



   51.020   Dilution



   51.021   Pretreatment of wastewater



   51.022   Accidental discharge/slug control plan



   51.023   Hauled wastewater



   51.024   Altering or disturbing sanitary sewer system prohibited



   51.025   Alterations of system



   51.026   Use of public sewers required



   51.027   Installation and connection of sewer facilities



   51.028   Sewer construction standards




Fees




   51.040   Purpose



   51.041   User charges



   51.042   Surcharges



   51.043   Pretreatment program administration charges




Administration




   51.055   Wastewater dischargers



   51.056   Determination of need for permit




Reporting Requirements




   51.070   Baseline monitoring reports



   51.071   Compliance schedule progress reports



   51.072   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline



   51.073   Periodic compliance reports



   51.074   Reports of changed conditions



   51.075   Reports of potential problems



   51.076   Reports from unpermitted users



   51.077   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting



   51.078   Notification of discharge of hazardous waste



   51.079   Analytical requirements



   51.080   Grab and composite sample collection



   51.081   Timing



   51.082   Recordkeeping



   51.083   Electronic reporting




Compliance Monitoring




   51.095   Monitoring facilities



   51.096   Inspection and sampling



   51.097   Search warrants




Confidential Information




   51.105   Confidential information




Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance




   51.115   Annual publication of significant noncompliance




Adjudicatory Hearings




   51.125   Adjudicatory hearings




Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations




   51.135   Upset



   51.136   Prohibited discharge standards defense



   51.137   Bypass




Enforcement




   51.145   Administrative remedies



   51.146   Other available remedies



   51.147   Remedies nonexclusive



 



   51.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the City of Bessemer City, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the
city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the wastewater system of the municipality which will
interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting
sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the
system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;



      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludges from the municipal system;



      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public;



      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater water
system; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES
or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater water system through the
issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users; authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities; requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of cost resulting from the program
established herein.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-312 and/or 153A-275.  The
city shall designate an administrator of the POTW and pretreatment program
hereafter referred to as the “Director.”  Except as otherwise provided
herein, the POTW Director shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.  Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW
Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to other city personnel.



   (E)   By discharging wastewater into the city wastewater system,
industrial users located outside the city limits agree to comply with the
terms and conditions established in this chapter, as well as any permits,
enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder.



   (F)   It is the policy of the City of Bessemer City that the
discharge of pollutants into the wastewater collection system is not a matter
or right, but is a privilege which may be withdrawn by means consistent with
the provisions of this chapter or with any permit issued pursuant hereto, or
both, in order to protect its citizens, the environment and its wastewater
collection and treatment system. Any user who is unwilling or unable to
comply with the provisions contained herein will not be permitted to make or
maintain a connection to the wastewater collection and treatment system of
the city.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.002  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (A)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used  in this chapter, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:



      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et. seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Division of Water Quality
of the North Carolina  Department of Environment and Natural Resources or
his or her designee.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation, the term
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:



            1.   The chief executive officer, the president,
secretary, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or
decision-making functions for the corporation, or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making capital
investment,



recommendations, and initiate and direct comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations: 
can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements;
and where authority to sign documents has bene assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or
local government facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a
director, or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or
their designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in (a) through (c) above
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing and specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, or the
individual or position having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company and submitted to the city.



         (e)   If the designation of an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATION
is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of this definition must be submitted to the
Treatment Operations Director prior to or together with any reports to be
signed by an authorized representative.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade usually
expressed as a concentration (e.g., milligrams per liter (mg/L)).



      BUILDING SEWER.  A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the  collection system.



      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user’s treatment  facility.



      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment  Standard.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY.  Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW
organization’s pretreatment program approval has not been withdrawn.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA).The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.



      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one
time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes.



      GREASE INTERCEPTOR. A passive device as defined by the most
recent version of the North Carolina State Plumbing Code and located
underground and outside of a food service facility designed to collect,
contain, or remove food wastes and grease from the waste stream while
allowing the balance of the liquid to discharge to the collection system by
gravity.



      GREASE TRAP. A passive device as defined by the most recent
version of the North Carolina State Plumbing Code and located in a food
services facility or under a sink designed to collect or remove food wastes
and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid to
discharge to the collection system by gravity.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks including, but
not limited to, such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or the
introduction from any non domestic source regulated under Section 307(b),
(c), or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding
tank waste discharged into the system).



      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person which is a source of indirect
discharge.



      INTERCEPTOR. A device designed and installed to separate and
retain for removal, by automatic means, deleterious, hazardous or undesirable
matter from normal wastes, while permitting normal sewage or wastes to
discharge into the drainage system by gravity.



      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW collection
system, treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or
disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of
the control authority (and/or POTW’s, if different from the control
authority) NPDES, collection system, or non-discharge permit or prevents
sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified applicable state
and federal statutes, regulations, or permits.  The term includes, but is
not limited to, prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the
municipality in accordance with Section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345)
or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SDWA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and
Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV
of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated
by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which
appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in § 51.015 and are developed under the authority
of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR Section 403.5.



      NEW SOURCE. As defined in 40 CFR 403.3(m), including any
subsequent amendments and additions.



         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or



         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source the same site. In determining whether these
are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type activity as the existing
source, should be considered.



         (d)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation
from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed Categorical Pretreatment
Standards under Section 307 (c) of the Act which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307(c) provided that:



            1.   Construction on a site at which an existing
source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of division (b) or (c) above of this
definition, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
production equipment.



         (e)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a
new source has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:



               A.   Any placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or



               B.   Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures,
or facilities which are necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or



               C.   Entered into a binding contractual
obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to
be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and
contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this definition.



      NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product,
waste product, or finished product.



      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES
PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1342), or pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from
EPA.



      NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the state pursuant to
G.S. § 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface
waters of the state or for a wastewater treatment works which does not
discharge directly to surface waters of the state.



      OIL AND GREASE. Fats, oils, and grease of animal or vegetable
origin; petroleum oil, cutting oil, or products of mineral origin, whether
emulsified or not, whether solidified or viscous. For analytical purposes,
OIL AND GREASE is defined as any material recovered under standard NCDENR
certified laboratory procedure or as determined under such standard
laboratory procedures as may be hereinafter adopted.



      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the collection system into
waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with
discharges from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation, of the control authority (and/or
POTW’s, if different from the control authority), NPDES, collection system,
or non-discharge permit or a downstream water quality standard even if
included in the permit.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, state,
federal or local government entities or any other legal entity, or their
legal representatives, agents or assigns.  This definition includes all
federal, state, and local government entities.



      pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter
of solution.



      POLLUTANT. Any “waste” as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste, and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color,
metals, BOD,  COD, toxicity, and odor).



      POTW DIRECTOR. The city’s administrator designated with the
responsibility for the pretreatment program and enforcement of this chapter.



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.



      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or
alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or
process changes or other means, except by diluting the concentration of the
pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.  The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the
city in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority
as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical standards, and local limits which applies to an industrial user.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this
instance by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in
the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of  municipal
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.  It also includes sewers and
pipes, only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant.  For the
purposes of this chapter, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey
wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or
agreement with the city, users of the city’s POTW.



      SEPARATOR. A device designed to separate oils or other items from
normal waste for proper disposal, rendering, or recycling. The separated
material is not retained within the unit but is siphoned off or discharged to
a container for storage and disposal, thus maintaining the efficiency of the
device.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user that discharges
wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewaters); or



         (b)   Contributes process wastewater which makes up 5%
or more of the NPDES or  non-discharge permitted flow limit or 5% or more of
the maximum allowable headworks loading of the POTW treatment plant for any
POTW pollutant of concern; or



         (c)   Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards
under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471; or



         (d)   Is found by the city, the Division of Water
Quality or the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the
potential for impact, either singly or in combination with other contribution
industrial users, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge,
the system’s effluent quality, or compliance with any pretreatment
standards or requirements.



         (e)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC
02H.0907(B), the control authority may determine that an industrial user
meeting the criteria in divisions (a) and (b) above has not reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any
pretreatment standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of
the POTW’s effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or
non-discharge permit, or for limiting the POTW’s sludge disposal options,
and thus is not a SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or SNC. A status of noncompliance
defined of a significant industrial user when one or more of the following
criteria are met.  Additionally, any industrial user which meets the
criteria in divisions (c), (d), or (e) of this definition shall also be SNC.



         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CRF Part 403.3(1);



         (b)   TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS,
defined here as those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) multiplied by the
applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, 1.2 for all
other pollutants (except flow or pH);



         (c)   Any other violation(s) of  a pretreatment
standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) (daily maximum,
long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the
control authority and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination
with other discharges, interference or pass interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);



         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that
has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in either the control authority’s or POTW’s,
if different from the control authority, exercise of its emergency authority
under CFR Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and § 53.135(E) to halt or prevent such a
discharge;



         (e)   Violations of a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the schedule date;



         (f)   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the
due date;



         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;



         (h)   Any other violations or group of violations that
the control authority and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.



      SLUG LOAD/DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local limits, or
industrial user permit condition. This can include but is not limited to
spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of non-routine, episodic
nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other discharges that can
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in § 51.015.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



      SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the city to supervise
the operation of the POTW, or a duly authorized representative.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile
sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.



      WASTEWATER PERMIT. A permit issued by the city pursuant to §
51.056.



      WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps,
sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs, all
other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,  natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the state or any portion thereof.



   (B)   This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and vice-versa.



   (C)   Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary.



   (D)   The use of the singular shall be construed to include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context
of its use.



   (E)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the
designated meanings:



 



BOD
 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand


CFR
 
Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
Chemical Oxygen Demand


EPA
 
Environmental Protection Agency


gpd
 
Gallons per day


l
 
Liter


mg
 
Milligrams


mg/L
 
Milligrams per Liter


G.S.
 
North Carolina General Statutes


NPDES
 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System


O & M
 
Operation and Maintenance


POTW
 
Publicly-Owned Treatment Works


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


SIC
 
Standard Industrial Classification


SWDA
 
Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.


TSS
 
Total Suspended Solids


TKN
 
Total Kjeidahl Nitrogen


U.S.C.
 
United States Code


NDCDENR/DWQ
 
North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources/Division of
Water Quality




 



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.003  CONSTRUCTION; HEADINGS.



   This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include
the feminine and vice-versa.  Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or
discretionary.  The use of singular shall be construed to include the plural
and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its
use.  The headings used throughout this chapter are for convenience only,
and are not to be construed as being substantive.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS



§ 51.015  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass through. This prohibition
applies to all users of the POTW, whether or not the user is a significant
industrial user or subject to any national, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW including, but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flash
point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids
greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



      (3)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in  amounts that will cause interference or
pass through.



      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than
10.5 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage to the POTW or equipment.



      (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD, etc.) in sufficient quantity, (flow or
concentration) either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
cause interference with the POTW.



      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150
degrees Fahrenheit (66 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference; but in no
case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the
POTW to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius).



      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker
health and safety problems.



      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the Treatment Director in accordance with § 51.023.



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.



      (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits
issued under Section 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State Criteria applicable to
the sludge management method being used.



      (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, including but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color
to the treatment plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public
health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to
adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the
receiving waters for any designated uses.



      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance
with applicable state and federal regulations.



      (13)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director.



      (14)   Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentration greater than 100 mg/L at any time, except as specifically
authorized by the POTW Director.



      (15)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.



      (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the POTW Director in a wastewater discharge permit.



      (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or
other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere
with the municipal wastewater system.



      (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous
waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer, except as
may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director.



      (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to
violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as described in
15A NCAC 2B.0200.



      (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test.



      (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.



      (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
municipal wastewater system.



      (23)   At no time, shall two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the
lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.



      (24)   Any volatile organics, except as specifically
authorized by the POTW Director in a  wastewater permit.



   (C)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater or other wastes prohibited
by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they
could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system.  All floor drains
located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the
industrial user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the system.



   (D)   When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such
amounts which may cause or contribute to an interference of a POTW operation
or pass through, the POTW Director shall:



      (1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the
contribution on the POTW in accordance with § 51.145; and



      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§ 51.055
and 51.056 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass
through.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.016  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to
comply with applicable standards as set forth in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter
N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein.



   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the  concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).



   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard
is mixed with wastewater water not regulated by the same standard, the POTW
Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing
the categorical pretreatment standard.



   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 CFR  403.15.



   (E)   A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.017  LOCAL LIMITS.



   (A)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user
discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following average
discharge limits:



 



BOD
 
250 mg/l


TSS
 
250 mg/L


NH3
 
25 mg/L


Total Phosphorous
 
8.00  mg/L


Arsenic
 
0.003 mg/L


Cadmium
 
0.003 mg/L


Copper
 
0.032 mg/L


Cyanide
 
0.015 mg/L


Lead
 
0.026 mg/L


Mercury
 
0.0002 mg/L


Nickel
 
0.021 mg/L


Silver
 
0.005 mg/L


Total Chromium
 
0.05 mg/L


Zinc
 
0.101 mg/L




 



   (B)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop
user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW’s maximum
allowable headworks loading are not exceeded for particular pollutants of
concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern
shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose mass
based limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based limits.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.018  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations,
or those in this chapter.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.019  RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements
which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal
regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
51.001, or the general and specific prohibitions in § 51.015 as is allowed
by 40 CFR 403.4.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.020  DILUTION.



   It shall be unlawful for a user to increase the use of process water
or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.021  PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits
issued under § 51.056, and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits, and the
prohibitions set out in § 51.015, within the time limitations as specified
by the POTW Director, the EPA, or the state, whichever is more stringent. All
facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operation procedures shall be submitted to the city for
review, and shall be approved by the POTW Director before construction of the
facility. The review of such plans and operation procedures shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions
of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be  approved by the POTW
Director prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.



   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.



      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.



      (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging
into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their
expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization
of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow
equalization.



      (3)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



   (C)   Fats, oils, and grease control.



      (1)   Scope; purpose. To aid in the prevention of sanitary
sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats,
oils, and grease into the sewer system from industrial or commercial
establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities.



      (2)   Interceptors, separators, and traps for grease, oil, and
sand. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors or separators shall be constructed
at user’s sole expense and to city specifications when, in the opinion of
the POTW Director, they are necessary for proper handling and control of
grease, oil, sand, grit, petroleum products, or other substances. By way of
example, but not of limitation, such devices may be required for industrial
or commercial establishments, public eating places, hotels, hospitals,
automobile centers, vehicle wash facilities, or other institutions.  Such
devices shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection and shall be maintained by the user at its sole expense in
continuously efficient operation at all times.



      (3)   The size, type, and location of interceptors, traps, and
separators shall be selected in accordance with the most recent version of
the North Carolina State Plumbing Code and shall be approved in writing by
the City of Bessemer City POTW Director prior to installation.



      (4)   The POTW Director may direct the user to install a unit
or to correct any unit that is not installed appropriately or functioning
properly.



      (5)   These vessels must have each chamber directly accessible
from the surface to provide a means for servicing, sampling, and maintaining
the interceptor in working and operating condition. These chambers shall not
be visually obscured with parked vehicles, building structures, recycle
containers, refuse containers, pallets, trees, growing plants, and/or
shrubbery, landscape tarps, plastic sheets, foreign objects, soils, mulch,
floorings, or pavement of any substance.



      (6)   The POTW Director may order the repair, modification or
replacement of a unit, or may order the addition of a grease recovery device
in combination with a grease interceptor. All food service establishments and
other grease handling facilities shall be subject to review, evaluation,
and  inspection by the aforementioned representative or designee during
normal working hours.



      (7)   Interceptors, traps, and separators shall be serviced
and emptied of accumulated waste content at a frequency appropriate to
maintain the efficiency of the device. Accumulated solids must be removed at
a frequency to maintain an effective volume of the device. Servicing of
interceptors, traps, or separators may be more frequent than, but not less
frequent than, as required by permit or ordinance. The owner, lease holder,
or operator shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of
grease by appropriate means.



      (8)   Grease, interceptors, traps, and separators shall be
kept free of grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells,
towels, rags, excessive food solids, and the like which can reduce the
effective volume of the unit.



      (9)   If any wastewater is removed from a grease interceptor,
treated, and then reintroduced back into the interceptor, the user shall
remain responsible for not exceeding the established oil and grease numerical
limit and responsible for maintaining an effective volume of the interceptor.
Reintroduction of screenings, sludges, or residues is prohibited.



      (10)   Any user utilizing biological or chemical additives
remains responsible for not exceeding the established oil and grease
numerical limit and responsible for maintaining an effective volume of the
interceptor or separator. Any user utilizing biological additives or enzymes
must notify the POTW Director and provide the material safety data sheets for
such additives. The exclusive use of biological and chemical additives is not
considered acceptable grease vessel maintenance practice. Their use cannot be
employed as the sole method of treating or maintaining the vessel’s
effluent.



      (11)   Emulsifiers are prohibited from use in oil and water
separators. The use of emulsifiers in grease interceptors for the purpose of
meeting the established oil and grease numerical limit or to decrease the
service frequency is prohibited.



      (12)   Any user utilizing an automatic grease removal system
remains responsible for not exceeding the established oil and grease
numerical limit and remains responsible for maintaining an effective volume
of the interceptor, trap, or separator.



      (13)   Grease interceptors shall receive grease-laden waste
from the major point sources.  Wastes that are not expected to contain
grease and oil and that otherwise do not require separation shall not 
discharge into the interceptor. Hot water flushing of a grease interceptor,
trap, or separator is prohibited.



      (14)   Any removal and hauling of grease or oils from in
ground units shall be performed by a licensed waste disposal or rendering
firm. Indoor, above ground, under sink grease vessels may be cleaned by the
user unless required otherwise. The user is responsible for appropriate
disposal of the removed substances.



      (15)   The user shall keep all records of interceptor, trap,
or separator maintenance for three years (unless specified within a permit).
The user must keep records of each clean out including the  date of service,
name of clean out company, and receipt. The user shall provide to the POTW
Director documentation of maintenance as required. The local user shall make
appropriate arrangements with its corporate offices, if any, in this regard
as needed.



      (16)   Each facility will be issued a grease vessel
maintenance log upon initial inspection.  The log shall be available at all
times and kept up-to-date.



      (17)    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided
when in the opinion of the POTW Director they are necessary for proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, or sand,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
All interception units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the POTW
Director and shall be located so as to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be  inspected, cleaned and repaired
regularly as needed by the user at its sole expense.  Records of cleaning
shall be furnished to the POTW Director or his or her designee upon request.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.022  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLAN.



   (A)   The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each significant
industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and prevent slug
discharges and accidental discharges as defined in § 51.002(A). All SIUs
must be evaluated within one year of being designated an SIU. The POTW
Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement
such a plan or other specific action.  Alternatively, the Treatment
Operations Director may develop such a plan for any user.



   (B)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a non routine episodic nature, a non- 
customary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see §§ 51.074 and 51.075.



   (C)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director
of any accidental or slug discharge, as § 51.075; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.023  HAULED WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the collection system
only at locations designated by the  POTW Director, and at such times as are
established by the POTW Director. Such waste shall not violate ths subchapter
or any other requirements established by the city. The POTW Director may
require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.



   (B)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators
of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater  discharge permits. The POTW
Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.



   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director.  No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.



   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall  include, at a minimum, the name and address
of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.024  ALTERING OR DISTURBING SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to uncover, make any
connection with, open into, alter or disturb the sanitary sewer system or any
appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.025 ALTERATIONS OF SYSTEM.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Public Works Director.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.026  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
construct, maintain or to use any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.026  INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION OF SEWER FACILITIES.



   The owners of all houses, buildings, or other properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city,
are hereby required at their expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to install suitable collection facilities for all commercial and
industrial wastewaters originating in said houses, buildings, or other
properties, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after
date of official notice to do so.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.028  SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Independent sewer for each building; exception. A separate and
independent building sewer  shall be provided for every building except
where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no
private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through
an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer serving the
front building may be extended to serve the rear building and the whole
considered as one building  sewer.



   (B)   Old building sewers. No old sewers will be accepted by the
city for purposes of discharging wastes into the city’s sanitary sewer
system and treatment works. This requirement may be waived by the Public
Works Director after the condition of the sewer has been thoroughly inspected
by same.



   (C)   Minimum standards of sewers. Each sewer shall, in all cases,
meet the minimum standards of the State of North Carolina Plumbing and
Building Codes, as amended, and be installed in accordance with all
applicable OHSA requirements. Joints shall be water tight. Any part of the
building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be
constructed of cast iron pipe with mechanical joints. Cast iron pipes with
mechanical joints may be required by the Code Enforcement Officer where the
building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or
unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron pipe, except that
nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or
cradle as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.



   (D)   Size and slope of sewer. The size and slope of the sewer shall
be subject to the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer, but in no event
shall the diameter be less than four inches, and the slope of said sewer
shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot.



   (E)   Grades for sewers. Unless otherwise authorized by the Code
Enforcement Officer, each sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel
to or within three feet of any load bearing wall. The building sewer shall be
laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment. Changes in direction shall
be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings.



   (F)   Building drains. In all buildings in which any building drain
is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer and discharged to the building sewer.



   (G)   Excavation and backfill. All excavations required for the
installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise
approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. Backfill shall not be performed
until the work has been inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer.



   (H)   Angle of connection. The connection of the building sewer into
the public sewer shall be made at an angle of 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may
be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend
past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer
at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than
the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the
connection made secure and water tight by encasement in concrete. Special
fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.



   (I)   Notice to Code Enforcement Officer. The applicant for the
building sewer permit shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.



   (J)   Private sewage disposal. Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



FEES



§ 51.040  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the wastewater disposal system of the City of Bessemer City for
the implementation of the program established herein.  The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and
fees by the Treatment Operations Director and approved by the City of
Bessemer City City Council. A copy of these charges and fees will be made
available from the POTW Director.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.041  USER CHARGES.



   A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited
to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge,
cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.



   (A)   The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt
service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the collection
system.



   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of
flow.



   (C)   The city shall review annually the sewage contributions of
users, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the
collection system and will make recommendations to the City Council for
adjustments in the Schedule of Charges and Fees as necessary.



   (D)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to a
specific user shall be distributed among all users of the collection system
based upon the volume of flow of the users.



   (E)   Every person who owns improved property within the corporate
limits of the city shall be required to pay a service availability fee with
respect to such improved property equal to the then current minimum charge
for water and sewer service to residential customers unless such service is
not available. This availability charge shall not apply to owners who
maintain connections to both the water and sewer systems of the city for such
improved property. Owners maintaining connections to one system but not the
other system shall pay an availability charge equal to the minimum charge for
the available service to which the owner does not maintain a connection.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.042  SURCHARGES.



   The amount of the surcharges will be based upon volume of flow and the
character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater.



 

BOD
 
250 mg/L


TSS
 
250 mg/L


Oil & Grease (total)
 
100 mg/L


NH3
 
25 mg/L


TP
 
8 mg/L



 



   (A)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user  charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:



      (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of
meter readings maintained by the city; or



      (2)   If required by the city or at the individual dischargers
option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of
wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and
safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance
with plans approved by the city. The metering system shall be installed and
maintained at the user’s sole expense according to arrangements that may be
made with the city.



      (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her water
supply from sources other than the city, the user shall install and maintain
at his or her own expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the
city.



   (B)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the
wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the city. Samples shall be collected in such a
manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed
using procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.



   (C)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his or her
duly appointed representative shall be binding as a basis for charges.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.043  PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.



   The Schedule of Charges and Fees adopted by the city may include
charges and fees for:



   (A)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program;



   (B)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;



   (C)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and or slug
load discharge procedures, and construction plans and specifications;



   (D)   Permitting;



   (E)   Other fees as the city  may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 51.055  WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the
collection system without first obtaining the permission of the POTW
Director.  When requested by the POTW Director, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater water by
completing a wastewater survey within 30 days following receipt of the
request.  The POTW Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose
and may periodically require users to update this information.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.056  DETERMINATION OF NEED FOR PERMIT.



   All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial
user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the collection
system.  Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director
to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial
permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW Director’s
determination.  Industrial Users who do not fit the significant industrial
user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW Director be required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-significant industrial users.



   (A)   Significant industrial user determination. All persons
proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the
volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater
shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user
determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed
discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria, he or she will
require that a significant industrial user permit application be filed.



   (B)   Significant industrial user permit application. Users required
to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with
the city, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director, and
accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the Schedule of
Charges and Fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant
industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of the POTW
Director’s determination in § 51.056. The application shall include at a
minimum the information required by 15A NCAC 02H0.0916(c)(1)(A-M). In support
of the application, the user shall submit any other information deemed
necessary by the POTW Director to evaluate the permit application. This may
including reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12(b) and §§ 51.070. 
Also required are the following:



      (1)   Name, address, and location, (if different from the
address);



      (2)   Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes for
pretreatment, the industry as a whole, and any processes for which
categorical pretreatment standards have been promulgated;



      (3)   Analytical data on wastewater constituents and
characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in §§ 51.015
through 51.028, any of the priority pollutants (Section 307(a) of the Act)
which the applicant knows or suspects are present in the discharge as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory, and any other pollutant of
concern to the POTW; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304 (g) of the Act
and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended; and as required in §§ 51.080
and 51.081;



      (4)   Time and duration of the indirect discharge;



      (5)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;



      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of
flow, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation;



      (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
accidentally or intentionally discharged;



      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards;



      (9)    If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required
to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this
schedule:



         (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in
the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading
to the construction and  operation of additional pretreatment required for
the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment in the
schedule shall exceed nine months.



         (b)   No later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the POTW Director including, at a minimum, whether or not  it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the POTW Director.



      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production;



      (11)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);



      (12)   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of
plant and proposed or  actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;



      (13)   If subject to a categorical standard, a baseline
monitoring report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H.0908(a)
as outlined in § 51.070;



      (14)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW
Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. This may include
reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12(b) and § 51.070.



   (C)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater
discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current
authorized representative of the user on file with the control authority
and/or municipality as defined in § 51.002(A) and contain the following
certification statement:



      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



   (D)   Application review and evaluation. The POTW Director will
evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may require additional
information.



      (1)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications
for the city and shall refer all applications to the treatment operations
staff for review and evaluation.



      (2)   Within 30 days of receipt, the POTW Director shall
acknowledge the complete application, or if it is not complete, treatment
operations staff shall return the application to the applicant with a
statement of what additional information is required.



   (E)   Tentative determination and draft of permit.



      (1)   The treatment operations staff shall conduct a review of
the application and an on site inspection of the significant industrial user,
including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation
and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user
permit.



      (2)   If the staff’s tentative determination in division
(E)(1) above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations
shall be made in writing:



         (a)   Proposed discharge limitations for those
pollutants proposed to be limited;



         (b)   A proposed schedule of compliance, including
interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and



         (c)   A brief description of any other proposed special
conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in
the application.



      (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to division (E)(1) and (2) above and the city’s general permit
conditions into a significant industrial user permit.



   (F)   Permit supporting documents. The control authority shall
prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits.



      (1)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for
all significant industrial users,  including but not limited to permit
limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total
permitted flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable loadings
of the  POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the
Division. The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as
permits are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is
revised.



      (2)   The basis, or rational, for the pretreatment
limitations, including the following:



         (a)   Documentation of categorical determination,
including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical
pretreatment standards; and



         (b)   Documentation of the rationale of any parameters
for which monitoring has been waived  under 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2).



   (G)   Final action on significant industrial user permit
applications.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all
competed applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.



      (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to:



         (a)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1;



         (b)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements;



         (c)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days
notice and pursuant to division (J) below;



         (d)   Revoke permit pursuant to § 51.145;



         (e)   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 51.145;



         (f)   Deny a permit application when in the opinion of
the POTW Director such discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or
interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to
effectuate the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.



   (H)   Permit modification.



      (1)   (a)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to
the same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as follows:



            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge
when no other change in the permit is indicated.



            2.   A single modification of any compliance
schedule not in excess of four months.



            3.   Modification of compliance schedules
(construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will
not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational.



         (b)   Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall
include a time schedule for compliance.



      (2)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the  wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
division (B) above, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit
within 180 days after promulgation of the applicable National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard.



      (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall
constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143.215.1(b).



   (I)   Permit conditions.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a
permit with such conditions attached as he or she believes necessary to
achieve the purpose of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits
shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five
years);



         (b)   A statement of non-transferability;



         (c)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical
standards or local limits or both;



         (d)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law.



         (e)   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event
of an accidental discharge or slug load  as defined in § 51.002;



         (f)   Requirements to implement a plan or other controls
for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in §
51.002, if determined by the Treatment Operations Director to be necessary
for the user and;



         (g)   Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of
any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in § 51.002.  Also see §
51.074 and 51.075;



         (h)   A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any
applicable compliance schedule.



      (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited
to, the following provisions:



         (a)   Limited on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.



         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or monthly
average and/or maximum  concentration mass or other measures of identified
wastewater water pollutants or properties.



         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, and the like,
designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the treatment works.



         (d)   Development and implementation of spill control
plans or other special conditions, including management practices, necessary
to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges.



         (e)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the
municipal wastewater system.



         (f)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the management of the wastewater discharge to the system.



         (g)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
monitoring and sampling facilities and equipment.



         (h)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may
include sampling locations,  frequency of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests, and reporting schedules.



         (i)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any
instance of noncompliance and for  automatic re-sampling and reporting
within 30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s).



         (j)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment
standards and requirements.



         (k)   Requirements for submission of periodic
self-monitoring or special notification reports.



         (l)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans
and records relating to wastewater  discharges as specified in § 51.082 and
affording the POTW Director, or his or her representatives, access thereto.



         (m)   Requirements for prior notification and approval
by the POTW Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of
any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to
introduction in the system.



         (n)   Requirements for the prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee.



         (o)   Requirements for immediate notification of
excessive, accidental, or slug discharges, or any discharge which could cause
any problems to the system.



         (p)   A statement that compliance with the permit does
not relieve the permittee of  responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the permit.



         (q)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW
Director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws,
rules and regulations.



   (J)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less
than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



   (K)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new and/or changed operation.



   (L)   Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply
for a permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with this chapter a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of
the existing permit.



   (M)   Local non-significant industrial users.



      (1)   Users who do not meet the criteria for significant
industrial user may be required by the POTW Director to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit when it is determined by the POTW Director that such permit
meets the intent of this chapter. All users with an oil and grease
interceptor, trap, or separator shall submit an industrial waste
survey/permit application to determine the need for a local wastewater
discharge permit. The POTW Director may issue such local permits as necessary
to carry out the purpose of this chapter.



      (2)   A permitted user must keep a copy of the wastewater
permit on site at the local facility. For permitted users with an oil and
grease interceptor or separator, the user’s permit shall establish a
minimum frequency of service. More frequent service may be necessary to
comply with the established numerical limit.



      (3)   For permitted users with an oil and grease interceptor
or separator, failure to service the unit in the time period required by
permit and/or failure to provide documentation required by permit shall each
constitute violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



REPORTING REQUIREMENTS



§ 51.070  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.



   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administration decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
collection system shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains
the information listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (B) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants discharged.



   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth
below.



      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description shall include
a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the
collection system from the regulated processes.



      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the collection
system from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste streams formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.



         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable
to each regulated process.



         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying
the nature and concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the POTW Director of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
51.079.



         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 51.080 and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40
CFR 403.12(g)(4).



      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s
current  authorized representative as defined in § 51.002 and certified by
a professional engineer or qualified professional approved by the POTW
Director, indicating whether pretreatment standards are currently being met,
and, if not, whether  additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.



      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must be approved by the POTW
Director and must at a minimum meet the requirements set out in § 51.071.



      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with § 51.056.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.071  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.



   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule
required by § 51.070(B)(7):



   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are
not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, beginning and conducting routine operation);



   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;



   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director
no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date
of  compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate the
steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and



   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the POTW Director.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.072  REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the collection
system, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements
shall submit to the POTW Director a report containing the information
described in § 51.072(B)(4) through (6).  For users subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the users actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 51.056(C).



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.073  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the POTW Director, but in no case less once every six months,
submit such reports indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and to applicable
flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in
accordance with procedures set out in §§ 51.079 and 51.080. All periodic
compliance repots must be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.056(C).



   (B)   If a user subject to the reporting requirements in this
section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW
Director, using the procedures prescribed in § 51.079, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in the report.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.074  REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.



   Each user shall notify the POTW Director of any planned significant
change to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before effecting the
change. The  permittee shall not begin the changes until receiving written
approval from the control authority and/or municipality. See § 51.075(D) for
other reporting requirements.



   (A)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including a wastewater discharge permit or an application under § 51.056.



   (B)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 51.056 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
51.056 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include,
but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases or decreases of 20% or
greater, and the discharge of any previous unreported pollutants.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.075  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.



   (A)   (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not
limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic
nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in §
51.002, that may cause potential problems to the POTW the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the POTW Director of the incident.



      (2)   This notification shall include the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume (if known) and corrective
actions taken by the user.



   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter. Failure to notify the POTW Director of potential
problem discharges shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



   (D)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 51.002.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.076  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.



   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director, as the Director may require.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.077  NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.



   (A)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director, user is not
required to resample:



      (1)   If the POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility
at least once a month; or



      (2)   If the POTW Director samples between the user’s
initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.



   (B)   If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and analysis
in lieu of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a
violation, the POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results
of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation,
unless one of the following occurs:



      (1)   The POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at
least once a month; or



      (2)   The POTW Director samples the user between their initial
sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or



      (3)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform sampling
and submit the results to the POTW Director within the 30-day deadline of
the  POTW becoming aware of the violation.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.078  NOTIFICATION OF DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of a hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW Director,  the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge
into the collection system of a substance which, if  otherwise disposed of,
would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must
include the name of the hazardous waste was set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or
other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the collection system, the notification also shall contain
the following information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the waste stream discharge during the calendar month, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place
no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. The user shall not
begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the city. Any
notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by the users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the
self-monitoring requirements of §§ 51.070, 51.072, and 51.073.



   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A)
above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which
the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification.



   (C)   In the case of any new regulation under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and
toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.



   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.079  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed by a laboratory certified by the state to perform the wastewater
analyses in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard
or unless otherwise performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA
or the city. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA and the city.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.080  GRAB AND COMPOSITE SAMPLE COLLECTION.



   (A)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be ground for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



   (B)   Grab samples must be used for pH, Cyanide, Total Phenols, Oil
and Grease, Sulfide, Volatile Organic Compounds, and any other pollutants as
required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs
necessary to be representative of the user’s discharge. See 40 CFR
403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and
90-day compliance reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may allow
collection of multiple grabs during a 24 hour period which are composited
prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136.



   (C)   Composite samples. All wastewater composite samples shall be
collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there
is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using
flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director. When
authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be
representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.081  TIMING.



   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.082  RECORDKEEPING.



   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records or information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period
shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the POTW Director.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.083  ELECTRONIC REPORTING.



   The POTW Director may develop procedures for receipt of electronic
reports for any reporting requirements of this chapter. Such procedures shall
comply with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable under §§
51.145 through 51.148, and 51.999.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



COMPLIANCE MONITORING



§ 51.095  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   When required by this chapter to monitor its wastewater, a
user shall provide and operate, at the user’s own expense, monitoring
facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the
building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility
shall be situated on the user’s premises, but the POTW Director may, when
such location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow
the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.



   (B)   The  user shall provide ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.



   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with city
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specification. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city.



   (D)   Flow monitoring systems shall be calibrated semi-annually and
a test report sent to the city’s POTW Director. The Director may require
more frequent calibration. If the city is not satisfied with the accuracy and
reliability of the system, or flow data provided, all computations and flow
rates will be based upon water meter readings.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.096  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   (A)   The city may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with and all
requirements are being met. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater
is created or discharged shall allow the city, approval authority, and EPA or
their representative ready access at all times to all parts of the premises
for the purposes of inspection, sampling, determining compliance with any
orders, records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their
duties. The city, approval authority, and EPA shall have the right to set up
on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.



   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval
authority and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes
of performing the specific responsibilities.  Denial of the city’s,
approval authority’s, or EPA’s access to the user’s premises shall be a
violation of this chapter. Unreasonable delay may constitute a denial of
access.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.097  SEARCH WARRANTS.



   If the city, approval authority, or EPA have been refused access to a
building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and are able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify 
compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the city, approval authority, or EPA may obtain issuance of a search warrant
from the Superior Court of the General Court of Justice, Gaston County.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION



§ 51.105  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the release of any
portion of such information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit,
non-discharge permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however,
that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
will not be recognized as confidential information.



   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon
request.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)




ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE




§ 51.115  ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of those individual users which
were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable
noncompliance, in 15A NCAC 2H.0903(b)(34), with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS



§ 51.125  ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS.



   Hearings. The local government may conduct hearings in accordance with
its regular hearing procedure.



   (A)   Hearings. An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted
subject to conditions he deems unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a
civil penalty under § 51.999, or one issued an administrative order under §
51.145 shall have the right to a hearing or hearing(s) in accordance with
regular local government hearing procedures upon making written demand,
identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW Director within
30 days following receipt of the significant industrial user permit, civil
penalty assessment, or administrative order. Unless such written demand is
made within the time specified herein, the action shall be final and binding
and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those parts of the
permit being modified may be adjudicated. The term and conditions of a permit
under review shall be as follows:



      (1)   New permits.  Upon appeal, including judicial review in
the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued
permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the
permit is not is effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or
until the parties reach a mutual resolution.



      (2)   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review
in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed
permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect
until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a
mutual resolution.



      (3)   Terminated permits. Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is
in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.



   (B)   Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or
decision of the Council or Board serving the city is entered, may seek
judicial review of the order or decision by filing a written request for
review by the Superior Court of Gaston County.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)




AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS




§ 51.135  UPSET.



   (A)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with  categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (B) are met.



   (B)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall have the burden of demonstrating, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant  evidence that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in full compliance with applicable operation and
maintenance procedures; and



      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days):



         (a)   A description of the discharge and the cause of
the noncompliance;



         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates
and times, or if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the  noncompliance.



   (C)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



   (D)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination
on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.



   (E)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.136  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS DEFENSE.



   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
51.015(A) or the specific prohibitions in §§ 51.015(B)(2), (3), (5) through
(7), and (9) through (23) if it can prove that it did not know, or have
reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges
from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:



   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the
user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.137  BYPASS.



   (A)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are
not subject to the provision of divisions (B) and (C) below.



   (B)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need of a bypass,
it will submit prior  notice to the Treatment Director, at least ten days
before the date of bypass, if possible.



      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Treatment
Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass.  A
written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned
to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The Treatment
Director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.



   (C)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Treatment Director may take an
enforcement action against user for a bypass, unless:



      (1)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;



      (2)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such
as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes,
or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is
not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive
maintenance; and



      (3)   The user submitted notices as required under division
(B) above.



   (D)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in division (C).



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.145  ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW Director finds
that any user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater permit,
or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained therein or any other
pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may serve upon such user a
written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 45 days from the
date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. 
Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the POTW Director to
take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.



   (B)   Consent orders. The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter
into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the
noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the
discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified
by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an
administrative order issued pursuant to division (D) below.



   (C)   Show cause hearing.



      (1)   The POTW Director may order any user who causes or is
responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated or is violating this
chapter, or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the
POTW Director determines a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall
be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the
proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken.  The notice of the hearing, shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
before the hearing.  Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.



      (2)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at
the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is
appropriate. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, the assessment of a civil penalty or the taking of any other action
against the user, nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director
under this section subject to an administrative appeal under § 51.125.



   (D)   Administrative orders.



      (1)   When the POTW Director finds that any user has violated,
or continues to violate this chapter, permit or order issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past
violations are likely to recur, the POTW Director may issue an order to the
user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and direct the user
to do any of the following:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



         (b)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time
schedule set forth in the order;



         (c)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in
the event of a continuing or threatened violation, which may include, but is
not limited to halting operations or terminating discharge;



         (d)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated
within a specified time period.



      (2)   Appeals of administrative orders shall be as provided in
§ 51.125.



      (3)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at
the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is
appropriate.



   (E)   Emergency suspensions.



      (1)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment
service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order
to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or
the environment, interferes with the POTW or caused the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit.



      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held as soon as possible, but
in all events within 15 days from the date of the giving of the notice of
suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user’s
waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or endangerment to any
individuals.  The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and
the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliant discharge. The user shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date of the
above described hearing.



   (F)   Termination of permit and/or permission to discharge.



      (1)   The POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge
permit or permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited
to, the following reasons:



         (a)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;



         (b)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit or
permission to discharge, conditions of this chapter, or any applicable state
and federal regulations.



      (2)   Noncompliant users will be notified of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to
show cause under this section why the proposed action should not be taken.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.146  AVAILABLE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Remedies, in addition to those provided in § 51.999, are
available to the POTW Director, who may use any single one or combination
against a noncompliant user.  Additional remedies include, but are not
limited to:



   (B)   If any person violates this chapter, or any order or permit
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director,
through the City Attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal
and/or equitable relief in the General Court of Justice for Gaston County.



      (1)   Criminal violations.



         (a)   The District Attorney for the 27A Judicial
District may, at the request of the city, prosecute noncompliant users who
violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B.



         (b)   NOTE: Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to
negligently violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment
permit, or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by
local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate
any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly
and willfully fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local
governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term,
condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by local
governments or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at
the time that a person is placed in imminent danger of death or serious
bodily injury, (G.S. § 143-215.6B(h)), and to falsify information required
under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the General Statutes (G.S. §
143-215.6B(i)).



      (2)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the
POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a temporary restraining order or a preliminary
and permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the
activities in question.



      (3)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and will only
recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated
ability to comply.



      (4)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued hereunder
is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as
directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall
be subject to the provisions of the City Code of Ordinances governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing,
abating, or remedying said nuisance.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.147  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be
in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan. However, the POTW
Director may take other action against any user when circumstances warrant.
Further the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Authority to assess civil penalties. Any user who is found to
have failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, or the orders,
rules, regulations, and permit issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil
penalty of up to $25,000 per day per violation. Penalties between $10,000 and
$25,000 per day per violation may be assessed against a violator only if:



      (1)   For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has
been imposed against the violator within the five years preceding the
violation, or



      (2)   In the case of failure to file, submit, or make
available as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by
this chapter, or the orders, rules regulations, and permits issued hereunder,
only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was intentional and a
civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years
preceding the violation.



   (B)   Costs, attorney fees. The POTW Director may recover
attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the
cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.



   (C)   Determination of amount. In determining the amount of civil
penalty to be assessed, the POTW Director may consider any other relevant
circumstances, but shall consider the following:



      (1)   The degree and extent of harm to the natural resources,
to the public health, or to public or private property resulting from the
violation;



      (2)   The gravity and duration of the violation;



      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance and any other
economic benefit gained through the user’s violation;



      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing
to comply with the pretreatment program; and



      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the city.



   (D)   Collection. Actions for unpaid civil penalties shall be
referred to the City Attorney for collection.



   (E)   Appeals. A person who has been assessed a civil penalty by the
POTW Director and who desires to dispute such penalty must file a written
notice of appeal and follow the procedures set forth in § 51.125. During the
pendency of such appeal, the assessment of such penalty shall be stayed.



   (F)   Assessment not a bar. Assessment of a civil penalty shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the taking of any other action
against the user.



(Ord. 13-08-09, passed 9-9-13)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section




General Provisions




   52.01   Certain uses of water prohibited



   52.02   Permit required to connect to water system



   52.03   Supervision of connections



   52.04   Prohibited connections



   52.05   Service charges



   52.06   Rates and fees



   52.07   Regulations governing Arrowood Lake Reserve water supply



   52.08   Meters required for dwellings and business buildings



   52.09   Each structure to have separate meter; exceptions



   52.10   Metered customers not to provide water to other persons;
exceptions



   52.11   Prohibited taking of water by persons not liable for water
bills



   52.12   Size of service pipes



   52.13   Responsibility of customers; special equipment



   52.14   Taking water from fire hydrants



   52.15   Regulations on use of private wells




Water Shortage
Conservation Provisions




   52.30   Purpose



   52.31   Declaration of water shortage



   52.32   Stage I water shortage conditions; guidelines



   52.33   Stage II water shortage conditions; unlawful uses of water



   52.34   Stage III water shortage conditions; restrictions



   52.35   Lifting of water shortage restrictions



   52.36   Penalties and disconnection for noncompliance



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  CERTAIN USES OF WATER PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or to aid or abet in the
use of, city water obtained in any manner not authorized by the provisions of
this chapter.



('75 Code, § 18-15)  (Ord. 70, passed 10-21-54) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.02  PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONNECT TO WATER SYSTEM.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a connection to
be made to any city water main of any type without a permit to do so issued
by the Public Works Department.  Each application for a permit for any such
connection shall be made by the owner of the premises to be served by such
connec-tion, or his duly authorized agent, upon blanks furnished by the city,
and upon the payment of the required tapping fees.  A written permit shall
be issued for the connection.



   (B)   The tapping fees mentioned in division (A) of this section
shall be as prescribed by the City Council from time to time, and a copy of
each schedule of fees so prescribed shall be placed on file in the office of
the Director of Public Works.  Until such time as the City Council
prescribes water tapping fees pursuant to this section, the water tapping
fees in force immediately prior to the effective date of this code shall
continue in full force and effect.



   (C)   The officer issuing a water tap permit pursuant to division
(A) of this section may prescribe in such permit the size and specifications
of pipe to be laid, the manner of installation thereof and connection to the
city main, and such other conditions as may be appropriate and in accord with
this chapter and the policies of the City Council.



('75 Code, § 18-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.03  SUPERVISION OF CONNECTIONS.



   All connections to the city water mains of any type, which are not made
by city employees, shall be made by plumbers licensed by the city and their
work shall be subject to the supervision and approval of the Director of
Public Works.



('75 Code, § 18-4)



§ 52.04  PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.



   No plumbing, plumbing fixture, construction or valve, fitting or
device, apparatus, or connection shall be installed which will provide a
cross connection between a distributing system of water supply for drinking
and domestic purposes, and a drainage system, soil or waste pipe, so as to
permit or make possible the back flow of sewage or wastewater into the water
supply system.



('75 Code, § 18-5)  (Ord. 40, passed 2-3-54) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.05  SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   Schedules authorized.



      (1)   The City Council may from time to time, by resolution
not in conflict with state law, this code, or other ordinance, promulgate
schedules of charges for:



         (a)   City water furnished to customers;



         (b)   The installation of meters; and



         (c)   Other services, materials, and equipment furnished
by the city to customers of the city water services.



      (2)   Any such schedule may provide for the dates on which
bills are to be mailed to customers; the due date for the payment of such
bills; and civil penalties for the nonpayment of such bills when due. A copy
of each such schedule, while in effect, shall be maintained on file in the
office of the City Clerk and another copy shall be maintained on file in the
office of the appropriate city department, and in each such office such
schedule shall be available to the public for inspection and use during all
regular business hours.



   (B)   Changes in effect.  Until such time as the City Council
adopts a schedule of charges pursuant to division (A) of this section, the
charges in force immediately preceding the effective date of this code are
hereby continued in full force and effect.



   (C)   Establishment of rate category.  There is hereby established
for the purpose of determining the proper rate to charge customers receiving
services as defined herein, a category of customer who owns property both
inside and outside the city limits, where such property is one parcel or
tract of land, or two or more adjacent tracts, any portion of which lies
inside the city limits (hereinafter referred to as the “property”).



   (D)   Method for determining rates.  The rates for the category of
customer described in division (C) of this section shall be determined as
follows:



      (1)   The customer shall pay that current rate for water
services of the city being charged similar customers (for example,
residential or industrial) whose property being served lies wholly inside the
city limits (hereinafter referred to as the “inside rate”), if the
customer has no facility located on the property receiving services of the
city and lying outside the city limits.



      (2)   The customer shall pay that current rate for water
services of the city being charged similar customers whose property being
served lies wholly outside the city limits (hereinafter referred to as the
“outside rate”), if the customer has no facility located on the property
receiving services of the city and lying inside the city limits.



      (3)   If the customer has facilities located on the property
which lie both inside and outside the city limits and which receive water,
the customer may elect either of the following:



         (a)   To pay the current outside rate for water for all
facilities located on the property regard- less of whether the facilities are
located inside or outside the city limits.



         (b)   To petition the city for annexation of the entire
portion of customer's property lying  outside the city limits and receiving
services.  During the pendency of any such petition and until the effec-
tive date of the annexation, the cost of services for the customer shall be
computed at the outside rate; provided, however, if the ordinance annexing
the property is adopted and the property of the customer receiving services
is annexed, the customer shall receive a credit in an amount equal to the
difference between the inside rate and the outside rate from the date the
petition is filed until the effective date of the annexation for consumption
during the period. Provided further, however, the credit referred to in this
division shall apply to the consumption of any customer filing a petition for
annexation in proper form on or before May 13, 1985 for the period beginning
April 1, 1985 until the effective date of the annexation.



         (c)   To pay the current inside rate for  water for
those facilities located on the property lying wholly within the city limits
and to pay the current outside rate for water services for those facilities
located on the property lying wholly outside the city limits.  In the event
a facility located on the property lies both inside and outside the city
limits, the customer will pay the current inside rate for services provided
to the facility, only if the customer pays ad valorem taxes to the city on
the facility.  Provided, however, the option provided hereunder shall not
apply until the customer has fully complied with the provisions of division
(E) of this section.



   (E)   Separate meters required.  In the event the customer makes
the election under division (D)(3)(c) of this section, the customer shall
install to the satisfaction of the city two separate water systems to provide
service to the facilities located inside the city limits and outside the city
limits as well as separate meters or other appropriate measuring devices to
measure the amount of service provided to the facilities inside and outside
the city limits.



('75 Code, § 18-6) (Am. Ord. passed 4- -85)



§ 52.06  RATES AND FEES.



   (A)   Water rates and fees shall be determined from time to time by
ordinance by the City Council.



   (B)   Every person who owns improved property within the corporate
limits of the city shall be required to pay a service availability fee with
respect to such improved property equal to the then current minimum charge
for water and sewer service to residential customers unless such service is
not avail-able.  This availability charge shall not apply to owners who
maintain connections to both the water and sewer systems of the city for such
improved property.  Owners maintaining connections to one system but not the
other system shall pay an avail-ability charge equal to the minimum charge
for the available service to which the owner does not maintain a connection.



§ 52.07  REGULATIONS GOVERNING ARROWOOD LAKE RESERVE WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   No fishing, boating, swimming, bathing, or wading in the
city's reserve water supply lake on Arrowood Lake shall be permissible at any
time and is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   All occupied dwelling houses and business establishments
situated on the watershed of the Arrowood Lake shall be provided with
approved systems of sewage disposal constructed and main- tained in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and of the State Board of
Health.



   (C)   No human excrement or urine shall be voided or deposited on
the surface of the ground within a distance of 300 feet of the Arrowood Lake
or reservoir or streams, branches, springs or other tributaries thereto.



   (D)   No carcass of any animal shall be thrown into the Arrowood
Lake or the streams furnishing water thereto nor deposited on the surface of
the ground within the area of the watershed of the lake.



   (E)   No parks or other places of resort for the use and
entertainment of the public shall be established or maintained on the
watershed and no picnicking or camping shall be permitted thereon unless they
are provided with adequate sanitary facilities for the collection and
disposal of garbage and sewage.



   (F)   No child under 14 years-of-age shall be permitted within 300
feet of the Arrowood Lake unless accompanied by some adult person responsible
for his care and supervision.



   (G)   (1)   This section is not intended as a substitute for the
rules and regulations of the State Board of Health governing watersheds but
is to be construed as a supplement thereto.



      (2)   For the purpose of enforcing this section and the rules
and regulations of the State Board of Health governing the protection of the
city's reserve supply of water, the Director of Treatment Operations is
hereby designated as the official custodian of such water supply and its
watershed and, as such, he is hereby authorized to do all things necessary
and proper to enforce compliance with this section and the rules and
regulations of the State Board of Health; and he is further authorized and
directed to inspect and examine the watershed to ascertain if the premises of
the watershed are being maintained in accordance with this section and the
rules and regulations aforesaid and report his findings to the City Council,
and thereafter make such inspec- tions and examinations of the water supply
and the watershed as the circumstances may require; and he is further
authorized to do all things necessary to prevent the water supply from being
contaminated or rendered less wholesome for drinking purposes.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision
of this section or to violate or fail to comply with any rule or regulation
of the State Board of Health applicable to the Arrowood Lake watershed or its
tributaries.



('75 Code, § 18-7)  (Ord. 72, passed 10-21-54) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.08  METERS REQUIRED FOR DWELLINGS AND BUSINESS BUILDINGS.



   (A)   A meter shall be installed at each dwelling house and at each
building occupied and used for business purposes, in which the occupants
thereof are using city water; provided, that the occupants of any dwelling
house who also operate a business in a building situated on the same premises
shall not be required to have a separate meter at both the dwelling house and
place of business when the occupants of the dwelling house actually operate
the business.



   (B)   Such meter shall serve to measure the water used by the
occupants of such dwelling house, or the occupants of such building used for
business purposes, anywhere on the premises irrespective of whether any of
the outlets are in other buildings or structures on the premises if the water
is for the use of the occupants of the dwelling house or the occupants of the
building used for business purposes.



('75 Code, § 18-8) (Ord. 70, passed 10-21-54)



§ 52.09  EACH STRUCTURE TO HAVE SEPARATE METER; EXCEPTIONS.



   The owner of any two or more structures furnished city water is
required to have installed a meter at each of such structures occupied by
different tenants, irrespective of how many outlets there may be on the
premises and irrespective of whether the outlets are inside such premises;
provided, that the Director of Public Works may, in his discretion, authorize
water service to be provided through a single meter to two or more structures
under single ownership when the owner of such premises will agree to become
the customer of the city liable for the payment of all water charges
furnished to each structure through such meter, and any such agreement shall
be in writing and subject to the approval of the City Attorney.



('75 Code, § 18-9) (Ord. 70, passed 10-21-54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.10  METERED CUSTOMERS NOT TO PROVIDE WATER TO OTHER PERSONS;
EXCEPTIONS.



   The occupants of one building which has a meter shall not furnish water
to the occupants of another building which has no meter, and the occupants of
such building which has no meter shall not obtain water from the occupants of
another building which has a meter, except when any such person is
unavoidably deprived of water and then only for a period of 30 consecutive
days.



('75 Code, § 18-10) (Ord. 70, passed 10-21-54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.11 PROHIBITED TAKING OF WATER BY PERSONS NOT LIABLE FOR WATER BILLS.



   No person other than the owner of the property served by a meter, or
the tenant of such property who is jointly and severally liable with such
owner for the payment of water bills, shall take city water running through
such meter.



('75 Code, § 18-11) (Ord. 70, passed 10-21-54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.12  SIZE OF SERVICE PIPES.



   The size of water pipes shall be as specified by the Director of Public
Works.



('75 Code, § 18-12) (Ord. 40, passed 2-3-54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.13  RESPONSIBILITY OF CUSTOMERS; SPECIAL EQUIPMENT.



   Customers to whom water service is supplied at any location which
requires a special pump or other appliance to provide sufficient pressure to
obtain sufficient water shall be entirely responsible for furnishing such
equipment as aforesaid and shall bear all expenses in connection therewith,
including the purchase thereof and its installation, maintenance, repairs,
operation and power bills.



('75 Code, § 18-13)  (Ord. passed 7-16-64)



§ 52.14  TAKING WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS.



   No person, other than a member of the Fire Department or other city
officer or employee acting in line of duty, shall take water from any city
fire hydrant, plug, street washer, draw cock, hose pipe, or fountain; nor
shall anyone in any way use or take water from any city fire hydrant for
private use, unless such person shall first obtain a permit from the City
Manager or his designee and pay such permit fee as may be established by the
City Council.



('75 Code, § 18-14) (Ord. 66, passed  - - )  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.15  REGULATIONS ON USE OF PRIVATE WELLS.



   (A)   No well shall be installed within the city limits without the
owner of the property on which the well is to be located first obtaining a
permit to be issued by the Director of Public Works or the City Manager.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works or the City Manager shall be
authorized to issue a permit for the installation of a well upon a showing
satisfactory to the Director of Public Works or the City Manager that the
following criteria have been met:



      (1)   That municipal water is not available to the property
pursuant to the extension policies of the city then in force.



      (2)   That the well to be installed is to be used only for
commercial or farming operations.



      (3)   That the proposed well meets the minimum public health
standards of the county and the state.



      (4)   Any well that serves a property connected to the sewer
shall pay for sewer service at a rate set by City Council from time to time.



(Ord. passed 9-9-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



WATER SHORTAGE
CONSERVATION PROVISIONS



§ 52.30  PURPOSE.



   A water shortage shall be deemed to exist when water demand by
customers connected to the city water system reaches the point where
continued or increased demand will equal or exceed the system supply and
transmission capabilities.  When demand results in the condition whereby
customers cannot be supplied with water to protect their health and safety
then the demand must be substantially curtailed to relieve the water
shortage.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the term WATER SYSTEM shall
mean the water system of the city both inside and outside the city limits.



(Ord. passed 8-8-88)



§ 52.31  DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE.



   In the event it appears that water demand on the city water system may
exceed supply and transmission capabilities, the Water Superintendent may
recommend to the City Manager that voluntary water conservation measures be
implemented. The City Manager, following consultation with the City Council,
may declare a Stage I Water Shortage Condition Advisory requesting voluntary
water conservation by consumers. In the event that voluntary conservation
measures fail to relieve the demand on the system, the city may advance to a
Stage II or Stage III Water Shortage Condition. The City Manager, following
consultation with the City Council, may, with or without the recommendation
of the Water Superintendent, declare that a Stage II or Stage III Water
Shortage Condition exists.



(Ord. passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 52.32  STAGE I WATER SHORTAGE CONDITIONS; GUIDELINES.



   (A)   In the event a Stage I Water Shortage Condition is declared,
the following guidelines apply:



      (1)   An extensive publicity campaign will be initiated using
public media and specialized methods to inform the public of an impending or
existing water shortage.



      (2)   Conservation measures will be encouraged and recommended.



   (B)   In the event a Stage I water shortage condition is declared,
the following guidelines shall apply and the public shall be encouraged to
adhere to the following:



      (1)   Limit car washing to the minimum.



      (2)   Limit lawn and garden watering to that which is
necessary for plants to survive.



      (3)   Cease washing down outside areas such as sidewalks,
patios, parking lots, service bays or aprons, and the like.



      (4)   Cease leaving faucets running while shaving or rinsing
dishes.



      (5)   Limit watering shrubbery to the minimum required,
reusing household water when possible.



      (6)   Limit use of clothes washers and dish washers and when
used, operate fully loaded.



      (7)   Use showers rather than bathtubs for bathing, and limit
showers to no more than four minutes.



      (8)   Limit flushing of toilets by multiple usage.



      (9)   Use disposable and biodegradable dishes as much as
possible.



      (10)   Use flow restrictive and water saving devices.



      (11)   Limit hours of operation of water cooled air
conditioners.



      (12)   Temporarily delay new landscape work by all residents,
businesses, and institutions until the water shortage has ended.



(Ord. passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.33  STAGE II WATER SHORTAGE CONDITIONS; UNLAWFUL USES OF WATER.



   (A)   In the event a Stage II Water Shortage Condition is in effect
and the raw water storage facilities drop to 60% or less of storage then the
City Manager may declare a Stage II Water Shortage. In exercising the
authority for declaring a water shortage condition consideration shall be
given to water shortage levels and available sources of supply, available
usable storage on hand, drawdown rates, the projected supply capability,
outlook for precipitation, daily water use patterns and availability of water
from other sources.



   (B)   In the event the City Manager issues a declaration of a Stage
II Water Shortage Condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
or corporation to use or permit the use of water from the water system for
any purpose hereinafter set forth until such time as the declaration of water
shortage has been rescinded. In addition to the voluntary guidelines already
in effect, it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the city water
system in the following manner:



      (1)   To water lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers, and
vegetable gardens except in accordance with the following schedule set forth
below for specific areas of the city. Such watering shall be done by
hand-held hose or container or drip irrigation system only. All areas north
of the tracks of the Southern Railroad on Sundays and Thursdays between 6:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m. All areas south of the tracks of the Southern Railroad on
Saturdays and Wednesdays between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.



      (2)   To fill newly constructed swimming and/or wading pools
or to add water or to refill private swimming and/or wading pools which have
been drained.



      (3)   To wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes,
or any other type of mobile equipment, including commercial washing.



      (4)   To wash down outside areas such as streets, driveways,
service station aprons, parking lots, office buildings, exterior of existing
or newly constructed homes or apartments, sidewalks, or patios, or to use
water for other similar purposes.



      (5)   To use water from public or private fire hydrants for
any purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency.



      (6)   To operate or induce water into any ornamental fountain,
pool, or pond, or other structure for similar use of water.



      (7)   To serve drinking water in restaurant cafeterias, or
other food establishments, except upon request.



      (8)   To operate water-cooled air conditioners or other
equipment that does not recycle cooling water, except when health and safety
are adversely affected.



      (9)   To use water for any unnecessary purpose or to
intentionally waste water.



(Ord. passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.34  STAGE III WATER SHORTAGE CONDITIONS; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   In the event a Stage II Water Shortage Condition exists and
city raw water storage facilities drop to 40% or less of storage, then the
City Manager may declare a Stage III Water Shortage. In exercising the
authority for declaring a water shortage condition consideration shall be
given to water storage levels and available sources of supply, available
usable storage on hand, drawdown rates, the projected supply capability,
outlook for precipitation, daily water use patterns and availability of water
from other sources.



   (B)   In the event the City Manager issues a declaration of Stage
III Water Shortage Condition then it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
or corporation to use or permit the use of water from the city water system
for any purpose hereinafter set forth until such time as the declaration of
water shortage has been rescinded. In addition to the restrictions for Stage
I and Stage II Water Shortage Conditions, the following restrictions shall
also apply:



      (1)   To fill or add any water into any pool.



      (2)   Use water outside a structure for any use other than an
emergency involving a fire.



      (3)   Fire protection to be maintained by the drafting of
ponds, rivers, and the like, wherever possible.



      (4)   The use of throw-away utensils and plates is encouraged
and recommended at all eating establishments.



      (5)   To operate an evaporative air conditioner which recycles
water except during operating hours of business.



(Ord. passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.35  LIFTING OF WATER SHORTAGE RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Water shortage conditions will expire when the City Manager,
after consultation with the City Council and upon recommendation of the Water
Superintendent, deems that the condition which caused the alert was abated.



   (B)   The expiration or cancellation of a water shortage declaration
shall be promptly and extensively publicized.



(Ord. passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 52.36  PENALTIES AND DISCONNECTION FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.



   Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter shall be
subject to the following civil penalties:



   (A)   Any residential water customer who violates any provisions of
this subchapter shall be subject to civil penalties. Civil penalties for a
residential violation of Stage II or III mandatory restrictions shall be as
follows:



      (1)   A written warning for the first offense.



      (2)   A civil penalty in the amount of $100 for the second
offense.



      (3)   A civil penalty in the amount of $200 for the third
offense.



      (4)   Disconnection of service for the fourth and successive
offenses.



   (B)   Any nonresidential water customer who violates any provision
of this subchapter shall be subject to civil penalties double in amount to
the above penalties.



   (C)   Violations shall be accumulated by all persons so long as the
restrictions contained in this subchapter, in any of its stages, are
continuously in effect, and until no stage of this subchapter has been in
effect for a period of one calendar year.



      (1)   Violations of any of the mandatory restrictions of any
stage shall accumulate with violations of other stages.



      (2)   Should a person move, or cease and renew service during
the period described herein, the person's violations shall continue to
accumulate as if such move or cessation had not occurred.



   (D)   Each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and
distinct criminal and civil offense. Each violation of the subchapter shall
be a separate offense even if occurring on the same day.



   (E)   Notwithstanding the above penalty structure, pursuant to the
provisions of G.S. § 162A-88, service may be temporarily discontinued for
willful disregard of this subchapter, and fees may be imposed before
restoration of service.



      (1)   For non-potable uses, this disconnection may be without
prior notice.



      (2)   In the event of such discontinuation, the meter may be
removed and all tap fees and deposits forfeited.



      (3)   Reconnection will only be made by payment of current due
amounts, penalties as set forth above, and new tap fees.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for customers to reconnect water
service discontinued for noncompliance.



         (a)   Any customer reconnecting such services shall be
guilty of meter tampering.



         (b)   A fine of $500 will be assessed for such violation.



(Ord. passed 8-8-88; Am. Ord. passed 1-14-08; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



CHAPTER 53:  NATURAL GAS



Section



   53.01   Authority to establish rules and regulations



   53.02   Natural gas incentive rates



   53.03   Charge for new taps



   53.04   Construction of new taps



§ 53.01  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The City Council may from time to time establish rules and
regulations regarding the opera- tion, maintenance, and use of the natural
gas system.



   (B)   Such rules, regulations, and policies shall be in form readily
available to the public.



§ 53.02  NATURAL GAS INCENTIVE RATES.



   (A)   The city will rebate to the developer, contractor or homeowner
“all or a portion of” the actual charge for the natural gas tap as an
incentive to the natural gas system customer. The amount of the rebate will
depend on the number of “connections” (gas fired appliances) installed
within the residence. The amount of the rebate shall be set forth in the
annual budget ordinance.



   (B)   The house or apartment must connect to the city's natural gas
distribution system.



   (C)   The customer or developer must enter into a written agreement
with the city to use the city's natural gas to fuel all of the gas fired
appliances for which the rebate has been given for a period of at least ten
years.



      (1)   Any customer who subsequently wants to use a different
fuel must first refund the rebate to the city.  If a developer received the
rebate, the current homeowner wishing to switch fuels must refund the
rebate.  This refund shall not apply if the appliance has been utilized for
which a customer or a developer received the rebate, for a period of at least
ten years.



      (2)   The refund required under division (C)(1) of this
section shall not be prorated for any reason.



   (D)   The rebates will be given for the initial installation in new
houses or apartments and for change-outs in existing houses or apartments
from electric or fuel oil to natural gas water heaters and/or space heating
units or the first time installation or change-outs from electric to gas
units for the other appliances named.



   (E)   A customer may qualify for either rebate, or both.



   (F)   The rebates will be given after installation, and passing
inspection by the city's Natural Gas Department.



   (G)   In the case of retrofitting an electric or fuel oil unit to a
natural gas unit, the city will give a rebate for the actual cost of the
retrofit, or the normal rebate amount, whichever is less.



   (H)   Dual-fuel source units shall not qualify for either rebate.



(Ord. 93-9-2, passed 9- -93; Am. Ord. 94-8-3, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. 96-1-1,
passed 1-8-96; Am. Ord. passed 2-9-04)



§ 53.03  CHARGE FOR NEW TAPS.



   (A)   All gas tap fees, or charges will be set forth as adopted in
the city’s annual budget ordinance.  This change shall not modify the
current extension policy and it shall remain in effect.



   (B)   (1)   The natural gas tap fee will be waived for
residential customers with a minimum of gas hot water heater or gas furnace
for a period of two years.



      (2)   The waiver is available only for standard AC250 and
AL425 meters and excess flow valve fees will still be applicable.



(Ord. 93-9-2, passed 9- -93; Am. Ord. passed 2-9-04; Am. Res. passed 12-12-11)



§ 53.04  CONSTRUCTION OF NEW TAPS.



   The city will no longer make natural gas taps for residential or
commercial customers until there is evidence submitted to the Gas
Superintendent's satisfaction that the applicant intends to immediately
connect to the gas system and become an active customer. The City Manager and
the Gas Superintendent shall develop procedures for the implementation of
this policy.



(Ord. passed 8-8-94)



CHAPTER 54:  SOLID WASTE



Section




General Provisions




   54.01   Definitions



   54.02   Disposal of refuse in city limits by nonresidents prohibited



   54.03   Prohibited disposal of wastes



   54.04   Transportation of refuse



   54.05   Depositing debris in catch basins, manholes, or drains



   54.06   Maintenance of premises; duty of occupant



   54.07   Notice to abate violation



   54.08   Appeal of order of abatement



   54.09   Abatement of nuisance by city



   54.10   Request by owner for abatement by city; charges; liens



   54.11   Gaston County landfill fees



   54.12   Recycling




Refuse Collection Service




   54.20   Permit required to engage in business of waste collection,
or brush clearing



   54.21   Collection practices



   54.22   Containers for refuse; regulations



   54.23   [Reserved]



   54.24   Pre-collection practices



   54.25   Point of collection



   54.26   Multi-family sanitation services



   54.27   Yard waste and leaf collection practices



   54.28   Wastes the city will not collect




Hazardous and Industrial Wastes




   54.35   Hazardous materials



   54.36   Industrial wastes



 



   54.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 54.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL and AGRICULTURAL WASTES. Principally, the manure and crop
residue from various agricultural pursuits including dairying and raising of
livestock and poultry.  Animal waste also includes, in addition to items
mentioned above, wastes from stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken coops,
veterinary establishments, and the like.



   ASHES.  The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other
combustible material in homes, stores, institutions, and small industrial
establishments for the purposes of heating, cooking, and disposing of
combustible waste material.  Ashes are usually com- posed of a mixture of
fine powdery residue, cinders, clinkers, and small portions of unburned or
partially burned fuel or other materials.  Ashes shall contain no live
embers or other burning materials.



   BUILDING RUBBISH.  Any materials or other substances accumulated as a
result of repairs or additions to existing buildings, construction of new
buildings, demolition of existing buildings, or moving of buildings,
including but not limited to bricks, stone, concrete, wood, lumber, siding,
shingles of any type, and the like.



   CONTRACTED SERVICES (BRUSH).  Any tree or shrubbery trimming resulting
from work performed by landscaping or tree service contractors or other
commercial workers, including, but not limited to land clearing work.  This
shall also apply to any job performed by anyone, including the owner or
resident of the property, that is of such scale that heavy equipment as used
by contractors is needed to complete the work.



   DECLARED NUISANCE.  Anything that causes injury or damage to the
health or life of any person or that causes an offensive odor.



   DEAD ANIMALS.  Those animals that die naturally or from disease or are
killed accidentally. Condemned animals or parts from slaughterhouses or
similar places are not included in this item.



      (1)   SMALL DEAD ANIMALS.  Dogs, cats, rabbits, squirrels,
chickens, rats, and other similar animals.



      (2)   LARGE DEAD ANIMALS.  Horses, cows, goats, sheep, hogs,
and other similar animals.



   GARBAGE.  The byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs, resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of food, or other matter
which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction, or the generation of
noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve
as breeding or feeding material for flies, other insects, or animals.



   HAZARDOUS REFUSE.  Materials such as paint, poison, acids, caustics,
chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, and explosives and any
other material declared hazardous by the U.S. EPA or any other responsible
agency.



   HOUSEHOLD TRASH.  Any waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust,
rags, bottles, cans, or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which
is usually attendant to housekeeping.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  All waste, including solids, semi-solids, sludges
and liquids, created by factories, processing plants, or manufacturing
enterprises.



   JUNK.  Any item, including but not limited to, dilapidated furniture,
appliances, machinery, equipment, building materials, automobile parts,
tires, or other items which are either in a wholly or partially rusted,
wrecked, junked, dismantled, or inoperative condition.



   LITTER.  Any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, can, bottle, box,
container, wrapper, paper, paper product, tire, appliance, mechanical
equipment or part, building or construction material, tool, machinery, wood,
motor vehicle or equipment, sludge from a waste treatment facility, water
supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, from domestic,
industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural, or governmental operations. 
LITTER does not include political pamphlets, handbills, religious tracts,
newspapers, and other such printed materials the unsolicited distribution of
which is protected by the Constitution of the United States or the
Constitution of North Carolina.



   MULTI-RESIDENTIAL UNIT.  Any duplex, apartment, group of apartments or
condominiums, or housing units designed for or occupied by more than one
family.



   NORMAL USE (ROLL OUT CONTAINER), RESIDENTIAL.  Placement of any
variety of both combustible and noncombustible solid waste materials from
households, including such items as plastic, waste paper, rags, sweepings,
and similar waste materials ordinarily accumulated around a house.



   NORMAL USE (ROLL OUT CONTAINER), BUSINESS.  Placement of any variety
of both combustible and noncombustible solid waste materials from businesses,
including such items as plastic, waste paper, rags, sweepings, and similar
waste materials ordinarily accumulated in general business operations.  This
list shall not include oil, oil cans, paint/paint thinners, and the like.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Property owned by any person, not a political
entity, including but not limited to, yards, grounds, driveways, entrances of
passage- ways, parking areas, storage areas, vacant land, bodies of water and
including sidewalks, grass strips, one-half of alleys, curbs, or
right-of-ways up to the edge of the pavement of any public street.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.  Newspapers, magazines, glass bottles, steel and
aluminum cans and plastic drink bottles or other such material as designated
by the state Public Works Director.



   REFUSE.  Solid waste consisting of garbage, household trash, or
business trash.



   ROLLCART.  A plastic, mobile, top-loading, residential refuse
container of 90-gallon capacity compatible to the city collection equipment.



   SINGLE RESIDENTIAL UNIT.  Any dwelling place designed for or occupied
by one family.



   WEEDS AND GRASS.  Weeds and grass in excess of 12 inches in height. 
Weeds and grass on heavily wooded lots where equipment cannot maneuver on the
lot because of the density are not included in this definition.



   YARD TRASH.  Accumulation of lawn, grass, or shrubbery cuttings or
clippings, bushes, limbs, and dry leaf rakings free of dirt, rocks, large
branches, and bulky or noncombustible material.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)



§ 54.02  DISPOSAL OF REFUSE IN CITY LIMITS BY NONRESIDENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation not
a resident of the city to bring trash, refuse, rubbish, or other forms of
waste into the city and to discard it or to deposit it for collection by the
city.  An example of a violation of this section is a person who owns or is
employed by a business within the city limits, but who lives outside the city
limits, bringing his household garbage into the city and depositing it or
otherwise leaving it for collection by the city.



   (B)   Ownership of trash, refuse, rubbish, or other forms of waste,
including designated recyclable materials, set out or placed in receptacles
for collection by the city shall be vested in the city.



(Ord. 88-1, passed 12-12-88)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.03  PROHIBITED DISPOSAL OF WASTES. 



   (A)   Prohibited disposal of wastes generally.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, throw, or
otherwise deposit upon any city street or sidewalk, or in any public place
not designated for such purpose, any scrap paper, bottles, cans, glass, rags,
feathers, building material scraps, tree and shrubbery trimmings, liquid
wastes, lubricating or fuel oil, flammable or combustible wastes or any other
trash, refuse, or debris.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause
to be obstructed the free flow of water in, over, along, upon, or through any
drainage way in any public street or other public way, or in any creek,
stream, or other natural drainage course within the city limits by depositing
any trash, refuse, tree or shrubbery trimmings, building material scraps, or
other matter therein.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, or
cause any gasoline, fuel oil, Nephro, or other flammable liquid, or any
wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance, or any lubricating oil,
grease or detergent, to drain into any drainage ditch, street gutter,
culvert, or other drainage way in any public street or other public way or in
any creek, stream, or other natural drainage course within the city limits. 
It shall also be illegal to place any type of lubricating oil, or other
above- named materials in any container provided by the city for garbage pick
up.  All lubricating oils should be taken to recycling centers.



      (4)   No person, including but not limited to, any firm,
organization, private corporation, or governing body, agents or employees of
any municipal corporation shall intentionally or recklessly throw, scatter,
spill or place or intentionally or recklessly throw, scatter, spill or placed
or otherwise dispose of any litter upon any public property or private
property not owned by him within this State or in any waters under the
jurisdiction of city, including, but not limited to, any public street,
highway, public park, lake, river, campground, forest land, recreational
area, trailer park, highway, road, street or alley except as the same shall
be deposited into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will
be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any
part of such private or public property or waters.  When litter is blown,
scattered, spilled, thrown or placed from a vehicle or water craft, the
operator thereof shall be presumed to have committed such offense.  This
presumption, however does not apply to a vehicle transporting agricultural
products or supplies when the litter from that vehicle is a nontoxic,
biodegradable agricultural product or supply.



   (B)   Waste matter subject to scattering.  Except as provided in
§§ 54.20 through 54.28 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person
to deposit or permit to accumulate any waste matter or refuse of any
description which is subject to scattering by animals or the elements of
nature on that part of any property which is adjacent to a street or public
place. This section shall not prohibit the burning of yard trash on one's own
property when approved and permits issued as per § 91.40 of this code.  Any
burning other than that permitted in § 91.40 shall be prohibited.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.04  TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE.



   No swill, slops, garbage, bones, offal, kitchen waste, or refuse shall
be transported through the city streets except in watertight metal containers
with tight- fitting covers.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.05  DEPOSITING DEBRIS IN CATCH BASINS, MANHOLES, OR DRAINS.



   No person shall throw, drop, or deposit leaves, shrubs, or any other
debris into any catch basin, manhole, or drainage ditch or structure in the
city.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.06  MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES; DUTY OF OCCUPANT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, and persons in
charge of any premises within the city to maintain such premises free of any
accumulation of garbage, rubbish, appliances, discarded household items and
other similar items. The unscreened storage of materials not customarily
stored outdoors in residential neighborhoods is prohibited, including but not
limited to: tires, construction materials, household items, broken toys and
other miscellaneous house/yard debris.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, and person in
charge of any premises within the city to maintain such premises free of
noxious weeds and grass, undergrowth, and other vegetation which affords a
harboring or breeding place for vermin, insects, rodents, or reptiles, and
grass which is 12 inches or more in height, not grown for agricultural
purposes, shall be deemed undergrowth within the meaning of this section.



   (C)   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant
or occupied parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city is hereby
declared to be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety and to
constitute a public nuisance:



      (1)   The uncontrolled growth of weeds or grass to a height of
18 inches or more within 100 feet of any residential structure or any
occupied nonresidential structure except in the downtown business district in
which all weeds or grass must be maintained.  This division shall not apply
to areas that are not accessible or controllable by reasonable means, or to
natural areas which customarily exist in a natural condition as determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer.



      (2)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is
offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or which is inhabited by rats, mice,
snakes, or vermin of any kind which may be dangerous to public health.



      (3)   Any accumulation of solid wastes not in compliance with
this chapter including litter, garbage, trash and other refuse.



      (4)   Open wells.



      (5)   An accumulation of stagnant water causing or threatening
to cause the inhabitation thereof by mosquitos.



      (6)   Any automobile part, including but not limited to tires,
motors, batteries, and the like.



      (7)   Any piles of wood, furniture, clothes, building
materials, and the like.



      (8)   Any other condition detrimental to the public health
which violates the rules and regulations of the Gaston County Health
Department.



      (9)   Junk, trash and litter. It shall be unlawful for any
person to have on their premises materials that would create a littered
condition, such as dilapidated and/or broken furniture, appliances,
machinery, building materials, automobile parts, tires or any other items
which are in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or
inoperative condition. Such items may be stored on the premises when they are
placed in a completely enclosed building or dwelling.



   (D)   Keeping upholstered furniture which is not manufactured for
outdoor use in outdoor areas where such furniture is visible to neighbors and
passersby in the public right-of-way is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
Accordingly, no person shall place, use, keep, store or maintain any
upholstered furniture not manufactured for outdoor use, including, without
limitation, upholstered chairs, upholstered couches and mattresses, in or on
any porch, patio or other unenclosed structure where such furniture is
visible from a public right-of-way or from the ground level of adjacent
property, and no property owner or property manager shall knowingly permit
any such activity to occur on property owned or managed by such person.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92; Am. Ord. passed 11-8-10; Am. Res. passed 4-11-11; Am.
Res. passed 7-9-12)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.07  NOTICE TO ABATE VIOLATION.



   Upon investigation and finding by any city officer that there exists on
any city property conditions constituting a public nuisance as described in
this subchapter, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the respondent of
such conditions. The respondent is the person in possession of the property
where a public nuisance is located, as well as the owner of such property, if
different from the former. The notice shall be by first class mail and
certified mail or by first class mail and in person by a sworn officer of the
city or county. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the certified mail is
unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office
within ten days after mailing. The notice shall order the abatement of the
premises within 15 days of the receipt of such notice except for the public
nuisance described in § 54.06(B). The notice of such conditions as described
in § 54.06(B) shall order the abatement of the premises within ten days of
receipt of such notice.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92; Am. Res. passed 4-11-11)



§ 54.08  APPEAL OF ORDER OF ABATEMENT.



   At any time before the expiration of the 15-day abatement period
specified in § 54.07 of this chapter, the respondent may request a hearing
before the City Council to appeal the finding of the Code Enforcement Officer
that a public nuisance exists on the premises.  The request for hearing must
be in writing and must be filed in the office of the City Manager.  The City
Manager shall set a time for the hearing, being the next scheduled Council
meeting. The initial abatement order shall be temporarily suspended pending
such hearing.  At the hearing, the individual shall be given the opportunity
to present evidence to refute the findings which supported the abatement
order.  Upon completion of the hearing, the Council shall consider the
evidence before it and shall either revoke the initial order, issue a final
order which differs from the initial order, or reinstate the initial order as
a final abatement order. No delay or postponement of decision will be made
concerning matters that have been deemed public nuisances.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)



§ 54.09  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY CITY.



   Upon the occurrence of either of the following conditions the Code
Enforcement Officer shall cause the condition to be removed or otherwise
remedied by having employees of the city and/or private contractors go upon
the premises and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance under the
supervision of an officer or employee designated by the Code Enforcement
Officer when:



   (A)   A hearing is requested and held under § 54.08 of this chapter
resulting in either a final order with modifications or the reinstatement of
the initial order as a final order, and such order is not complied with
within five days from adjournment of the hearing.



   (B)   No hearing is requested or held, and the respondent, having
been ordered to abate such public nuisance fails, neglects, or refuses to
abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance within 15 days from
receipt of the order.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)



§ 54.10  REQUEST BY OWNER FOR ABATEMENT BY CITY; CHARGES; LIENS.



   (A)   The owner of property where a public nuisance has been found
to exist may request the city, in writing, to remove such condition, and the
city may remove the offending condition pursuant to such request.  The full
cost of said removal shall be borne by the requesting owner.



   (B)   (1)   The actual cost incurred by the city in removing or
otherwise remedying a public nuisance pursuant to this section shall be
charged to the owner of the offending property, and the owner shall pay these
charges within 30 days after receiving from the city a statement of charges.



      (2)   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a
public nuisance are not paid within 30 days after receipt of a statement of
charges under division (B)(1) of this section, such charges shall become a
lien upon the land where the public nuisance existed and shall be collected
as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)



§ 54.11  GASTON COUNTY LANDFILL FEES.



   The City Council may establish and fix from time to time such landfill
charges and other fees as necessary.



§ 54.12  RECYCLING.



   The City Council may establish and fix from time to time such fees to
provide recycling collection service and add said fees to customer utility
bills.



REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE



§ 54.20  PERMIT REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN BUSINESS OF WASTE COLLECTION OR BRUSH
CLEARING.



   (A)   Waste collection business.  No person shall engage in the
business of collecting, hauling, or transporting in the city, any waste
without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager.



   (B)   Brush/land clearing.  A permit will be required for land
clearing or brush clearing that meets the definition of contracted services
as defined in § 54.01 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.21  COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, and except in
the case of emergency arising from an act of God or under circumstances over
which the Public Works Department has no control, the Public Works Department
or its agents shall collect, remove, and dispose of certain refuse in
residential and general business sections of the city once per week. In
business districts, twice per week collection may be offered when deemed
necessary by the city.



   (B)   Industrial waste shall be collected, removed, and disposed of
by the operator of the factory, plant, or enterprise creating or causing the
same in accordance with the provisions of this code.



   (C)   Construction debris. The city does not collect construction
debris. Landfill regulations pertaining to construction materials prohibit
the city from picking up any type of construction debris. Disposal of all
debris from do-it-yourself homeowner projects and independent contractor work
shall be the responsibility of the person doing the work. This includes, but
is not limited to, lumber, shingles, roofing, ceilings, flooring, brick, and
other construction materials. Fines and other charges may be levied for
collection of unauthorized debris.



   (D)   No refuse shall be collected where refuse receptacles cannot
be serviced by sanitation personnel without unlocking, opening, or reaching
over a door, gate, or similar obstacle, encountering a porch, carport or
garage, encountering a dog, or otherwise being denied reasonable access by
parked vehicles, yard tools, equipment, or similar objects.



   (E)   Once an established collection route is established, any
changes shall be advertised in the local newspaper once at least 15 days
before such changes become effective; provided, that such notice may be given
by other means and within a lesser period of time in cases of emergency.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92; Am. Res. passed 9-12-11)



§ 54.22  CONTAINERS FOR REFUSE; REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Every person owning or occupying a single- and/or multi-family
residential unit shall store all garbage and refuse in containers, as
specified herein, so as to eliminate wind driven debris and unsightly litter
in and about their premises.



   (B)   (1)   Each residential unit, not using dumpster service,
shall use at least one 96-gallon roll- out container provided by the city or
the city’s agent. Additional containers, if needed, may be obtained for
additional fees. Containers remain the property of the city or its agent.
Solid waste containers shall not be removed from the residence where
assigned. The maximum number or roll-out containers allowed per residence
shall be two.



      (2)   Each residential unit, not using dumpster service, shall
have at least one recycling container provided by the city or the city’s
agent. Additional containers, if needed, may be obtained for additional fees.
Containers remain the property of the city or its agent. Recycling containers
shall not be removed from the residence where assigned. The maximum number of
recycling containers allowed shall be two.



   (C)   All persons doing business within the city limits shall use
containers as outlined in this section if dumpster service is not utilized. A
96-gallon container may be provided, when feasible and in accordance with
city code regulations. The maximum number of containers will be determined by
staff.



   (D)   Containers shall be used for the purpose of holding regular
household refuse.  No items such as sticks, yard clippings, leaves, and the
like may be placed in roll-out containers.



   (E)   Stones, bricks, iron items, and the like shall not be placed
in the containers.



   (F)   Damaged or missing containers shall be reported to the city.
If a container is stolen, a police report shall be filed by the resident.
Malicious damage may be assessed against property owners and/or tenants of
the property.



   (G)   Residents are required to clean roll-out containers when
needed to keep down odor and insects.



   (H)   The city may refuse to collect the following types of solid
wastes and it shall be unlawful for any person to place any of the following
in any container or receptacle for collection by the city:



      (1)   Hazardous refuse and industrial waste. All such refuse
shall be stored in suitable leakproof containers that will ensure that no
such refuse or wastes leak or spill onto any public or private property.  It
shall be the responsibility of the person in possession of the premises to
see that it is disposed of properly.



      (2)   Oils, lubricants or any other type matter that may
damage the container, cause it to leak, or erode wheel parts.



      (3)   Contagious disease refuse.  The removal of clothing,
bedding, or other refuse from homes or the places where highly infectious
diseases have occurred shall be performed under the supervision and direction
of the County Health Department.



      (4)   Human tissues or wastes resulting from operation,
autopsy, or obstetrical procedures or any other material of similar nature.



      (5)   Materials of any kind or nature, including ashes, which
may contain any hot or live coals or fire.



      (6)   Raw or uncooked seafood waste (fish heads, and the like).



      (7)   Dead animals of any sort.



      (8)   Hypodermic needles and/or any other sharp object.



      (9)   Any other items that are prohibited from disposal in the
Gaston County Landfill.



   (I)   Violations of this section shall be punished as spelled out in
G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92; Am. Res. passed 9-12-11)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.23  [RESERVED].



§ 54.24  PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   The occupant, whether owner or tenant of single- and multi-family
residential units requiring a roll-out cart to store refuse shall adhere to
the following pre- collection practices:



   (A)   Garbage and general rubbish shall be stored only in
receptacles approved by § 54.22 of this chapter and such receptacles shall
be covered at all times.



   (B)   All dangerous items, such as broken glass, and the like, shall
be securely wrapped to avoid injury to collection crews.



   (C)   Any refuse shall have liquid drained from it prior to being
placed in the container for collection.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92; Am. Res. passed 9-12-11)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.25  POINT OF COLLECTION.



   (A)   Time of collection.  All solid waste and recycling containers
shall be placed at a location designated by the city not more than 24 hours
before the time set for collection. Containers shall be removed from the
street and stored away from the front of the property prior to 9:00 p.m. on
the day of collection.



   (B)   Handicapped provisions.  In the event a resident is
physically unable to place the cart at the curbside and there is no one
living in the household that will place it at curbside for him or her, the
resident may request special pick-up consideration.  All requests are to be
made to the city and will require a doctor’s certification prior to
approval.



   (C)   Receptacles.  Receptacles or containers other than those
allowed in § 54.22 of this chapter may be considered solid waste and may be
disposed of by the city or its agent.



   (D)   Business building collection.  Business building collection
areas shall be from the rear, side, or  in  certain  cases, front. 
Where  front  collection points are used, empty containers shall not be
left on the street after sundown of collection day.  The best collection
location for businesses shall be determined by the city.



   (E)   Street litter containers.  Businesses shall not use street
litter containers for the disposal of business- generated trash.



   (F)   Bulk collection. The city may collect minimal bulk items, such
as furniture and the like. Items for bulk collection shall be placed at
curbside. This service shall be available to residential units only. This
does not include construction or building materials. Fines and other charges
may be levied for collection of unauthorized debris.



   (G)   Appliances.  Appliances will be picked up on a bi-monthly
schedule. 



   (H)   Yard waste.  Yard clippings, leaves, and the like shall be
placed in plastic bags at curbside for pickup. These shall not be placed in
roll-out containers. The city will remove leaves using a leaf vacuum machine
between the dates of October 1 and April 1.



   (I)   The owner or owner’s agent for multi-family units shall
provide a central location area for placement of roll-out containers for
pick-up.  This location shall be one that meets the standards set forth in
this chapter and it will be subject to approval of the city.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92; Am. Ord. 94-9-3, passed 9-12-94; Am. Ord. 97-4-1,
passed 4- -97; Am. Res. passed 9-12-11)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.26  MULTI-FAMILY SANITATION SERVICES.



   (A)   The city, either itself or through its agents, will provide
residential garbage collection services on the same basis as single-family
residences to any multi-family complex that the service was being provided to
prior to the adoption of this section (all except Park Terrace and Baytree
Apartments).



   (B)   For all multi-family facilities built or brought into the city
after the effective date of this section containing five or more units on a
single site, the owner shall provide tenants with garbage and trash
collection service at his or her expense.



   (C)   All multi-family facilities at which the city provides garbage
collection service under this section shall also participate in the city’s
recycling program, if an when offered to multi-family sites, and shall pay
the required fees for recycling on the same basis that the water and landfill
fees are charged, such fees to be adjusted by City Council from time to time.



(Ord. 93-10-1, passed 10-11-93; Am. Res. passed 9-12-11)



§ 54.27  YARD WASTE AND LEAF COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   Tree, hedge, and shrubbery trimmings shall be placed at the curb for
collection in accordance with the following guidelines:



   (A)   No tree trunks, branches, limbs, and the like, larger than six
inches in diameter, longer than five feet in length, shall be collected by
the city.



   (B)   Tree and shrubbery limbs shall have protruding branches or
limbs of a size not to be blown about and scattered by the elements, they
shall be effectively tied so as to avoid wind driven debris and unsightly
litter conditions.  Thorny vegetation shall be placed near the curb in
small, neat piles.



   (C)   Collection of tree and shrubbery trimmings shall be limited to
six yards, uncompacted per week, per residence, but additional service may be
approved by the Public Works Director upon request.



   (D)   Tree limbs shall be separated from smaller shrubbery trimmings
to allow for chipping. All brush shall be put in separate piles from other
general debris.



   (E)   Limbs and cuttings must be placed with butt or cut end toward
the street or public alley and must be of the size that can be handled by one
person.



   (F)   The city shall not collect tree and shrubbery trimmings
resulting from contracted work, as defined in § 54.01 of this chapter, nor
shall the city collect, remove, or assist in the removal of tree stumps,
small rocks, tree trunks, heavy grass, or dirt resulting from the clearing of
any property of any kind.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
deposit any such item at curbside at any time.



   (G)   The city shall remove leaves through the use of a leaf vacuum
machine beginning October 1 until March 1. Please rake early and frequently.
Leaves should be raked to the edge of the road, not into the street or onto
the sidewalk. Leaf pickup is for leaves only. Do not mix other debris such as
trash, limbs, brush, rocks, flowers, roots or garbage in the leaf pile.  Do
not allow children or animals to play in the leaf pile. Leaves should be
bagged for pickup at times not covered above.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92; Am. Ord. passed 7-8-02; Am. Res. passed 9-12-11) 
Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.28  WASTES THE CITY WILL NOT COLLECT.



   (A)   The city will not collect the following types of solid and/or
liquid wastes and it shall be illegal for any person to place any of the
following in any container or receptacle or along the city right-of-way or
curbside for collection:



      (1)   Hazardous refuse and industrial wastes.



      (2)   Contagious disease refuse.



      (3)   Building materials (incidental amounts not associated
with repairs, alterations, construction, or demolition may be picked up).



      (4)   Any materials, including ashes, containing hot or live
coals.



      (5)   Large dead animals.



      (6)   Barrels and/or drums with any liquid substance in same.



      (7)   Motor oils, lubricants, anti-freeze, and the like.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to
legally and properly dispose of these items.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92; Am. Res. passed 9-12-11)  Penalty, see § 54.99



HAZARDOUS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTES



§ 54.35  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place any hazardous refuse, as defined
in § 54.01 of this chapter, in any receptacle used for collection by the
city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to place in any container, at curbside,
or in any catch basin, manhole, or drainage ditch, or structure, any
materials considered to be hazardous refuse by the U.S. EPA or any other
responsible agency.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.36  INDUSTRIAL WASTES.



   The city shall not collect any type industrial wastes, solid, liquid,
hazardous, or highly combustible.  It shall be unlawful to place industrial
waste in any container or receptacle for collection by the city. Industrial
waste shall be collected, removed, and disposed of by the operator of the
factory or industry creating the same.



(Ord. passed 2-10-92)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 10.99.



   (B)   A civil penalty in the amount of $10 may be assessed for the
violations of § 54.25(A) and collected as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



   (C)   Any person who violates § 54.03(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100 for the first
offense is punishable by a fine of not less than $100.  In addition, the
court may require the violator to pick up litter or perform other labor
commensurate with the offense committed.



   (D)   Civil remedy for violation.  If the city or any person
sustains damages arising out of a violation of § 54.03, a court in a civil
action may order the person to pay the city or the injured party up to three
times the actual damages or $100, whichever is greater.  In addition, the
court shall order the person to pay the city's or the injured party's court
costs and attorney's fees.



(Ord. 94-9-3, passed 9-12-94  Am. Ord. passed 9-14-98)



CHAPTER 55:  STREETS; SIDEWALKS; PUBLIC PLACES



Section




General Provisions




   55.01   Damaging of public streets, sidewalks, and the like



   55.02   Obstructing view near intersections



   55.03   Use of streets and sidewalks during construction



   55.04   Removal or disturbance of components of streets or sidewalks



   55.05   Structures and overgrowth as public nuisance



   55.06   Obstruction prohibited except pursuant to permit



   55.07   Places of business to keep sidewalks clear



   55.08   Maintenance and repair




Special Assessments




   55.15   Special Assessments




Paving Streets




   55.20   Expense of street paving; cost



   55.21   Petition to City Council; determining priorities



   55.22   Conflict with subdivision regulations




Excavations




   55.35   Permit required; bond



   55.36   Duty to restore surface



   55.37   Safety precautions



   55.38   Work to be prosecuted diligently




Driveways




   55.50   Driveways; general



   55.51   Driveways for business establishments



   55.52   City indemnified



Cross-reference:



   Parades and public demonstrations, see Chapter 131



   Drainage regulations, see Ch. 152



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 55.01  DAMAGING OF PUBLIC STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner damage any city
street or sidewalk, or any easement or right-of-way of the city which has
been dedicated or otherwise established for public use.



('75 Code, § 13-1)  (Ord. 38, passed 9-4-39) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.02  OBSTRUCTING VIEW NEAR INTERSECTIONS. 



   No person shall plant, install, or maintain any tree, bush, or other
obstruction or screen which is more than 30 inches above the ground in
height, between the curb and sidewalk along any street or other right-of-way
at any place within 50 feet of an intersection of streets or other
rights-of-way.



('75 Code, § 13-2)  (Ord. passed 1-10-72)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.03  USE OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS DURING CONSTRUCTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to walk on, ride or lead any
animal, or drive any vehicle, over, across, or along any sidewalk or street
while such street or sidewalk is under construction or is being repaired and
barricades or signs have been posted to give notice of such prohibition; and
it shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person knowingly to tamper with or
molest any such construction or repair work or any such sign or barricade.



('75 Code, § 13-3) (Ord. 50, passed  - - ) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.04  REMOVAL OR DISTURBANCE OF COMPONENTS OF STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall, without proper authority, disturb or remove any sand,
dirt, or other component of any street, sidewalk, or public place within the
city.



('75 Code, § 13-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.05  STRUCTURES AND OVERGROWTH AS PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   No person shall allow to be erected or maintain any building,
fence, or other structure so as to encroach upon or obstruct any street,
sidewalk, or public place within the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow from
property which he owns, occupies or which is under his control, any bushes,
shrubs, or other growth, to obstruct or encroach the paved portion of a
public street at a height of less than 14 feet, or to cause or allow any such
bushes, shrubs, or growth, or other obstructions to obstruct or encroach a
public sidewalk at a height of less than nine feet above such sidewalk.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow grass,
vines, weeds, or other vegetation to grow from property which he owns or
occupies under his control, over, onto, or across any public street or
sidewalk, or to cause, or allow the area between the owner's property and the
curb or street pavement to become overgrown with weeds or other plants, or to
allow any dirt, or other debris to build up on any sidewalk.



   (D)   Any violation of this section or any of its divisions is
hereby declared a public nuisance, and if not corrected by the responsible
person within ten days after being given written notice of the violation by
the city, the city may summarily abate the nuisance.



   (E)   The actual cost incurred by the city in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance pursuant to this section shall be charged to the
record owner of the offending property; provided however, if the violation
arises out of dirt or debris covering a sidewalk, the owner of the offending
property shall not be charged with the costs of abatement unless the city
shall have first cleared the sidewalk once since February 1, 1993, or the
sidewalk was constructed after February 1, 1993.  Otherwise, the owner shall
pay these charges within 30 days after receiving from the city a statement of
charges under this division. Such charges shall become and remain a lien upon
the land or premises where the public nuisance existed until paid, and shall
be collected as unpaid taxes as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.



('75 Code, § 13-5) (Am. Ord. passed 3-8-93; Am. Ord. passed 8-9-93) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.06  OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED EXCEPT PURSUANT TO PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place anything on any public
street, sidewalk, or public place, or in any gutter, which will impede travel
or traffic or annoy pedestrians.  This prohibition shall not be applicable
to the use of sidewalks by merchants for the display of merchandise or
storage of materials, nor to the erection in streets and upon sidewalks of
booths or stands, nor to the use of streets and sidewalks by contractors for
temporary storage of lumber, and the like, during the course of any
construction project, when so authorized by permit granted by the City
Manager.



('75 Code, § 13-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.07  PLACES OF BUSINESS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAR.



   Every occupant of a store or other place of business in front of which
the sidewalk is paved with stone, brick, asphalt, or concrete shall remove
any accumulation of snow, ice, or other such obstruction from the sidewalk
within four hours of the end of a storm event or within four hours after
sunrise following a night storm.  Any violation of this section is hereby
declared to be public nuisance and the city may abate such nuisance
immediately pursuant to § 55.05(E) of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 3-8-93; Am. Ord. passed 8-9-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.08  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owner to maintain any
property, driveway, steps or walkway servicing the premises between the
property line and the curb of a paved street including any property located
between a sidewalk and the abutting street. The City Council may exercise any
reasonable amount of enforcement necessary to maintain such areas at the
expense of the property owner should it be necessary.



SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



§ 55.15  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   In making special assessments, the City may employ the following
procedures:



   (A)   Petition. Upon receipt of a petition from one or more owners
of abutting property which 50% or more of the total street frontage is in one
ownership, the Council may order the making of any local improvement. The
Council may assess the cost thereof against the abutting property in the same
manner and following the same procedures set out in the general laws of the
State for making special assessments against property benefited by local
improvements.



   (B)   Limited Assessment Permitted.  The Council may order the
making of any local improvement and assess the cost thereof, except the
City's portion, if any, against only a limited number of abutting properties
if the owners of those properties submit a petition asking that the
improvement be made and that the total amount to be assessed for the
improvement be assessed only against their properties.



   (C)   Assessment by Council without Petition. If, in the Council's
judgment, which shall be conclusive, the abutting property to be assessed
will be benefited in an amount at least equal to the assessment, no petition
for local improvements shall be necessary and the Council may order the
making of any such local improvement and assess the cost thereof against
abutting properties in the following cases:



      (1)   Streets.



         (a)   When any street or part of a street is unsafe.



         (b)   The improvement of a street or part of a street
not more than 1,500 linear feet in length is necessary to connect a street
already paved; or the improvement of a street or part of a street is
necessary to connect a paved street, or portion thereof, with a paved
highway; or the improvement of a street or part of a street is necessary to
provide a paved approach to a railroad, street grade, separation, or bridge;
or the widening of any street or part of a street is necessary to accommodate
present and antici- pated volumes of traffic.



      (2)   Storm Drains.  When any street or part of a street, or
any property, is without storm sewer or other surface drainage improvements
and storm sewer or other surface drainage should be provided in the public
interest.



      (3)   Sidewalks.  When any street or part of a street is
without sidewalks and sidewalks should be provided in the public interest.



      (4)   Water and Sewer. When any property is without water and
sewer lines and water and sewer lines should be provided in the public
interest.



   (D)   Repair of Sidewalks and Driveways. If the Council determines
that the public interest requires repair of a sidewalk or portion of a
driveway within the public right-of-way, the Council may order the making of
the repair and assess the total cost against the property abutting the
sidewalk or driveway repaired. Before an assessment may be made for the
repair, at least 30 days written notice shall be given to the abutting
property owner personally or by registered or certified mail to his last
known address or his address as shown on the tax records. The notice shall
state that he is required to make the repair at his own expense in conformity
with the sidewalk standards adopted by the City, and that if he shall fail to
make the repair thereupon the City may make the repair and assess the cost.
If the Council finds that any sidewalk or driveway is in need of immediate
repair, the Council may adopt a resolution setting out its finding and
directing that the repair be made immediately and that the cost be assessed
against the abutting property without prior notice to the property owner
affected.



PAVING STREETS



§ 55.20  EXPENSE OF STREET PAVING; COST.



   (A)   The paving of all streets by the city shall be done at the
expense of the city and the property owners of the lots or tracts of land
abutting on the street to be paved, in the manner as hereinafter provided in
this subchapter.  ('75 Code, § 13-8)



   (B)   Two-thirds of the cost of any street paving, including curbing
and guttering, exclusive of the cost incurred at street intersections, shall
be specifically assessed upon the lots of land abutting directly upon such
improvements, according to the extent of their respective frontages thereon,
by an equal rate per foot of such frontage.  The city shall pay 1/3 of the
costs and in addition shall pay total cost incurred at street
intersections.  ('75 Code, § 13-9)



(Ord. passed 12-9-63)



§ 55.21  PETITION TO CITY COUNCIL; DETERMINING PRIORITIES.



   (A)   Before paving any street, the persons owning a majority of the
front footage of property abutting directly on the street to be improved
shall petition the City Council to pave such street, and as soon as
practicable thereafter the City Council, in its discretion, will order such
street to be paved.  ('75 Code, § 13-10)



   (B)   In the event that more than one petition requesting the
pavement of any street or avenue is filed with the City Council at the same
time, the Council, in its discretion, will determine which street or avenue
shall be paved first, with due consideration being given to any street or
avenue wherein the property owners propose to pay cash for their share of the
cost.  ('75 Code, § 13-11)



(Ord. passed 12-9-63)



§ 55.22  CONFLICT WITH SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.



   In any case involving a street or other public way or any proposed
street or other public way in any subdivision, if any provision of this
section is in conflict or inconsistent with any provision of the subdivision
regulations set forth in Chapter 154 of this code, then such provision of the
subdivision regulations shall prevail.



('75 Code, § 13-13)



EXCAVATIONS



§ 55.35  PERMIT REQUIRED; BOND.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, ditch, or
excavation in or under any street, sidewalk, or public place owned or
maintained by the city without first having procured a permit so to do from
the Director of Public Works.  ('75 Code, § 13-14)



   (B)   Each applicant for a permit required by this chapter may, as a
prerequisite to the issuance thereof, file with the Director of Public Works
a bond, payable to the city and in such amount as the Director shall consider
adequate, conditioned upon restoration of the surface of the place to be
excavated in compliance with the requirements of this sub-chapter; provided,
that in lieu of such bond, a cash deposit may be made with the Treasurer. 



('75 Code, § 13-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.36  DUTY TO RESTORE SURFACE.



   It shall be the duty of every holder of a permit issued pursuant to
this subchapter to put such street, sidewalk, or public place in as good
condition in all respects as it was prior to the beginning of work under such
permit, and every day of failure so to do shall constitute a separate offense.



('75 Code, § 13-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.37  SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.



   Every holder of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall take
such precautions as may be necessary for the protection of persons, animals,
and property from injury.  Such precautions shall include the erection and
maintenance of barriers and lights, and the Director of Public Works may
prescribe in the permit such other precautions as he may deem necessary or
prudent.



('75 Code, § 13-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 55.38  WORK TO BE PROSECUTED DILIGENTLY.



   Permit holders under this subchapter shall prosecute their work with
due diligence, to the end that the work may be completed and the surface
restored without undue delay.



('75 Code, § 13-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DRIVEWAYS



§ 55.50  DRIVEWAYS; GENERAL.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person may
open, construct, alter, or relocate any driveway across any public sidewalk
or into any street, or cut any curb for such purpose without having obtained
a written permit from the Public Works Director.



   (B)   Any person who receives a permit under this section shall be
responsible for repairing any damage to the sidewalk or street (including
curb and gutter) caused by the driveway construction.



   (C)   The Public Works Director shall review the driveway
construction and design plans and shall issue the permit unless he finds the
driveway, if constructed as proposed, will substantially interfere with or
pose a danger to persons using the street or sidewalk inter- sected by the
driveway, or public facilities (including utility poles, traffic signal
standards, etc.), or will fail to comply with the specifications of the city
or any of the provisions of this section.



   (D)   No driveway may be constructed closer than three feet to a
fire hydrant or catchbasin or closer than 20 feet to the right-of-way line of
a street that intersects with the street the driveway opens onto, unless
specifically approved by the City Manager.



   (E)   No driveway may be constructed closer than two feet to a
property line at the point where the property line intersects with the
right-of-way line of a street that the driveway opens onto.



   (F)   If the driveway crosses a drainage ditch on a lot that abuts a
street without curb or gutter, then piping of sufficient size and strength
(as approved by the Public Works Director shall be installed beneath the
driveway surface so that the drainage ditch is not materially impaired.



   (G)   If the driveway crosses a drainage swale on a lot that abuts a
street without curb or gutter, the driveway may conform to the contours of
the drain- age swale without compliance with subsection (F) (upon approval of
the administrator) so long as the drainage capability of the drainage swale
is not materially impaired.



   (H)   Any paved private or public driveway that intersects with or
opens onto a public street shall make the pavement of such driveway connect
with and conform to the street and sidewalk cross sections in accordance with
the specifications of the administrator. Any driveway that slopes downwards
towards the public street shall pave a minimum of 15 feet from the public
street.



(Ord. 95-4-2, passed 4-10-95; Am. Res. passed 5-9-11)



§ 55.51  DRIVEWAYS FOR BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   No driveway shall exceed 30 feet in width at the outer or
street edge of the driveway.



   (B)   Not more than two driveways shall be permitted to service one
business or commercial installation from one street, and then only if the two
driveways are at least 30 feet apart.



   (C)   Any business or commercial establishment located at the
intersection of two or more streets and which desires a driveway into two
intersecting streets shall construct said driveways so as to comply with the
minimum requirements of this subchapter.



   (D) No driveway apron shall extend out into the street further than the
face of the curb and under no circumstances shall such driveway apron extend
into the gutter area.



   (E)   The city shall retain the right to deny any driveway permit
when solely in the opinion of the city that traffic flow and safety will be
compromised or if the business is adequately served by other driveway access
points.



(Ord. 95-4-2, passed 4-10-95)



§ 55.52  CITY INDEMNIFIED.



   Any person obtaining a permit authorized by this subchapter agrees as a
condition of the permit to indemnify the city for and hold the city harmless
from any expense (including but not limited to attorney's fees, litigation
costs and judgments) incurred as a result of claims made for damages arising
out of operations conducted by the permit recipient pursuant to the permit.



(Ord. 95-4-2, passed 4-10-95)



CHAPTER 56:  CEMETERIES



Section



   56.01   Title



   56.02   Definitions



   56.03   Authority of the Director



   56.04   Duties of the Director



   56.05   Rules for interment



   56.06   Lot valuation



   56.07   Records of ownership; cemetery accounts



   56.08   Reports



   56.09   Perpetual Care Trust Fund



   56.10   Cost of cemetery lots



   56.11   Clean-up days



   Appendix: Rules and regulations



Cross-reference:



   Fee Schedule, see § 33.01



§ 56.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Bessemer City
Cemetery chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84)



§ 56.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DIRECTOR.  The City Manager, or such person to whom he may delegate
the duties described in this chapter.



   MUNICIPAL CEMETERY or CEMETERY.  Any municipal cemetery of the city.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84)



§ 56.03  AUTHORITY OF THE DIRECTOR.



   The Director shall manage, operate, and maintain the municipal cemetery
subject to any limitations and restrictions set forth herein or contained in
any applicable law.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84)



§ 56.04  DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR.



   (A)   Establishment of rules.  The Director shall establish rules
and regulations for the use of the cemetery relating to:



      (1)   Subdividing the cemetery into lots;



      (2)   Capacity of each lot;



      (3)   Location of graves;



      (4)   Types of plantings, monuments, and markers that will be
permitted for the proper and most attractive development of the cemetery.



   (B)   Direct the cemetery. The Director shall oversee and take
proper care of the cemetery and see that no lot therein is used or occupied
in violation of this chapter or of any rule or regulation promulgated by the
division.



   (C)   Collect and turn over fees.  All fees and charges collected
by the Director for duties and services performed in connection with the
cemetery shall be for the use of the city and shall immediately be turned
over to the city.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84)



§ 56.05  RULES FOR INTERMENT.



   No deceased person shall be interred in the cemetery until the Director
has found:



   (A)   That the lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid
for or guaranteed arrangements have been made;



   (B)   That the person arranging for such burial has the right to the
use of such lot;



   (C)   That such lot is not used beyond its capacity;



   (D)   That proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased
person and of the exact location of the grave.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84)



§ 56.06  LOT VALUATION.



   (A)   Valuation of lots. The Director shall, with approval of
Council, place a value upon all unsold lots in the cemetery, and shall record
such valuations on an official map or plan of such cemetery that shall be
kept on file, open to public inspection, in the City Hall.  Such valuations
shall be then fixed and estab- lished value of such lots and the price at
which such lots shall be sold.  There shall be no discrimination in the sale
of lots, on any basis; provided however, in cases of extreme poverty or no
assets, the Director, with approval of Council, may reduce the cost of a
burial lot.



   (B)   Method of purchase.  Any person desiring to purchase a
particular lot or lots, for the purpose for which it is intended, shall be
permitted to do so upon payment of the price fixed for such lot or upon
making arrangements, according to rules and regulations that may be
established by the Director.



   (C)   Repurchase policy.  The city shall have the first option on
the repurchase of any lots in the Bessemer City Cemeteries. Any person
desiring to sell lots owned in Bessemer City Cemeteries shall contact the
City Manager. The option to repurchase and the repurchase price shall be at
the discretion of the City Manager.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84; Am. Ord. passed 1-10-00)



§ 56.07  RECORDS OF OWNERSHIP; CEMETERY ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   Records of ownership.  The Director shall keep full and
complete records of the ownership of all lots in the cemetery, of the burial
capacity of each lot, sold and unsold, of the location of each grave, of the
names of the persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be
used, and of the date of burial of each.



   (B)   Cemetery accounts.  The Director shall keep full and detailed
accounts of the receipts and expenditures on account of the cemetery, and
shall immediately upon receipt turn over to the city all monies collected on
such account.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84)



§ 56.08  REPORTS.



   Prior to May 1 of each year, the Director shall furnish an annual
report to the City Council on the condition of the cemetery, together with
all informa- tion necessary for the Council to decide what sums, if any,
should be appropriated for proper maintenance and operation of the cemetery
in the budget.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84)



§ 56.09  PERPETUAL CARE TRUST FUND.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority conferred upon the city by G.S. §
160A-347 there is hereby established a perpetual care trust fund, hereinafter
known as the “Trust Fund.”



   (B)   The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to
establish an appropriate account with a local banking institution, which
account shall be named “City of Bessemer City Cemetery Trust Fund,” and
is further hereby authorized to accept gifts, grants, bequests, and devises
made to or on behalf of the Trust Fund; and to deposit any such funds so
received together with all revenues realized from the sale of lots in or the
operation of city cemeteries into the Trust Fund.



   (C)   The principal of the Trust Fund shall be held intact and the
income from the Trust Fund shall be perpetually used to care for and maintain
the city's cemeteries, and shall be kept separate and apart from all other
city funds.  The Trust Fund shall in no case be appropriated by, lent to, or
in any manner used by the city for any purpose other than the perpetual care
of city cemeteries.



(Ord. passed 8-10-87)



§ 56.10  COST OF CEMETERY LOTS.



   (A)   Until otherwise determined by the City Council, the purchase
price for any cemetery lot or single grave portion shall in no event be less
than $400 for each cemetery lot or single grave portion.



   (B)   Cemetery lots or single grave openings in any city cemetery
shall not be sold except to individuals who are residents of the city and
their immediate family.  Immediate family is to be limited to parents,
children, siblings, and spouses.



('75 Code, § 11-3.1) (Ord. passed 6-9-75; Am. Ord. passed 11-13-78; Am. Ord.
passed 7-1-87; Am. Ord. passed 8-9-94; Am. Ord. passed 1-10-00)



§ 56.11  CLEAN-UP DAYS.



   The Public Works Director may establish up to three general clean-up
days per year for the removal of all arrangements and other materials. 
Prior to any such clean-up days, the Public Works Director shall  publish
notice in the City Newsletter, the Bessemer City Record, and the Gaston
Gazette, and shall also post signs at the cemeteries stating the days of
clean- up.  Any person desiring to retain their arrangements shall remove
them prior to the established date.



(Ord. passed 12-12-94)



APPENDIX:  RULES AND REGULATIONS



Section



   1.   Application of rules; lots sold



   2.   Interment regulations



   3.   Funeral processions



   4.   Digging graves; removal or transfer of bodies



   5.   Entrance to cemetery; open hours



   6.   Firearms prohibited



   7.   Enclosures around lots prohibited



   8.   Trees, shrubs, and plants; decorations



   9.   Foundations on cemetery lots



   10.   Numbered lots required



   11.   Stone markers; headstones and monuments



   12.   Vaults



   13.   Maintenance of cemetery; cost; property injury; pets



   14.   Supplemental rules and regulations for Sections 9 and 10,
Bessemer City Memorial Cemetery



   15.   Certain cemetery portions closed to sale of future gravesites



§ 1.  APPLICATION OF RULES; LOTS SOLD.



   (A)   The rules that follow in §§ 2 through 13 of this appendix
shall apply to the public cemeteries of the city being:



      (1)   Bessemer City Memorial Cemetery located at the end of
13th Street.



      (2)   Vantine Cemetery located at the end of D Street.



      (3)   Any other lands designated or developed by the City
Council for the burial of the dead.



   (B)   All lots are sold subject to the rules and regulations of this
cemetery now in force, or which may hereafter be adopted, and they shall be
used for no other purpose than for the burial of the human dead.  The City
Clerk shall keep a record of all lots sold in this cemetery, showing dates,
lot numbers, purchasers names, and prices.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85)



§ 2.  INTERMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All interments in lots shall be restricted to the members of
the family or relations of the lot owner.  The transfer of interest in any
lot shall not be valid except by the written consent of the Director endorsed
upon such transfer or assignment.



   (B)   No interment will be permitted, nor body be received, until
the name and residence of the deceased, the name of the nearest relative and
other such information as the Public Works Director shall require is
furnished, and after all state laws relating thereto have been complied with,
and eight hours daylight notice must be given before interment.  The
Director shall cause a record to be kept of all interments and disinterments.



   (C)   Only one interment shall be made in a grave, except a mother
and infant, or two children in one coffin, or in the case of cremation urns,
in which case two cremation urns may be placed in the same grave, but urns
and caskets may not be placed in the same grave space.



   (D)   Grave liners.  Outer burial containers shall be required for
all burials in both city owned cemeteries. The minimum requirement shall be a
concrete grave liner. This requirement shall not be waived in any situation.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. passed 5-13-02)



§ 3.  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   Funeral processions, upon entering the cemetery, shall be under the
control and subject to the directions of the Director, or his representative.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85)



§ 4.  DIGGING GRAVES; REMOVAL OR  TRANSFER OF BODIES.



   (A)   No grave shall be opened in any cemetery owned by the city
until the Cemetery Director has issued a permit for opening. All openings
shall be done by the city or its agent.



   (B)   Price for opening shall be $100 above the contract price as
agreed upon by the city and contractor, with the $100 being applied to
Perpetual Care Fund for cemetery maintenance.



   (C)   No material shall be allowed to remain longer than is
reasonably necessary for any construction work. No work shall be started on
Saturday which cannot be completed on that day. No heavy equipment will be
allowed in wet weather.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. passed 1-10-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 5.  ENTRANCE TO CEMETERY; OPEN  HOURS.



   No person shall enter the cemetery except through the gates or provided
entrances, which shall be open such hours as may be fixed by the Council. No
person shall enter the cemetery after hours and such person in violation of
this rule may be charged with trespassing.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 6.  FIREARMS PROHIBITED.



   No persons with firearms shall be permitted within the cemetery
grounds, without city approval.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 7.  ENCLOSURES AROUND LOTS  PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No enclosures of any nature, such as fences, copings, hedges,
or ditches, shall be allowed around any lot.  The boundaries of the lots may
be marked by corner-posts, which will be set as needed by and at the expense
of the cemetery, with the centers of the lines bounding the lot. Corner
markers may be set by the owner at his expense, but these must be set flush
with the ground level. Corner-posts and markers must not be altered or
removed. All such enclosures constructed in violation of this rule shall be
removed by the cemetery.  All existing enclosures as they need repair may be
repaired or removed as the Director may see fit.



   (B)   Grave mounds shall not be allowed, nor shall stone or other
enclosures around graves be permitted.  No lots shall be raised above nor
lowered below the established grade.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 8.  TREES, SHRUBS, AND PLANTS;  DECORATIONS.



   (A)   No trees, shrubs, or plants shall be planted, pruned, or
removed without the consent of the Director, or his representatives.  The
Director, or his representative, shall have authority to plant, prune,
remove, or transplant any tree, shrub, plant, or anything upon a lot, when
they may consider such a course necessary to the best interest of the
cemetery and other lot-owners.



   (B)   No iron or wire work and no seats or vases will be allowed on
lots, except by permission of the Director; and when any articles so placed
begin to rust or otherwise become unsightly, the same shall be removed from
the cemetery.



(Ord. passed 5-14-84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 9.  FOUNDATIONS ON CEMETERY LOTS.



   (A)   Foundations for all monuments, headstones, and the like shall
be built at the expense of the lot- owner, and five days notice must be given
for the building of foundations.  Exception to these requirements may be
made, provided the work is done in accordance with the cemetery rules and
specifications and is inspected and accepted by the Director.



   (B)   Every foundation must be at least as wide and as long as the
base stone resting upon it, and must not project above the surface of the
ground. Foundations must be at least 18 inches deep, and must be built as the
Director may require for safety and permanence.



   (C)   Only one upright monument will be permitted on a family burial
lot, nor shall be it less than three feet high nor more than 2/3 the width of
the lot in height (but not exceeding eight feet in height), and shall be of
granite or marble.  No monument shall cover more than 7% of the ground space
of the lot.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.  NUMBERED LOTS REQUIRED.



   All reference to lots shall refer to numbered lots as shown on maps of
the cemeteries as maintained by the Director.  Two or more lots may not be
combined to change or avoid any restriction placed on any lot as shown on the
maps by reason of size or otherwise without approval of the Director with
advice of the Public Works Superintendent.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85)



§ 11.  STONE MARKERS, HEADSTONES, AND MONUMENTS.



   (A)   Only one stone or marker shall be allowed for each grave, and
shall be placed at the head of the grave.  All markers must be of granite or
marble; not less than five inches high; not less than eight, or more than 12
inches in thickness; and not more than 24 inches in width; the top being set
with and following the contour of the ground.  Graves, monuments, and the
like, will be placed on the lots facing the front line of the lot, and
located as directed by the Director.  The only exception to the provisions
of this section shall be markers provided through the U.S. Veterans
Administration, which shall be of their standard sizes.



   (B)   All stone and marble work for monuments, headstones, and the
like, must be accepted by the Director as being in conformity with these
rules before being taken into the cemetery.



   (C)   No monument, headstone or coping, and no portion of any vault
above ground shall be constructed of other material than cut-stone or real
bronze.  No artificial material will be permitted.



   (D)   A permanent stone marker shall be placed on every grave no
later than 90 days from the day of burial.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. passed 1-10-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 12.  VAULTS.



   The building of vaults, for the burial of deceased or for cremation
urns, will be permitted only when the construction is solid and thorough and
the design had been submitted to the Public Works Director and in his
judgment has been deemed suitable for placement under the guidelines of the
city. Vaults will be permitted only on such lots as the Director may
determine to be suitable for the purpose. The Director will determine the
number of lots required for the placement of such vault and the vault shall
be located in the center of such area and facing the front line of the lots.
As no interment is being made, the fee for locating/marking such grave shall
be collected per request, with that fee being deposited to the Perpetual Care
Trust Fund.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. passed 6-9-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 13.  MAINTENANCE OF CEMETERY; COST; PROPERTY INJURY; PETS.



   (A)   All rules shall apply to lots sold, including any lots in the
old part of the cemetery.  Perpetual care shall include ordinary and
reasonable care of the cemetery as a whole and of the several burial lots
therein, including the care of existing shrubbery, and trees; but does not
include the furnishing and planting of shrubbery, trees, flowers, and the
like, on the several burial lots, except such as the cemetery may wish to
furnish and plant to carry out its landscape plans.



   (B)   No person shall injure or deface any property or structure in
the cemeteries.  Dogs are to be on a leash, as required by county ordinance,
when walked in the cemeteries and owners shall take care to clean up after
animals when in the cemetery.



   (C)   The prices at which the several lots (or in the old parts
which hereafter revert to the cemetery) of the cemetery shall be sold, shall
be fixed by the City Council and shall be sufficient, as nearly as possible
to cover the cost of developing, maintaining, and operating the cemetery.



(Ord. passed 5-13-85; Am. Ord. passed 3-14-01)



§ 14.  SUPPLEMENTAL RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR SECTIONS 9 AND 10, BESSEMER
CITY MEMORIAL CEMETERY.



   (A)   Sale of Lots.



      (1)   Graves in Section 9 shall be sold only in four or eight
grave plots in the following combinations:



   Four Grave Plot: A, B, G, H or C, D, E, F



   Eight Grave Plot: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H



      (2)   Graves in Section 10 shall be sold only in two or four
grave increments, with lots to be side by side or in blocks of four.



      (3)   No plot may be re-subdivided or sold with out the
express written permission of the Cemetery Director, obtained in advance. The
city shall retain the right of first refusal to repurchase any plot at the
original sale price. The Director may limit the number of grave spaces sold
to any individual and no graves shall be purchased with the intent to resell
the same.



      (4)   When any plot remains without interment for 20 years or
more since the last deed  was issued or interment made, whichever is later,
and the whereabouts of the owner or any direct relative by blood, marriage or
adoption is unknown to the city, the title to such plot shall revert to the
city when, after notice being published once per week for four successive
weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the county. Notice shall
describe the plot, last known owner and advise that title shall revert to the
city upon failure of the owner to appear. If after such publication such
record owner or heir does not appear within 30 additional days and confirm
ownership to the satisfaction of the Director, title to said plot shall
revert back to the city and the city may resell the same.



   (B)   Markers.



      (1)   No marker, stone or such shall be placed in any section
of the Bessemer City cemeteries until notification to the Cemetery Director
has been made and the location for such marker has been marked by the
Director.



      (2)   No more than one marker may be placed on any single
grave within the cemetery, except where a single grave space has been divided
into two spaces for cremation urns or infant burials.



      (3)   In Section 9, there shall be allowed only one upright
marker on a plot and said marker shall be only placed on the line made
through the square or plot that runs between graves A, B, C, D, and graves E,
F, G, H. Marker shall be centered on such line and before placing markers,
the Director shall be notified to mark the placement of the marker.



      (4)   (a)  In Section 10, single markers may be placed on any
grave, and markers shall be 12 inches in width, 24 inches in length and 6
inches thick; provided that standard markers furnished to the family of any
deceased veteran by the U.S. government, which may not be within the limits
specified herein, may be placed on any grave of any deceased veteran.



         (b)  Such markers may have rough or smooth sides, and may
include a vase, included inside the base of the marker area.  Companion
markers or double markers are allowed in the above section provided that the
markers shall be 12 inches in width, 48 inches in length and 6 inches thick,
with rough or smooth sides.  Such markers may include a vase located inside
the vase of the marker area.



      (5)   All markers must be constructed of first quality granite
or marble, or of bronze.  All markers will be installed at grade level.



      (6)   Corner markers may be permitted but shall be placed
completely flush with the grade as it currently exists. No coping of any type
shall be permitted nor shall the grade be changed, by fill or any other
method, on any plot from the grade established by the city.



      (7)   No plantings of any type shall be made on any plot.



   (C)   All provisions of §§ 56.01 through 56.11 and this Appendix
shall have full force on effect in Sections  9 and 10, and if any conflict
shall arise between these supplemental rules and the primary rules, the more
restrictive shall apply, as interpreted by the Director.



   (D)   The price for lots shall be fixed by the City Council and
shall be sufficient, as nearly as possible to cover the cost of developing,
maintaining, and operating the cemetery.  This price may be adjusted at any
time by the City Council.



   (E)   Grave Liners.  Outer burial containers shall be required for
all burials in Section 10 of the Bessemer City Memorial Cemetery.  The
minimum requirement shall be for a concrete, steel or fiberglass grave
liner.  This requirement shall not be waived in any situation.



(Ord. passed 11-13-95; Am. Ord. passed 7-10-00; Am. Ord. passed 3-14-01)



§ 15.  CERTAIN CEMETERY PORTIONS CLOSED TO SALE OF FUTURE GRAVESITES.



   (A)   The following described portions of Vantine Cemetery and
Bessemer City Memorial Cemetery shall be closed to the sale of future
gravesites:



      (1)   Vantine Cemetery.  A 1.4105 acre tract located at the
northern intersection of “D” Street and the northern margin of the right
of way for Maryland Avenue as shown on the map dated June 6, 2000, drawn by
Robinson and Sawyer, Inc., Consulting Engineers and Land Surveyors, a copy of
which is on file with the cemetery maps maintained by the city in City Hall.



      (2)   Bessemer City Memorial Cemetery.  A 1.9751 acre tract
located near the northwestern intersection of the right of way of 13th Street
and the terminus of Iowa Avenue as shown on the map dated June 6, 2000 drawn
by Robinson and Sawyer, Inc., Consulting Engineers and Land Surveyors, a copy
of which is on file with the cemetery maps maintained by the city in City
Hall.



   (B)   Only those individuals holding valid deeds to gravesites
located within the portions of the cemeteries closed by this section shall be
permitted to utilize those sites for future interment.



(Ord. passed 7-10-00)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC RULES



      71.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



      72.   BICYCLES



      73.   STOPPING; STANDING; PARKING



      74.   VEHICLE LICENSES



      75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      76.   PARKING SCHEDULES



      77.   ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES



      78.   GOLF CART RULES AND REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   70.01   Short title



   70.02   Applicability of traffic code



   70.03   Trucks on city streets; regulations



   70.04   Required obedience to police officers and firefighters



   70.05   Funeral processions



   70.06   Intersections



   70.07   Alleys and driveways



   70.08   Sidewalks



   70.09   Backing



   70.10   Entering or riding on vehicles without permission



   70.11   Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited



   70.12   Front seat passengers



   70.13   Passengers must remain inside moving vehicles



   70.14   Skateboards; scooters; skates



   70.15   Unnecessary noise



   70.16   Compliance required



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Truck routes on specific streets, see Chapter 75, Schedule IV



§ 70.01  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the traffic code.



('75 Code, § 17-1)



§ 70.02  APPLICABILITY OF TRAFFIC CODE.



   (A)   Every person propelling any push-cart or riding a bicycle or
an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle,
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver
of any vehicle, except those provisions thereof which, by their very nature,
can have no application. 



('75 Code, § 17-2)



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of
any vehicle owned by, or used in the service of, the United States government
or any state, county, or municipality, and it shall be unlawful for any such
driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise
may be permitted therein, or by state statute. 



('75 Code, § 17-3)



§ 70.03  TRUCKS ON CITY STREETS; REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Findings.  The City Council hereby finds that the
indiscriminate driving of heavy trucks and trailers located within the city
is detrimental to the health, morale, comfort, safety and welfare of the
people of the city and deems it best for the public welfare of the citizens
that the operation of such trucks be confined to certain streets within the
corporate limits of the city.  The trucks and trailers that this section
applies to are the following:



      (1)   Tractor and tandem tractor type trucks when pulling
semi-trailers or tandem semi-trailers.



      (2)   Trucks exceeding seven feet in width.



      (3)   Trucks, including tractors and tandem tractors with or
without trailers, having a gross weight of 2½ tons or more.



   (B)   Routes designated by signs.  When signs are erected, all
trucks and trailers entering the city destined to any point outside the city
and not taking on or discharging within the city limits any goods, wares, or
merchandise shall travel exclusively on the truck routes designated, and over
such portion of such truck routes as shall constitute the shortest and most
direct route from the point of entrance into the city and departure from the
city.



   (C)   Deviation for loading and unloading.  No person shall operate
any such trucks or trailers for the transportation of property, except along
and over the routes set out in Chapter 75, Sched. IV of this traffic code,
except when it is impractical to do so because of street repairs or other
emergencies, or when necessary to travel on other streets to a destination
for the purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares, or merchandise, and
then only by such deviation from the nearest truck traffic route as is
reasonably necessary.



   (D)   Application to trucks loading within the city for
transportation outside the city limits.  All persons operating trucks or
truck trailers for the transporta- tion of goods, wares, or merchandise,
whose property or cargoes are taken on or loaded within the city for the
transportation outside the corporate limits, shall in every instance follow
the truck route out of the city.



(Ord. passed 9-12-83)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Truck routes on specific streets, see Chapter 75, Sched. IV



§ 70.04  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction given by a police officer, or fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction given by a uniformed fire- fighter
at or near the scene of any fire.  ('75 Code, § 17-5)



   (B)   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary
to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct
traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding other pro- visions of this
chapter.  ('75 Code, § 17-6)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.05  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the city.



   FUNERAL PROCESSION PERMIT.  Any permit required by this section.



   PERMITTED FUNERAL PROCESSION.  Any procession of motor vehicles
travelling at a distance no greater than 40 feet apart after a funeral, for
which a permit has been issued in accordance with this chapter, and which is
escorted by the police of the city.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   (B)   Permit required; contents; fee.



      (1)   No funeral procession shall be escorted by the police of
the city without there first having been obtained a funeral procession permit
from the Chief of Police at least 24 hours prior to the funeral.



      (2)   The funeral procession permit shall state the time,
point of beginning, the cemetery, and the route, as determined by the Chief
of Police, to be followed by the procession.



   (C)   Speed limit.  No permitted funeral pro- cession shall proceed
within the city at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour.



   (D)   Permitted funeral processions to have right of way.  Any
vehicle upon the highway as defined in G.S. Ch. 20 shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles travelling in a permitted funeral procession.



   (E)   Operating procedures.  The Chief of Police shall establish
written standard operating procedures with respect to funeral processions
which shall become a part of the Police Manual.



(Ord. passed 10-13-86)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.06  INTERSECTIONS.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwith- standing any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.



('75 Code, 17-8)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.07  ALLEYS AND DRIVEWAYS.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or side-
walk areas extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway he
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway.



('75 Code, § 17-9)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.08  SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall propel a motor or animal-drawn vehicle on any sidewalk
in the city except when crossing a sidewalk at a crossing place constructed
for such purpose.



('75 Code, § 17-11)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.09  BACKING.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection
or over a crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle
unless such movement can be made in safety, and he shall have given ample
warning to those who may be behind, by hand and horn or other signal.



('75 Code, § 17-10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.10  ENTERING OR RIDING ON VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   No person shall enter, jump on, or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.



('75 Code, § 17-12)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.11  CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates, or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any public
conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.



('75 Code, §§ 17-13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Skateboards, scooters; skates, see § 70.14



   Bicycles, see Ch. 72



§ 70.12  FRONT SEAT PASSENGERS.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any
motor vehicle to permit more than three persons including the driver to ride
in the front or driver's seat of a motor vehicle.



('75 Code, § 17-14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.13  PASSENGERS MUST REMAIN INSIDE MOVING VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall allow any part of his body to protrude beyond
the limits of the vehicle in which he is riding except to give such signals
as are by law required, and no person shall hang onto any vehicle
whatsoever.  ('75 Code, § 17-15)



   (B)   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or
other vehicle while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion. 



('75 Code, § 17-17)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.14  SKATEBOARDS; SCOOTERS; SKATES.



   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway unless it be while
crossing a street at a crosswalk or intersection, except upon streets set
aside as play streets.



('75 Code, § 17-16)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.15  UNNECESSARY NOISE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be loaded with materials likely to create
loud noises by striking together, without using every reasonable effort to
deaden the noise.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in operating a motor
vehicle, motorcycle, or minibike within the city to create in the operation
thereof any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or unnecessary noise.



   (C)   In operating a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or minibike, the
following acts, among others, are declared to create loud, disturbing, and
unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:



      (1)   The use of any such vehicle so out of repair as to cause
thereby loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or any of such
noises, or any other unnecessary noise.



      (2)   The practice of unnecessarily racing the motor of any
such vehicle while standing or moving, thereby causing unnecessary noise from
such motor.



      (3)   The practice of unnecessarily retarding the spark to the
motor of any such vehicle and thereby causing unnecessary, loud, and
explosive noise from the motor.



      (4)   In starting a motor of any such vehicle from a standing
position, the practice of gaining speed unnecessarily quickly and thereby
causing unnecessary and loud noise from the motor and the screeching of
tires, or either of such noises.



      (5)   The practice of coming to an unreasonably quick stop
with any such vehicle and thereby causing unnecessary grinding of brakes and
screeching of tires or either of such noises.



('75 Code, § 17-18)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.16  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited or fail to
do any act required by this chapter.



('75 Code, § 17-19)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be
required to pay a fine not to exceed $50. Each day that any of the provisions
of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate offense.



(G.S. § 14-4(b))



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



Section



   71.01   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   71.02   Placement, change, or removal of traffic-control devices



   71.03   Types of traffic-control devices authorized



   71.04   Requirements as to signs



§ 71.01  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Obedience required.  The driver of any vehicle and any
pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any applicable official
traffic-control device placed in accordance with the provisions of state law,
this chapter, or other ordinance of the city, unless other- wise directed by
a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted by state law to the
drivers of Police and Fire Department vehicles, public and private
ambulances, and rescue squad and emergency service vehicles.  ('75 Code, §
17-20)



   (B)   Avoidance of official traffic-control devices. No person may
drive across a sidewalk or through the driveway of a gasoline filling station
or other property for the purpose of avoiding an official traffic-control
device. (Ord. passed 2-12-90)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.02  PLACEMENT, CHANGE, OR REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Traffic-control devices of the city shall be placed, erected,
installed, changed, or removed only upon order of the City Council pursuant
to action taken by the Council and entered upon its minutes, and any such
action shall be by ordinance when so required by law.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided by the City Council in any instance,
such orders of the Council shall be executed under the direction of the City
Manager.



   (C)   A list of all devices shall be made as Chapter 75, Sched. I of
this traffic code with respect to stop and yield restrictions and Chapter 75,
Sched. III of this traffic code with respect to the designation of one-way
streets.



('75 Code, § 17-21) (Ord. 46, passed  - - ; Am. Ord. passed 7-13-92) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.03  TYPES OF TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   Examples.  Traffic-control devices of the city within the
purview of § 71.02 shall include but shall not be limited to those
indicating stop and yield intersections; speed restrictions; limited or
prohibited turning movements; one-way streets; prohibited and restricted
parking areas; truck routes and other restrictions as to vehicle types
permitted to be driven upon the streets; school zones; safety zones; zones of
quiet; play streets; bus stops; taxicab stands; loading zones; and business
and residence districts. All signs shall conform with the Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. ('75 Code, § 17-22)



   (B)   Traffic-control devices in place on effective date of this
code.  All traffic-control devices hereto- fore installed by authority of
the City Council and which are in place on the effective date of this code
shall continue to be official until such time as they may be removed by
authority of the City Council; and until they are so removed it shall be
unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any instruction or directive
indicated by any such official traffic-control device.  ('75 Code, § 17-23)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  REQUIREMENTS AS TO SIGNS.



   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person.  Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective
without signs being placed to give notice thereof.



('75 Code, § 17-24)



CHAPTER 72:  BICYCLES



Section



   72.01   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles



   72.02   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   72.03   Riding on bicycles



   72.04   Roadways and bicycle paths



   72.05   Speed



   72.06   Emerging from alley, driveway, or building



   72.07   Carrying articles



   72.08   Parking



   72.09   Riding on sidewalks; yield to pedestrians



   72.10   Equipment on bicycles



Cross-reference:



   Clinging to moving vehicles, see § 70.11



   Riding bicycles on certain sidewalks, see Chapter 75, Schedule V



§ 72.01  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by the traffic ordinances of the city applicable to the driver
of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as
to those provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no
application.



('75 Code, § 17-30) (Ord. passed 12-14-65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.



('75 Code, § 17-31) (Ord. passed 12-14-65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  RIDING ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time
than the number for which it is designed and equipped.



('75 Code, § 17-32) (Ord. passed 12-14-65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.04  ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



   (C)   Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent
to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.



('75 Code, § 17-33) (Ord. passed 12-14-65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.05  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



('75 Code, § 17-34)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.06  EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.



('75 Code, § 17-35) (Ord. passed 12-14-65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.



('75 Code, § 17-36) (Ord. passed 12-14-65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



('75 Code, § 17-37) (Ord. passed 12-14-65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.09  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS; YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS.



   Whenever any person is operating or riding a bicycle, skateboard, or
roller-skates on a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing
such pedestrian.



(Ord. passed 5-14-90)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Cross-reference:



   Riding bicycles on certain sidewalks, see Chapter 75, Schedule V



§ 72.10  EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with
a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the
rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle.  A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.



   (B)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



('75 Code, § 17-39) (Ord. 3, passed 9-19-49; Am. Ord. passed 12-14-65) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73:  STOPPING; STANDING; PARKING



Section



   73.01   Applicability of chapter



   73.02   Unlawful stopping, standing, or parking



   73.03   Stopping in streets



   73.04   Parking restrictions



   73.05   Parking for certain reasons prohibited



   73.06   Stopping, standing, or parking in certain places prohibited



   73.07   Parking of large vehicles



   73.08   Loading zones



   73.09   Permits for loading and unloading at angle to curb



 



   73.99   Penalty



§ 73.01  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein
specified or as indicated on official signs.  ('75 Code, § 17-39.1)



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or
parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.  ('75 Code,
§ 17-39.2)



(Ord. passed 5-12-75)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.02  UNLAWFUL STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING.



   No person owning or having control or charge of a vehicle shall:



   (A)   Park or leave standing such vehicle upon any public street or
public grounds for a continuous period of more than 48 hours.



   (B)   Allow such vehicle to stand on any street or on any public
parking lot of the city unattended without first effectively setting the
brakes, stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the ignition
key of such vehicle, and when standing upon any grade of a street, without
turning the front wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side of the street.
Whenever any law enforcement officer shall find a vehicle standing unattended
with the ignition key in the vehicle in violation of this section, such law
enforcement officer shall remove such key from such vehicle and deliver the
same to the police station of the city.



   (C)   Park any vehicle upon a street or alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width
of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a
position as to block the driveway entrance or doorway to any abutting
property.



   (E)   Stop, stand, or park such vehicle if it exceeds 19 feet in
length where head-on or right-angle parking is required.



('75 Code, § 17-39.3) (Ord. passed 5-12-75)



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  STOPPING IN STREETS.



   (A)   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of
parking as prescribed in this chapter, unless such stop is made necessary by
the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle as defined in § 70.03 of
this traffic code, by the approach of a funeral or other procession or
vehicle which is given the right-of- way, by the stopping of a school bus or
a public conveyance, by the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of some
other vehicle or a pedestrian, or by some emergency; and in any case covered
by these exceptions vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway,
pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street intersection, if such can
be avoided.  ('75 Code, § 17-40)



   (B)   Standing vehicles not to obstruct passage of other vehicles. 
No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with the
passage of public conveyances or other vehicles. 



('75 Code, § 17-41)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Parking prohibited at all times where so posted or where curbs
painted yellow.  When official signs are placed, erected or installed,
giving notice thereof, or the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of such
signs, no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets so
sign-posted or painted yellow. ('75 Code, § 17-42)



   (B)   Parking restricted as sign-posted.  When official signs are
placed, erected, or installed giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any of the streets so sign-posted at any time during which
parking is prohibited by such signs or for a greater length time than is
permitted by such signs.  ('75 Code, § 17-43)



   (C)   Standing or parking parallel to curb.  Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway
where there are adjacent curbs shall be stopped or parked with the wheels of
such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb.  ('75 Code, §
17-44) (Ord. passed 5-12-75)



   (D)   Angle parking.  On those streets which have been signed or
marked by the City Traffic Engineer for angle parking, no person shall park
or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway
indicated by such signs or markings.  ('75 Code, § 17-44.1) (Ord. passed
5-12-75)



   (E)   Parking backed up to curb restricted.  No person shall park a
vehicle backed up to the curb, except when actually loading or unloading, and
then only at places where such parking is not prohibited. ('75 Code, § 17-45)



   (F)   Stopping with left side of car to curb prohibited.  No person
shall stop a vehicle with its left side to the curb on any improved two-way
street. ('75 Code, § 17-46) (Ord. passed 5-12-75)



   (G)   Parking within marked parking spaces required.  On any street
which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces for vehicles,
such vehicles shall be parked between such lines.  ('75 Code, § 17-47)
(Ord. passed 5-12-75)



Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.05  PARKING FOR CERTAIN REASONS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale or hire.



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, excepting repairs
necessitated by an emergency.



   (C)   Commercial storage, including storage by garages, dealers and
other persons.



   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit
has been disconnected.



   (E)   Transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to
another.



   (F)   Commercial advertising, except with prior written permission
of the City Manager or City Chief of Police.



   (G)   Presenting shows, exhibitions or entertainment of any kind
where an admission fee is charged or donations solicited or accepted.



('75 Code, § 17-48) (Ord. passed 5-12-75)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.06  STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING IN CERTAIN PLACES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk.



   (B)   On the planting strip or utility strip not used for sidewalk
purposes which is situated between the edge of the street pavement and the
street right-of- way boundary line.



   (C)   In front of a public or private driveway.



   (D)   Within an intersection.



   (E)   On a crosswalk.



   (F)   Within 20 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or roadway.



   (G)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any
underpass structure.



   (H)   On either side of any street at the approaches to a bridge, an
underpass or an overhead bridge within 50 feet in either direction of the
outer edge of such structure.



   (I)   On either side of any street leading to a grade crossing
within 50 feet of the closest rail; provided, that where existing permanent
structures are located closer than 50 feet, parking may be permitted in front
of such structures unless otherwise prohibited, and if such parking does not
block the view in either direction of the approach of a locomotive or train.



   (J)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, if
such stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.



   (K)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopping, standing, or
parking at the edge or curb of a street.



   (L)   Within 15 feet in either direction of a fire hydrant or the
entrance to a fire station.



   (M)   Within 25 feet of a corner of any inter- section.



   (N)   In front of any motion picture theater, except for bicycles
where racks are provided.



('75 Code, § 17-49) (Ord. passed 5-12-75)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.07  PARKING OF LARGE VEHICLES.



   Except while actively engaged in loading and unloading, no person shall
park a vehicle with a GVW in excess of 20,000 pounds on any street in a
residential zone.



('75 Code, § 17-49.5) (Ord. passed 1-8-79)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.08  LOADING ZONES.



   (A)   Commercial vehicles may park in designated loading zones for
the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise for a period of time not
exceeding 15 minutes.



   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in a loading zone for the
purpose of taking orders or buying or selling merchandise of any kind.



   (C)   Loading zones shall be sign-posted so as to give notice as to
the loading zone, or the curbing shall be painted red in lieu of such signs.



('75 Code, § 17-50)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.09  PERMITS FOR LOADING AND UNLOADING AT ANGLE TO CURB.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue temporary permits
for a period not to exceed 48 hours to allow the backing of a vehicle to the
curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject
to the terms and conditions of such permit.  Such permits may be issued
either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the driver of a vehicle
and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized
herein.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to
violate any of the terms or conditions of any such permit or to back a
vehicle to the curb for the purposes set forth herein without first having
obtained such temporary permit.



('75 Code, § 17-50.1)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may, within
10 days of the time that a traffic ticket for such violation was attached to
his vehicle, pay to the designated official a penalty for, and in full
satisfaction of such violation, in the sum of $5.  Upon failure to make the
payment heretofore designated, a written notice shall be mailed to the
person, and if payment be not made within 48 hours after the time of mailing
of such notice, the fine shall be assessed as a civil penalty, collectible in
the manner of debt.



('75 Code, § 17-51.1) (Ord. passed 5-12-75)



CHAPTER 74:  VEHICLE LICENSES



Section



   74.01   Annual license tax imposed



   74.02   Method of collection



§ 74.01  ANNUAL LICENSE TAX IMPOSED.



   All owners of motor vehicles residing within the corporate limits of
the city are hereby required to pay to the city an annual license tax of $5
for each vehicle. 



(G.S. § 20-97)



§ 74.02  METHOD OF COLLECTION.



   The license tax imposed by this section shall be collected along other
property taxes on motor vehicles by the County of Gaston and remitted to the
city monthly.



CHAPTER 75:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Stop or yield intersections



      II.   Speed limits



      III.   One-way streets



      IV.   Truck routes



      V.   Bicycles, skateboards, or roller skates on sidewalks;
regulations



      VI.   Other traffic control regulations



SCHEDULE I.  STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   The following table shows stop or yield intersections within the
city.  An * denotes a state system street or road.



 

Intersection
 
Stop or Yield
 
Right-of-Way
 

Ord. No.

 
Date




“A” Street/Vine Street
 
“A” Street
 
Vine Street
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave./South “E” Street
 
South “E” Street
 
Alabama Ave.
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave./Hwy. 161*
 
Alabama Ave.
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave./Pinchback Street
 
Pinchback Street
 
Alabama Ave.
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave.*/8th Street
 
Alabama Ave.*
 
8th Street*
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave.*/9th Street
 
South 9th Street
 
Alabama Ave.*
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave.*/10th Street
 
South 10th Street
 
Alabama Ave.*
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave.*/11th Street
 
South 11th Street
 
Alabama Ave.*
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave.*/12th Street
 
South 12th Street
 
Alabama Ave.*
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave.*/South 13th Street
 
South 13th Street
 
Alabama Ave.*
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alabama Ave./South 14th Street
 
Alabama Ave.
 
South 14th Street*
 

—

 
7-13-92


Alley North of Washington Ave. and North Inman Ave.
 
Alley
 
North Inman Ave.
 

93-9-6

 
9-13-93


Alley running parallel to and between West Pennsylvania Ave. and West Alabama
Ave.
 
Alley
 
12th Street, 13th Street
 

94-12-1

 
   12-12-94


Alley running parallel to and between Virginia Ave. And Washington Ave.
 
Alley
 
8th Street, 9th Street, 10th Street, 11th Street, 12th Street, 13th Street
 

94-12-1

 
   12-12-94


Apple Lane/Johnathan Lane
 
Johnathan Lane
 
Apple Lane
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Apple Lane/North 6th Street
 
Apple Lane
 
North 6th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Athenia Place*/Crescent Drive
 
Crescent Drive
 
Athenia Place*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Athenia Place*/Dover Drive
 
Dover Drive
 
Athenia Place*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Athenia Place*/Georgia Ave.
 
Georgia Ave.
 
Athenia Place*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Athenia Place*/Rhyne Street
 
Rhyne Street
 
Athenia Place*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Boston Ave./South 14th Street*
 
Boston Ave.
 
South 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Boston Ave./South 8th Street*
 
East Boston Ave.
 
South 8th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Boston Ave./South 9th Street
 
South 9th Street
 
East Boston Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Boston Ave./South 10th Street
 
East Boston Ave.
 
South 10th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Boston Ave./South 11th Street
 
East Boston Ave.
 
South 11th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Boston Ave./South 12th Street
 
East Boston Ave.
 
South 12th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Boston Ave./South 13th Street
 
West Boston Ave.
 
South 13th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Carolina Ave./South “E” Street
 
Carolina Ave.
 
South “E” Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Carolina Ave./South “F” Street
 
South “F” Street
 
Carolina Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Carolina Ave./Ramseur Road*
 
Carolina Ave.
 
Ramseur Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Carolina Ave./South Inman Ave.
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Carolina Ave./North 14th Street
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Central Ave./Helen Ave.
 
Central Ave.
 
Helen Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Central Ave./North 12th Street*
 
Central Ave.
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Chadwick Circle/North 12th Street*
 
Chadwick Circle
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Cleveland Ave./Crowders Mountain Road*
 
Cleveland Ave.
 
Crowders Mountain Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Cleveland Ave./South 9th Street
 
East Cleveland Ave.
 
South 9th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Cleveland Ave./South 10th Street
 
South 10th Street
 
East Cleveland Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Cleveland Ave./South 11th Street
 
East Cleveland Ave.
 
South 11th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Costner School Road*/East Iowa Ave.
 
East Iowa Ave.
 
Costner School Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Costner School Road*/Toncin Drive
 
Toncin Drive
 
Costner School Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Crowders Mountain Road*/Caswell Ave.
 
Caswell Ave.
 
Crowders Mountain Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Crowders Mountain Road*/Indiana Ave.
 
Indiana Ave.
 
Crowders Mountain Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Crowders Mountain Road*/Ormand Ave.
 
Ormand Ave.
 
Crowders Mountain Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Crowders Mountain Road*/South 14th Street
 
South 14th Street*
 
Crowders Mountain Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


“D” Street/Logan Ave.
 
Logan Ave.
 
“D” Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Davis Street/Carolina Ave.
 
None
 
 
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Dover Drive/Algedon Drive
 
Algedon Drive
 
Dover Drive
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Dover Drive/Terrace Drive
 
Terrace Drive
 
Dover Drive
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Edgewood Road*/McCall Drive
 
McCall Drive
 
Edgewood Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


E.D. Wilson/South Skyland Ave.*
 
E.D. Wilson
 
South Skyland Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South “F” Street/Alabama Ave.
 
South “F” Street
 
Alabama Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South “F” Street/Hwy. 161*
 
South “F” Street
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South “F” Street/Georgia Ave.
 
Georgia Ave.
 
South “F” Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Fallsway Court/Caswell Ave.
 
Fallsway Court
 
Caswell Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Florida Ave./North 6th Street
 
East Florida Ave.
 
North 6th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Florida Ave./North 7th Street
 
East Florida Ave.
 
North 7th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Florida Ave./North 8th Street
 
East Florida Ave.
 
North 8th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Florida Ave./North 9th Street
 
East Florida Ave.
 
North 9th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Florida Ave./North 11th Street
 
North 11th Street
 
East Florida Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Florida Ave./North 12th Street*
 
East Florida Ave.
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South “G” Street/Alabama Ave.
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South “G” Street/Hwy. 161*
 
South “G” Street
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gaston Ave./Crowders Mountain Road*
 
Gaston Ave.
 
Crowders Mountain Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gaston Ave./South 14th Street
 
South 14th Street*
 
Gaston Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Gaston Ave./South 9th Street
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/Carpenter Lane
 
Carpenter Lane
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/Costner School Road*
 
Costner School Road*
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/Davis Street
 
Davis Street
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/East Lee Ave.
 
East Lee Ave.
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/East Maine Ave.
 
   STOP LIGHT
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/East Maryland Ave.
 
East Maryland Ave.
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/East Ohio Ave.
 
East Ohio Ave.
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/East Washington Ave.
 
East Washington Ave.
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gastonia Hwy.*/North 7th Street
 
North 7th Street
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Georgia Ave./“A” Street
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Georgia Ave./Chestnut Street
 
Chestnut Street
 
Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Georgia Ave./Hwy 161*
 
Georgia Ave.
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Georgia Ave./Oak Street
 
Oak Street
 
Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Georgia Ave./Vine Street
 
Vine Street
 
Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Georgia Ave./6th Street
 
6th Street
 
Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Georgia Ave./South 8th Street*
 
East Georgia Ave.
 
South 8th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Georgia Ave./South 9th Street
 
South 9th Street
 
East Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Georgia Ave./South 10th Street
 
South 10th Street
 
East Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Georgia Ave./South 11th Street
 
South 11th Street
 
East Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Georgia Ave./South 12th Street
 
South 12th Street
 
East Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Georgia Ave./South 13th Street
 
West Georgia Ave.
 
South 13th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Gould Street/Hwy. 161*
 
Gould Street
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Hartford Ave./South 14th Street*
 
Hartford Ave.
 
South 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Hartford Ave./South 9th Street
 
East Hartford Ave.
 
South 9th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Hartford Ave./South 12th Street
 
East Hartford Ave.
 
South 12th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Helen Ave./North 12th Street*
 
Helen Ave.
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


High Street/Mickley Ave.
 
Mickley Ave.
 
High Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Hwy. 161*/Boston Ave.
 
Boston Ave.
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Hwy. 161*/Willow Lane
 
Willow Lane
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Hillcrest Drive/Dover Drive
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Indiana Ave./Hwy. 161*
 
Indiana Ave.
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Indiana Ave./South 15th Street
 
South 15th Street
 
Indiana Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Indiana Ave./South 8th Street*
 
East Indiana Ave.
 
South 8th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Indiana Ave./South 9th Street
 
South 9th Street
 
East Indiana Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Indiana Ave./South 10th Street
 
East Indiana Ave.
 
South 10th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Indiana Ave./South 11th Street
 
East Indiana Ave.
 
South 11th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


North Inman Ave./West Ohio Ave.
 
None Needed
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Iowa Ave./North 6th Street
 
North 6th Street
 
East Iowa Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Iowa Ave./North 7th Street
 
North 7th Street
 
East Iowa Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Iowa Ave./North 8th Street
 
North 8th Street
 
East Iowa Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Iowa Ave./North 9th Street
 
East Iowa Ave.
 
North 9th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Iowa Ave./North 11th Street
 
East Iowa Ave.
 
North 11th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Iowa Ave./North 12th Street
 
East Iowa Ave.
 
North 12th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Iowa Ave./North 13th Street
 
West Iowa Ave.
 
North 13th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Lee Ave./North 6th Street
 
North 6th Street
 
East Lee Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Lee Ave./North 7th Street
 
North 7th Street
 
East Lee Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Lee Ave./North 8th Street
 
North 8th Street
 
East Lee Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Lee Ave./North 9th Street
 
East Lee Ave.
 
North 9th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Lee Ave./North 10th Street
 
East Lee Ave.
 
North 10th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Lee Ave./North 12th Street*
 
West Lee Ave.
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Lee Ave./North 13th Street
 
West Lee Ave.
 
North 13th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Lee Ave./North 14th Street*
 
West Lee Ave.
 
North 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Longcreek Road*/Hwy. 161*
 
Longcreek Road*
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Louisiana Ave./South “F” Street
 
South “F” Street
 
Louisiana Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Louisiana Ave./South 8th Street*
 
East Louisiana Ave.
 
South 8th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Louisiana Ave./South 9th Street
 
South 9th Street
 
East Louisiana Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Louisiana Ave./South 10th Street
 
East Louisiana Ave.
 
South 10th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Louisiana Ave./South 11th Street
 
East Louisiana Ave.
 
South 11th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Louisiana Ave./South 12th Street
 
East Louisiana Ave.
 
South 12th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Louisiana Ave./South 13th Street
 
West Louisiana Ave.
 
South 13th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maine Ave.*/North 6th Street
 
North 6th Street
 
East Maine Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maine Ave.*/North 7th Street
 
North 7th Street
 
East Maine Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maine Ave.*/North 8th Street
 
North 8th Street
 
East Maine Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maine Ave.*/North 9th Street
 
North 9th Street
 
East Maine Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maine Ave.*/North 10th Street
 
North 10th Street
 
East Maine Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maine Ave.*/North 11th Street
 
North 11th Street
 
East Maine Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maine Ave.*/North 12th Street*
 
   STOP LIGHT
 

—

 
1-  -96


West Maine Ave.*/North 13th Street
 
North 13th Street
 
West Maine Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Maine Ave.*/North 14th Street
 
North 14th Street*
 
West Maine Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Maryland Ave./Mickley Ave.
 
Maryland Ave.
 
Mickley Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Maryland Ave./North 12th Street*
 
Maryland Ave.
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maryland Ave./Park Street
 
East Maryland Ave.
 
Park Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maryland Ave./North 7th Street
 
East Maryland Ave.
 
North 7th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maryland Ave./North 9th Street
 
East Maryland Ave.
 
North 9th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maryland Ave./North 10th Street
 
North 10th Street
 
East Maryland Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Maryland Ave./North 11th Street
 
North 11th Street
 
East Maryland Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Maryland Ave./North Gould Street
 
North Gould Street
 
West Maryland Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Maryland Ave./North Inman Ave.
 
North Inman Ave.
 
West Maryland Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Maryland Ave./North Skyland Street
 
North Skyland Street
 
West Maryland Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Maryland Ave./North 13th Street
 
West Maryland Ave.
 
North 13th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Maryland Ave./North 14th Street*
 
West Maryland Ave.
 
North 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Mickley Ave./Alabama Ave.
 
Mickley Ave.
 
Alabama Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Mickley Ave./Hwy. 161*
 
Mickley Ave.
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


M.L. Kiser Road*/North 12th Street*
 
M.L. Kiser Road*
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Ohio Ave./Park Street
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Ohio Ave./North 7th Street
 
East Ohio Ave.
 
North 7th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Ohio Ave./North 8th Street
 
North 8th Street
 
East Ohio Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Ohio Ave./North 9th Street
 
East Ohio Ave.
 
North 9th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Ohio Ave./North 10th Street
 
East Ohio Ave.
 
North 10th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Ohio Ave./North 11th Street
 
North 11th Street
 
East Ohio Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Ohio Ave./North 12th Street*
 
West Ohio Ave.
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Ohio Ave./North 13th Street
 
West Ohio Ave.
 
North 13th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Ohio Ave./North 14th Street*
 
West Ohio Ave.
 
North 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Ormand Ave./South 13th Street
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Osage Lane/South 12th Street
 
Osage Lane
 
South 12th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Park Terrace Drive/Alabama Ave.*
 
Park Terrace Drive
 
Alabama Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Park Terrace Drive/Court Drive
 
Court Drive
 
Park Terrace Drive
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Pennsylvania Ave./10th Street
 
None
 
 
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Pennsylvania Ave./South 8th Street*
 
East Pennsylvania Ave.
 
South 8th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Pennsylvania Ave./South 12th Street
 
West Pennsylvania Ave.
 
South 12th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Pennsylvania Ave./South 13th Street
 
West Pennsylvania Ave.
 
Travelling south on 13th - yield. Travelling north on 13th - stop. Travelling
west on Pennsylvania - stop.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Pinchback Ave./High Street
 
High Street
 
Pinchback Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Pinchback Ave./Hwy. 161*
 
Pinchback Ave.
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Pinchback Ave./Louisiana Ave.
 
Louisiana Ave.
 
Pinchback Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


North Pinchback Ave./Maryland Ave.
 
North Pinchback Ave.
 
Maryland Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Pine Street/Best Town Road
 
Pine Street
 
Best Town Road
 

92-12-1

 
   12-14-92


Pine Street/Tryon Courthouse Road
 
Pine Street
 
Tryon Courthouse Road
 

92-12-1

 
   12-14-92


Ramseur Road*/Hwy. 161*
 
Ramseur Road*
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Ramseur Road*/McKee Drive
 
McKee Drive
 
Ramseur Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Ramseur Road*/Sunset Drive
 
Sunset Drive
 
Ramseur Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Ramseur Road*/Virginia Ave.
 
Virginia Ave.*
 
Ramseur Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Rhyne Street/Center Drive
 
Center Drive
 
Rhyne Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Rhyne Street/Hillcrest Drive
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Rhyne Street/Terrace Drive
 
Terrace Drive
 
Rhyne Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Rice Ave./Mickley Ave.
 
Rice Ave.
 
Mickley Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Rice Ave./Pinchback Ave.
 
Rice Ave.
 
Pinchback Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Rice Ave./Skyland Ave.
 
Rice Ave.
 
Skyland Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Sharon Ave./North 12th Street*
 
Sharon Ave.
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Sherwood Drive*/North 14th Street*
 
Sherwood Drive*
 
North 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Skyland Ave.*/Crowders Mountain Road*
 
Skyland Ave.*
 
Crowders Mountain Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Skyland Ave.*/E.D. Wilson Road
 
E.D. Wilson Road
 
Skyland Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Skyland Ave.*/Hwy. 161*
 
Skyland Ave.*
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Sunset Drive/Caruso Court
 
Caruso Court
 
Sunset Drive
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Sunset Drive/Logan Ave.
 
Logan Ave.
 
Sunset Drive
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Sunset Drive/North 14th Street*
 
Sunset Drive
 
North 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Sunset Lane/North 12th Street*
 
Sunset Lane
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Tennessee Ave./Crowders Mountain Road*
 
Tennessee Ave.
 
Crowders Mountain Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Tennessee Ave./South 14th Street*
 
Tennessee Ave.
 
South 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Tennessee Ave./South 8th Street*
 
East Tennessee Ave.
 
South 8th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Tennessee Ave./South 9th Street
 
South 9th Street
 
East Tennessee Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Tennessee Ave./South 10th Street
 
South 10th Street
 
East Tennessee Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Tennessee Ave./South 11th Street
 
East Tennessee Ave.
 
South 11th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Texas Ave./North 6th Street
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Texas Ave./North 7th Street
 
East Texas Ave.
 
North 7th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Texas Ave./North 8th Street
 
East Texas Ave.
 
North 8th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Texas Ave./North 9th Street
 
East Texas Ave.
 
North 9th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Texas Ave.*/North 10th Street
 
North 10th Street
 
East Texas Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Texas Ave./North 11th Street
 
   4-WAY-STOP
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Texas Ave.*/North 12th Street*
 
East Texas Ave.*
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Texas Ave./North 13th Street*
 
West Texas Ave.
 
North 13th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Texas Ave./North 14th Street*
 
West Texas Ave.
 
North 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Toncin Drive/North 6th Street
 
North 6th Street
 
Toncin Drive
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Virginia Ave./“D” Street
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Virginia Ave./“E” Street
 
“E” Street
 
Virginia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Virginia Ave./“F” Street
 
“F” Street
 
Virginia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Virginia Ave./Carolina Ave.
 
Carolina Ave. (westbound only)
 
East Virginia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Virginia Ave./Gastonia Hwy.*
 
East Virginia Ave.
 
Gastonia Hwy.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Virginia Ave./Norfolk Southern Railroad (unsignalled crossing)
 
East Virginia Ave.
 
Norfolk Southern Railroad
 

91-8-2

 
   8-12-91


East Virginia Ave.*/South 8th Street*
 
   STOP LIGHT
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Virginia Ave.*/North 9th Street
 
North 9th Street
 
East Virginia Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Virginia Ave.*/North 10th Street
 
North 10th Street
 
East Virginia Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Virginia Ave.*/North 11th Street
 
North 11th Street
 
East Virginia Ave.*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Virginia Ave./North Gould Street
 
None (one way)
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Virginia Ave./Inman Ave.
 
Inman Ave.
 
West Virginia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Virginia Ave./South Skyland Ave.
 
Skyland Ave.
 
West Virginia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Virginia Ave.*/12th Street
 
   STOP LIGHT
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Virginia Ave.*/13th Street
 
   STOP LIGHT
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Virginia Ave.*/14th Street
 
West Virginia Ave.* (eastbound only)
 
14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Washington Ave./North 12th Street*
 
   4-WAY-STOP
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Washington Ave./Park Street   
 
Park Street
 
East Washington Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Washington Ave./North 7th Street
 
North 7th Street
 
East Washington Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Washington Ave./North 8th Street
 
North 8th Street
 
East Washington Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Washington Ave./North 9th Street
 
North 9th Street
 
East Washington Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Washington Ave./North 10th Street
 
North 10th Street
 
East Washington Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


East Washington Ave./North 11th Street
 
North 11th Street
 
East Washington Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Washington Ave./North Inman Ave.
 
West Washington Ave.
 
North Inman Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Washington Ave./North 13th Street
 
North 13th Street
 
West Washington Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


West Washington Ave./North 14th Street*
 
West Washington Ave.
 
North 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Willow Lane/South “E” Street
 
Willow Lane
 
South “E” Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Windward Drive/Dameron Road
 
Windward Drive
 
Dameron Road
 

92-12-1

 
   12-14-92


Windward Drive/Linville Court
 
Windward Drive
 
Linville Court
 

92-12-1

 
   12-14-92


Yellow Jacket Lane/Best Town Road*
 
Yellow Jacket Lane
 
Best Town Road*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


Yellow Jacket Lane/North 12th Street*
 
Yellow Jacket Lane
 
North 12th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 6th Street/East Boston Ave.
 
East Boston Ave.
 
South 6th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 6th Street/East Hartford Ave.
 
East Hartford Ave.
 
South 6th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 6th Street/East Louisiana Ave.
 
Louisiana Ave.
 
South 6th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 7th Street/East Boston Ave.
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 7th Street/East Georgia Ave.
 
South 7th Street
 
East Georgia Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 7th Street/East Louisiana Ave.
 
East Louisiana Ave.
 
South 7th Street
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 13th Street/Gaston Ave.
 
South 13th Street
 
Gaston Ave.
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 14th Street/Cleveland Ave.
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 14th Street*/Hwy. 161*   
 
South 14th Street*
 
Hwy. 161*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 14th Street*/Park Terrace Drive
 
Park Terrace Drive
 
South 14th Street*
 

—

 
   7-13-92


South 15th Street/Hartford Ave.
 
None
 
   —
 

—

 
   7-13-92




 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II.  SPEED LIMITS.



   No person shall exceed the speed limits indicated on the following
streets.



 

Location
 
Miles Per Hour
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




A Street
 

25

 

—

 

4-8-96



Central Ave. from North 12th to Helen Ave.
 

20

 

—

 

6-14-93



Chestnut Street
 

25

 

—

 

4-8-96



East Georgia Avenue from 8th Street to South 6th Street
 

25

 

—

 

4-9-12



E. Georgia Street, east of Athenia Place
 

25

 

—

 

4-8-96



East Iowa Ave. from Costner School Rd. to North 12th Street
 

25

 

—

 

- -



West Maryland Avenue from North Mickley Avenue to North 14th Street
 

25

 

—

 

1-9-12



Oak Street
 

25

 

—

 

4-8-96



West Pennsylvania Ave. from South 12th. Street to South 13th Street
 

20

 

94-12-2

 

12-12-94



Terrace Drive between Dover Ave.  and Rhyne Ave. (This constitutes the
entirety of Terrace Drive)
 

25

 

__

 

11-12-01



Toncin Ave.
 

25

 

—

 

6-11-01



Vine Street
 

25

 

—

 

4-8-96



West Virginia Avenue from 14th Street to Skyland Avenue
 

20

 

—

 

12-10-12



East and West Washington Ave.
 

25

 

—



—

 

5-14-01



1-12-11



North 6th Street from East Iowa Avenue to Toncin Avenue
 

25

 

—

 

12-12-11



North 8th Street from intersection with Washington Ave. to intersection with
North 9th Street
 

20

 

94-8-1

 

8-8-94



North 9th Street from intersection with Washington Ave. to Ohio Ave. 
 

25

 

94-8-1



—

 

8-8-94



5-14-01



North 9th Street from Maine Ave. to dead end
 

25

 

—

 

- -



Yellow Jacket Lane
 

25



(during school opening and closing hours)

 

96-12-1

 

12-9-96





 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE III.  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   No person shall operate a vehicle on the following streets other than
the direction indicated.



 

Street
 
Direction
 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



North Gould Street
 
Northbound from West Virginia Ave. to West Maryland Ave.
 

—

 

7-13-92



Park Street
 
Southbound from East Ohio Ave. to East Washington Ave.
 

—

 

7-13-92



8th Street/East Maryland Ave.
 
Northbound from East Washington Ave. to North 9th Street
 

—

 

7-13-92




 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE IV.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   The following are designated truck traffic routes.



 

Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed




NC 274 from east corporate limits to north
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


NC 161 from the intersection of NC 274 to west corporate limit
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


SR 1304 - Skyland Drive
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


SR 1302 - 14th Street/Crowders Mountain Road
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


SR 1307 - Alabama Ave./Athenia Place/Edgewood Road
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


SR 1309 - Between Virginia Ave. NC 274 and Alabama Ave. SR 1307
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


SR 1403 - Ramseur Road
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


SR 1448 - 12th Street north of Virginia Ave.
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


SR 1452 - Costner School Road
 
   —
 
   9-12-83


SR 1484 - Maine Ave.
 
   —
 
   9-12-83




 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE V.  BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, OR ROLLER SKATES ON SIDEWALKS;
REGULATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a bicycle,
skateboard, or roller skates on a sidewalk adjacent to the following streets.



 

Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


Pennsylvania Ave. between South 12th Street and South 13th Street
 
   —
 
   5-14-90


Virginia Ave. between 8th Street and Inman Ave.
 
   —
 
   5-14-90


Washington Ave. between 8th and 9th Streets (in front of Central School)
 
   —
 
   5-14-90


12th Street between Alabama Ave. and Maryland Ave.
 
   —
 
   5-14-90



 



Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE VI.  OTHER TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No U-Turn zones.



 


Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



E. Washington Ave. between N. 8th and N. 9th Streets (in front of Central
Elementary School).
 

97-1-1

 

1-13-96




 



Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 76:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   No parking zone



SCHEDULE I.  NO PARKING ZONE.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets.  ('75 Code,
§ 17-49.1)



 

Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


The Alley running between West Pennsylvania Ave. and West Alabama Ave. from
intersection with South 12th Street to a point 200 feet west of the
intersection.
 

94-8-2

 

8-8-94



East Ohio Avenue immediately adjacent to Field No. 3, Washington Park
 

—

 

- -



N. 13th Street, west side, from Washington Ave. running south to the alley
 

96-7-1

 

7-8-96



Park Street from East Ohio Avenue to East Washington Avenue
 

—

 

- -



S. 13th Street between West Pennsylvania Avenue and West Alabama Avenue
 

—

 

8-8-11



N. 8th Street, west side, from East Virginia Avenue to East Washington Avenue
 

—

 

8-8-11




 



Penalty, see § 73.99



CHAPTER 77: ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES



Section



   77.01   Regulation of all terrain vehicles



 



   77.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Golf cart rules and regulations, see Chapter 78



§ 77.01  REGULATION OF ALL TERRAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   Findings.  The City Council hereby finds that the
indiscriminate operation of all terrain vehicles (ATVs) within the city
limits is detrimental to the health, morale, comfort, safety and welfare of
the people of the city and deems it best for the public welfare that the
operation of such vehicles be subject to regulation as provided in this
section.  The vehicles to which this section applies are defined as
motorized vehicles that are designed primarily for off-road use, including by
way of illustration, dirt bikes, four and three-wheelers and go-carts, and
are not required to be registered or licensed by the Division of Motor
Vehicles for use in public streets and highways and are herein called ATVs.



   (B)   The operation of ATVs on city streets or on areas within 20
feet of the right-of-way of city streets is hereby prohibited.



   (C)   The operation of ATVs upon lands within the city is prohibited
unless the operator either owns the lands upon which the ATV is being
operated or has in his/her possession a written statement of permission from
the owner or legal possessor of said lands that operation of the ATV by the
operator is permitted.



   (D)   The operation of ATVs within 250 yards of a school or a church
is prohibited.



   (E)   The operation of ATVs before 30 minutes before sunrise or
after 30 minutes after sunset is prohibited.



(Ord. TC01-05, passed 11-12-01)  Penalty, see § 77.99



§ 77.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no other
penalty is provided shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be
required to pay a fine not to exceed $50.  Each day that any of the
provision of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate offense.



(G.S. § 14-4(b))  (Ord. TC01-05, passed 11-12-01)



CHAPTER 78:  GOLF CART RULES AND REGULATIONS



Section



   78.01   Authority to regulate



   78.02   Definitions



   78.03   Standards of operation



   78.04   Prohibitions



   78.05   Registration



   78.06   Liability disclaimer



 



   78.99   Penalty



§ 78.01  AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.



   Pursuant to Session Law 2009-459 and G.S. § 160A-300.6 as enacted by
the North  Carolina General Assembly, the City of Bessemer City is
authorized, by ordinance, to regulate the operation of golf carts on any
public street or road within the city limits.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 78.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY. The City of Bessemer City.



   GOLF CART. A vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf
course for sporting or recreational purposes, and that is not capable of
exceeding a speed or more than 20 miles per hour and is powered by a
battery-powered motor. Gasoline-powered vehicles are not permitted under this
chapter.



   OPERATE. To drive or to be in physical control of a golf cart which is
moving upon a public street.



   PUBLIC STREET. A street or road owned and maintained by the City of
Bessemer City or the North Carolina Department of Transportation.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 78.03  STANDARDS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   An operator of a golf cart must possess a valid driver’s
license issued by the North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles. A
learner’s permit is not sufficient to comply with this standard.



   (B)   Golf carts shall be operated in accordance with the North
Carolina General Statutes.



   (C)   The owner of the golf cart must possess and maintain liability
insurance in an amount not less than required by the North Carolina General
Statutes for traditional motor vehicles operated on a public highway in North
Carolina.



   (D)   Golf cart operation may occur only from dawn to dusk.



   (E)   Golf carts must stay to the far right of the roadway and must
yield to overtaking vehicles.



   (F)   The number of occupants of a golf cart is limited to the
number of persons for whom seating is installed.



   (G)   If equipped, the headlights must be illuminated at any time
the golf cart is in forward motion.



   (H)   Golf carts are subject to the same parking regulations as
traditional vehicles.



   (I)   Golf carts may not be operated on any sidewalk.



   (J)   Golf carts shall not be used to town another cart, trailer, or
vehicle of any kind. This includes a person on a skateboard, roller skates,
bicycle, or sled.



   (K)   Golf carts must be operated in a manner and at a speed that is
reasonable and prudent given existing conditions. At no time may a golf cart
be driven at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour.



   (L)   Original lighting and reflective devices, as installed by the
manufacturer, must be maintained.



   (M)   Golf carts utilized by the city or emergency personnel are
exempt from this chapter.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)  Penalty, see § 78.99



§ 78.04  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Golf carts shall not be operated on streets within
Bessemer City that have been assigned a number by the North Carolina
Department of Transportation. These streets include:



         (a)   NC 161;



         (b)   Virginia Avenue/Gastonia Highway;



         (c)   Bess Town Road;



         (d)   Edgewood Road/Athenia Place/Alabama Avenue;



         (e)   North 14th Street;



         (f)   North 12th Street;



         (g)   Crowder’s Mountain Road;



         (h)   Maine Avenue; and



         (i)   Costner School Road.



      (2)   In addition, golf carts are prohibited from operating on
the following streets that are maintained by Bessemer City:



         (a)   Washington Avenue;



         (b)   Yellow Jacket Lane;



         (c)   Maryland Avenue;



         (d)   Skyland Drive;



         (e)   E.D. Wilson Road; and



         (f)   Iowa Avenue.



      (3)   Golf carts may cross these streets at intersections when
traveling on a permitted street.



   (B)   All-terrain vehicles, four-wheel utility vehicles, go-karts,
and other similar vehicles which are not manufactured for operation on a golf
course, and/or a golf cart which has been modified so that is no longer meets
the definition of GOLF CART are not permitted under this chapter.



   (C)   Golf carts are not permitted at city-sponsored events such as
Down Home Fest, the Christmas parade, and Christmas in the City unless
officially sanctioned as being used in the event.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13) Penalty, see § 78.99



Cross-reference:



   Regulation of all-terrain vehicles, see Chapter 77.



§ 78.05  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Citizens wishing to operate a golf cart in Bessemer City must
complete a registration form which is available at City Hall. Submission of
the registration application should be accompanied by a $25 annual
registration fee, proof of liability insurance, and North Carolina driver’s
license for each operator. Also potential operators must sign a waiver
releasing the City of Bessemer City from all liability arising from the
operation of a golf cart.



   (B)   Once the conditions above are satisfied, the application will
be forwarded to the Bessemer City Police Department. One of the police
sergeants or his or her designee will conduct an inspection of the golf cart
to determine compliance with this chapter. Once compliance is established,
the Bessemer City Police Department will issue a registration sticker that is
to be affixed to the lower left corner of the windshield.



   (C)   Permits/stickers will be valid from July1 until June 30 of the
following year. The registration fee may not be prorated.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)  Penalty, see § 78.99



§ 78.06  LIABILITY DISCLAIMER.



   This chapter is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Golf
carts are not designed or manufactured to be used on public streets. The City
of Bessemer City in no way advocates or endorses their use in such a manner.
By establishing this chapter, the city is merely attempting to address safety
issues as they relate to golf course operation. All persons who operate or
ride in golf carts upon public streets do so at their own risk and peril and
must be attentive to the safety of themselves and others. The city has no
liability under any theory of liability and the city assumes no liability for
permitting golf carts to be operated on public streets.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 78.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be an
infraction, the maximum penalty for which shall be $50. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a person who, while operating a golf cart on a public street
within Bessemer City, violates any provision of G.S. Chapter 20 shall be
subject to the same penalties applicable to operators of traditional motor
vehicles.



   (B)   A recurring violation of this chapter may result in the
revocation of the golf cart registration.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   NUISANCES



      91.   FIRE PREVENTION



      APPENDIX: FEES AND CIVIL PENALTIES SCHEDULE



      92.   ABANDONED, JUNKED, AND NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLES



      93.   ANIMALS



      94.   NOISE REGULATIONS



      95.   YARD/GARAGE SALES



      96.   SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 90:  NUISANCES



Section



   90.01   Purpose



   90.02   Nuisances prohibited



   90.03   Certain nuisances enumerated



   90.04   Premises to be drained of stagnant water



   90.05   Inspections; investigations; complaints



   90.06   Right to enter private premises; duty of occupant



   90.07   Notice to abate nuisance; appeal



   90.08   Recourse of city when notice is ignored; liens



   90.09   Arrest not prohibited



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  PURPOSE.



   Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in other chapters of this
code, and it is the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter to
make it supplemental to those other chapters in which nuisances are defined
and prohibited, and the pro- visions of this chapter relating to the
abatement of nuisances shall be regarded as alternative methods and
procedures for the abatement of nuisances in those instances where other
methods and procedures for abatement are provided.



('75 Code, § 10.1)



§ 90.02  NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, harbor, commit, or
maintain, or to suffer to be caused, harbored, committed, or maintained, any
nuisance as defined by the statute or common law of this state or as defined
by this code or other ordinance of the city at any place within the city or
at any place within the area surrounding the city and within one mile of the
city limits.



('75 Code, § 10-2)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  CERTAIN NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



   (A)   The following acts when committed, or conditions when
existing, within the city or within the area surrounding the city and within
one mile of the city limits are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances:



      (1)   An act done or committed or aided or assisted to be done
or committed by any person, or any substance, being or thing kept,
maintained, placed or found in or upon any public or private place, which is
injurious or dangerous to the public health or safety.



      (2)   All buildings, bridges, or other structures of whatever
character kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or
having control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe,
dangerous, unhealthy, injurious, or annoying to the public.



      (3)   All trees and other appendages of or to realty kept or
maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or having control
thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy,
injurious, or annoying to the public.



      (4)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water, and all foul or
dirty water or liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe, or spout, or
thrown into or upon any street, public place or lot to the injury or
annoyance of the public.



      (5)   All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or
sidewalk to the danger or annoyance of the public, and all stones, rubbish,
dirt, filth, slops, vegetable matter or other article thrown or placed by any
person on or in any street, sidewalk, or other public place, which in any way
may cause any injury or annoyance to the public.



      (6)   All sidewalks, gutters, or curb stones permitted to
remain in an unsafe condition, or out of repair.



      (7)   All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep, or cow pens or
other places where animals are kept or yards for poultry, permitted by the
owner thereof or the person responsible therefor to be in such a condition as
to become offensive, annoying, or injurious to the public.



      (8)   All houses or buildings used for special storage of
powder, dynamite, or other explosive sub- stances, except those maintained
pursuant to permit issued by competent authority.



      (9)   Any litter, trash, garbage, or refuse, or any abandoned
unlicensed motor vehicle or any part thereof, which is or may be offensive to
the neighborhood or citizens generally.



      (10) Any offensive or unwholesome sub- stance or growth of grass,
weeds, or brush upon any lot or parcel of ground within the city, or within
the area surrounding the city, and within one mile of the city limits.



   (B)   The nuisances described in this section shall not be construed
as exclusive, and any act of commission or omission and any condition which
constitutes a nuisance by statute or common law of the state is, when
committed, omitted, or existing within the city or within the area
surrounding the city and within one mile of the city limits is hereby
declared to constitute a nuisance.



('75 Code, § 10-3)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  PREMISES TO BE DRAINED OF STAGNANT WATER.



   No person owning or in possession of any lot, house, building, or
enclosure shall allow or suffer to exist in or upon such premises any
stagnant water, animal, or vegetable matter or other substance liable to
become putrid, offensive, annoying, or unhealthy. Persons owning or in
possession of any real estate shall provide proper and adequate drainage
therefor so that no offensive, baneful, or disagreeable liquids shall flow or
seep into any street. Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be
a nuisance.



('75 Code, § 10-4)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  INSPECTIONS; INVESTIGATIONS; COMPLAINTS.



   It shall be the duty of the City Manager to cause inspections to be
made from time to time of all portions of the city, and the area surrounding
the city, and within one mile of the city limits, to determine whether any
condition exists or activity is being practiced which constitutes a nuisance,
and he shall cause an investigation to be made upon complaint made by any
responsible person.



('75 Code, § 10-5)



§ 90.06  RIGHT TO ENTER PRIVATE PREMISES; DUTY OF OCCUPANT.



   Police officers, Fire Department officers, and Code Enforcement Officer
shall have the right to enter upon private premises for the purposes
specified in § 90.05 of this chapter, upon compliance with all applicable
provisions of law.  Unless it appears probable that advance warning would
defeat the purpose of such entry, occupants of premises to be entered shall
be given reasonable notice in advance, and in any case it shall be unlawful
for any owner or occupant to prevent such entry which is sought to be made in
compliance with law.



('75 Code, § 10-6)



§ 90.07  NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE; APPEAL.



   (A)   If at any time a police officer, Fire Department officer, or
Code Enforcement Officer shall find that an activity or practice which
constitutes a nuisance is occurring within the city or within the area
surrounding the city and within one mile of the city limits he shall promptly
and by the most expeditious means notify the violator to cease and desist
forthwith.  ('75 Code, § 10-7)



   (B)   If at any time a police officer, Fire Department officer, or
Code Enforcement Officer shall find that a condition which constitutes a
nuisance exists within the city or within the area surrounding the city, and
within one mile of the city limits, he shall give notice in writing to the
owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises upon which such condition
exists, stating therein the condition which constitutes a nuisance, and
directing such addressee to remedy the condition within the time stated in
such notice, which shall be not more than ten days.  It shall be unlawful
for any such owner, occupant, or person in charge to fail to comply with the
terms of such notice; provided, that any owner, occupant, or person in charge
may, within two days from the service thereof, appeal to the City Council, in
which case the terms of such notice shall be stayed pending action of the
Council, which shall be final; provided further, that if the officer signing
such notice shall state in such notice that the condition which constitutes a
nuisance is such as to be an imminent hazard to the health, safety or welfare
of the public or any person within or near the premises upon which such
nuisance exists, then the addressee shall comply with the terms of such
notice.  ('75 Code, § 10-8)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.08  RECOURSE OF CITY WHEN NOTICE IS IGNORED; LIENS.



   (A)   Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given
pursuant to § 90.07(B) of this chapter to comply with the terms of such
notice, or with the terms imposed by the City Council on appeal, as the case
may be, the City Manager shall forthwith direct the appropriate city officer
to remedy the condition which is the subject of such notice, and the expense
incurred by the city in so doing shall be charged to the addressee of such
notice, to be collected as city taxes, and such expenses shall constitute a
lien upon the premises where such condition occurred, to be collected as city
taxes are collected if not otherwise first paid to the city.



   (B)   Abatement by the city of any condition which constitutes a
nuisance and reimbursement to the city of expenses incurred thereby shall not
bar prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.



('75 Code, § 10-9)



§ 90.09  ARREST NOT PROHIBITED.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any police
officer from arresting any person for committing or maintaining a nuisance
when such arrest is made pursuant to law.



('75 Code, § 10-10)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to or in lieu of any other penalty herein provided by the
code of ordinances of the city, or the North Carolina General Statutes,
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty in the amount of $100 per violation to be recovered by the city
in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the
penalty within a period of 72 hours after the offender has been cited for
violation.  Any action to recover the civil penalty may be joined in an
action for appropriate equitable remedy, including injunctions and orders of
abatement, and including an action to recover damages owing to the city by
reason of expenses incurred by the city in abating, correcting, limiting, and
otherwise dealing with the offending action.



(Ord. 94-6-3, passed 6-13-94)



CHAPTER 91:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




General Provisions




   91.01   Unauthorized meddling with Fire Department apparatus



   91.02   Obstructing Fire Department; obedience at scene of fire



   91.03   Use of torches or flame-producing devices



   91.04   Maintaining chimneys and the like



   91.05   Regulation of alarm systems




Fire Prevention Code




   91.20   State Fire Prevention Code adopted



   91.21   Amendments



   91.22   Fire Official to enforce



   91.23   Motor vehicle routes for transporting dangerous materials



   91.24   Permit and inspection fees



   91.25   Appeals from decisions of Fire Official



   91.26   Conflicts with state law




Open Burning and Smoking Regulations




   91.40   State open burning regulations adopted



   91.41   Maintaining fire on property of another



   91.42   Smoking prohibited under certain conditions; posting signs




Flammable and Combustible Materials




   91.55   Hot ashes and other dangerous materials



   91.56   Accumulations of waste materials



   91.57   Flammable decorative materials in buildings; storage in
roofed-over malls



   91.58   Open flames or lights restricted




Fire Department




   91.70   Established



   91.71   Fire Chief appointed; compensation



   91.72   Powers and responsibilities



   91.73   Chain of command; obedience to supervisors



   91.74   Authority of members; interference prohibited



   91.75   City Manager to make rules and regulations



   91.76   Services to other municipalities



   91.77   Compliance with state law and bylaws



 



   91.99   Penalty



   Appendix: Fees and civil penalties schedule



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  UNAUTHORIZED MEDDLING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT APPARATUS.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to enter, or to meddle
in any way with any fire truck or other apparatus of the Fire Department.



('75 Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 20, passed  - - )  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.02  OBSTRUCTING FIRE DEPARTMENT; OBEDIENCE AT SCENE  OF FIRE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder, or
delay in any manner whatsoever the proper operations of the Fire Department
in the performance of its duties in the extinguishment of fires.  ('75 Code,
§ 7-2)



   (B)   Every person present at the scene of a fire shall be subject
and obedient to the orders of fire- fighters and police officers in any
matter relating to extinguishing the fire, removal and protection of persons
and property endangered by fire, smoke, or water, freedom of Fire Department
and medical personnel and apparatus to perform their duties or to function
properly, and the maintenance of order at or near the scene of the fire.  It
shall be unlawful for any person to disobey any such lawful order of a fire-
fighter or police officer.  Firefighters and police officers shall have
authority to arrest persons who disobey such orders and to hold them in
custody until the fire has been extinguished, at which time the violators
shall be dealt with according to law.  ('75 Code, § 7-3) (Ord. 15, passed 
- - ; Am. Ord. 16, passed 10-15-53)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  USE OF TORCHES OR FLAME- PRODUCING DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person using a torch or other flame- producing device for
removing paint from any building or structure shall provide one fire
extinguisher, of a type approved by the Fire Chief, or water hose connected
to a water supply in the area where such burning is done.  In all cases, a
fire watcher shall remain on the premises for one hour after the torch or
flame-producing device has been used.



   (B)   Any person using a torch or other flame- producing device for
sweating pipe joints in any building or structure shall have available, in
the immediate vicinity where the sweating is done, one such approved fire
extinguisher or water hose connected to a water supply.  Combustible
material in the close proximity of flame shall be protected against ignition
by shielding, wetting, or other approved means.  In all cases, a fire
watcher shall remain in the vicinity of the sweating operation for one-half
hour after the torch or flame-producing device has been used.



('75 Code, § 7-7)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  MAINTENANCE OF CHIMNEYS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Chimneys, flues, or similar devices for conveying products of
combustion or hot gases to the exterior of the building shall be maintained
in a manner as not to create a hazardous condition.



      (1)   Existing masonry chimneys which, upon inspection, are
found to be without flue liner and with open mortar joints which will permit
smoke or gases to be discharged into the building, or which are cracked as to
be dangerous, shall be made safe by means of a fire clay liner, fire brick, a
corrosion resistant metal pipe and otherwise repaired if necessary, or the
chimney shall be removed.  Metal pipe liners shall be one inch less in
diameter than the least dimension of the flue and entire space between the
metal liner and the walls of the chimney filled with cement mortar.



      (2)   Existing chimneys and vents of metal which are corroded
or improperly supported shall be replaced, unless suitable repairs are made.



      (3)   Existing chimney and vent connectors of metal which are
corroded or improperly supported shall be replaced.



   (B)   All heat-producing appliances, including boilers, furnaces,
incinerators, ovens, and restaurant type cooking appliances, shall be
installed and maintained so as to be reasonably safe to persons and
property.  Evidence that heat-producing appliances are installed in
accordance with the applicable standard specified for this division shall be
evidence that such heat-producing appliances are installed so as to be
reasonably safe to persons and property.



   (C)   Exhaust systems provided for restaurant cooking equipment
shall be maintained in a manner such as not to create a hazardous condition.



      (1)   Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, ducts, and other
devices shall be inspected periodically and cleaned as needed to remove
grease and deposits of residues.



      (2)   Fire extinguishing systems shall be inspected
periodically and checked for proper operation.  These inspections shall
include a check that the supply of extinguishing agent in the system is
adequate, and all actuation components are operating satisfactorily. 
Fusible links, if employed, shall be replaced or properly cleaned.
Instructions for manually operating the system shall be posted conspicuously
in the kitchen and employees checked for their knowledge of procedures.



      (3)   Any fire dampers shall be tested periodically to insure
proper functioning of all parts.



   (D)   Commercial, industrial, and flue-fed incinerators shall be
provided with approved spark arresters or other effective means for arresting
sparks and fly ash.



   (E)   No person owning or occupying any building or other structure
shall install, maintain, or use therein any rubber pipe, rubber hose, or
rubber connection, or other device or apparatus of rubber composition for the
transmission of natural or artificial gas into or within such building or
structure for illuminating or heating purposes therein.



('75 Code, § 7-15)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  REGULATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Purpose and scope.  The purpose of this section is to
encourage alarm users to assume increased responsibility for maintaining the
mechanical reliability and proper use of alarm systems; to prevent the
unnecessary response of fire department personnel to false alarms and thereby
to protect the public safety and preserve the emergency response capability
of the City of Bessemer City.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section, the following
words or phrases shall have the following meanings:



      (1)   ALARM SIGNAL. A detectable signal, either audible or
visible, generated by an alarm system, to which the Fire Department is
expected to respond.



      (2)   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment or devices,
mechanical, electrical or electronic, arranged to signal the occurrence of
the presence of smoke or fire to which the Fire Department is expected to
respond.



      (3)   ALARM SYSTEM COORDINATOR. An employee of the city or
Fire Department designated by the Fire Chief to administer this section.



      (4)   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, proprietorship, governmental or educational entity, or any other
entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm
system is maintained for the protection of such premises.



      (5)   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. An automatic dialing device or
an automatic telephone dialing alarm system which, upon activation, is
programmed to select one or more predetermined telephone numbers and transmit
an emergency message by tape or electronic signal indicating a need for Fire
Department response.



      (6)   CITY. The City of Bessemer City, North Carolina.



      (7)   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the
intentional or negligent conduct of the alarm user, his or her employees or
agents, which results in signals activated to summon the Fire Department
unless Fire Department response was canceled by the alarm user or his or her
agent before Fire Department personnel arrive at the alarm location.



         (a)   The term FALSE ALARM shall not include a signal
which can be reasonably determined to have been caused or activated as a
direct result of external events such as unusually violent conditions of
nature or other extraordinary circumstance not reasonably subject to control
by the alarm user.



         (b)   An alarm activated during an alarm system testing
procedure shall not be considered a FALSE ALARM if the user first notifies
and receives permission from the users alarm company (or designee) and the
Alarm System Coordinator, to test the system.



         (c)   An alarm is false within the meaning of this
section when, upon inspection by responding Fire Department personnel,
evidence indicates that no fire or smoke was present which would have
activated a properly functioning alarm system.



      (8)   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the Fire Department of the City
of Bessemer City or his or her designee.



   (C)   Review of false alarm determinations.



      (1)   Request for review. The Alarm Systems Coordinator shall,
when requested by an alarm user, review the determination that an alarm was
false. Such review shall be conducted by the Coordinator only if the alarm
user requests the review in writing within ten days of the date that the
false alarm occurred. A written request for review of a false alarm
determination by the Alarm Systems Coordinator shall include the following
information:



         (a)   Alarm user name;



         (b)   Address at which the alarm system is installed;



         (c)   Date and time of the false alarm that is being
contested;



         (d)   Facts upon which the request for review of the
false alarm determination is made.



      (2)   Disposition of review. The Alarm Systems Coordinator
will review each request for appeal and may make changes if he believes the
call should not have been categorized as false. The decision of the Alarm
Systems Coordinator shall be final.



   (D)   Service charge assessment for false alarms.



      (1)   Excessive false alarms.  It is hereby found and
determined that the occurrence of three or more false alarms from any one
user within a year is deemed excessive and constitutes a public nuisance.



      (2)   Year term. For the purpose of this section, a year is
any period of 12 consecutive months following the occurrence of a false alarm.



      (3)   Fine schedule for excessive false alarms requiring Fire
Department response:



 


Number of False Alarms

 

Fine




1 or 2

 

Waived




3, 4 and 5

 

$50




6 and 7

 

$100 each




8 and 9

 

$250 each




10 and subsequent

 

$500 each




 



(Ord. passed 12-8-08)



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 91.20  STATE FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code known as the North Carolina State Building Code Volume V -
Fire Prevention, 1992 Edition, of which code not less than one copy shall
remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, and such code is hereby
adopted and incorporated in this chapter as fully as if set out at length
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of
the city, and any designated extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.  The
code adopted by this section shall be law and may be cited as the Bessemer
City Fire Prevention Code or Bessemer City Fire Code.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



§ 91.21  AMENDMENTS.



   The North Carolina Building Codes Council and the North Carolina
Department of Insurance may from time to time issue amendments and revisions
to the City Fire Prevention Code and such amendments and revisions shall be
fully and automatically incorporated into the Code without further action by
City Council.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



§ 91.22  FIRE OFFICIAL TO ENFORCE.



   The provisions of the City Fire Prevention Code shall be administered
and enforced by the Fire Official who shall be appointed by the City Manager
along with such assistants as from time to time may be appointed by the City
Manager.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



§ 91.23  MOTOR VEHICLE ROUTES FOR TRANSPORTING DANGEROUS MATERIALS.



   The Fire Official may from time to time designate routes for shipments
of explosives, blasting agents, hazardous chemicals, or other dangerous
articles by the use of official traffic control signs or in the absence of
such signs at the issuance of any permit required by this code.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



§ 91.24  PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   Permits covered by Chapter 4 of the City Fire Prevention Code
and required in various articles thereof are for the purpose of giving City
Council, through the Fire Official, more effective control over hazardous
conditions regulated by the code.  Each permit shall be for a term
coinciding with the man- dated inspection schedule for the class of occupancy.



   (B)   The City Council may, by resolution, adopt a schedule of fees
for permits and inspections required by the Fire Prevention Code, and when
such resolution has been placed on file in the office of the City Clerk, no
such permit shall be issued and no such inspection shall be made until the
fee therefor as provided in such schedule, has been paid to the Finance
Officer.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93; Am. Ord. 94-6-1, passed 6-13-94)



Cross-reference:




Fees and civil penalties schedule, see Ch. 91 Appendix




§ 91.25  APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF FIRE OFFICIAL.



   Whenever the Fire Official shall disapprove an application or refuse to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
Fire Prevention Code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the
code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal
from the decision of the Fire Official to the City Council within 30 days
from the date of the decision appealed.  All appeals shall be in writing and
shall fully and clearly state the issues appealed.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



§ 91.26  CONFLICTS WITH STATE LAW.



   In the event of conflict between any provision of the Fire Prevention
Code and any provision of state law (including the State Building Code) or
any other rule or regulation made pursuant to state law, the state law or
rule or regulation made pursuant thereto shall prevail.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



OPEN BURNING AND
SMOKING REGULATIONS



§ 91.40  STATE OPEN BURNING REGULATIONS ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing open burning, that certain code known as the 15A NCAC 02D.1903,
Open Burning Without an Air Quality Permit, of which code not less than one
copy shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, and such code is
hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter as fully as if set out at
length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
limits of the city. The code adopted by this section shall be law and may be
cited as the “Bessemer City Open Burning Code.”



(Ord. passed 9-11-89; Am. Ord. 94-10-1, passed 10-10-94; Am. Ord. passed
10-14-13)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.41  MAINTAINING FIRE ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.



   No person shall kindle or maintain any fire upon the property of
another without authority of the owner of such property, nor shall any person
will-fully or through neglect permit any fire on his own property to spread
to the property of another.



('75 Code, § 7-5)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.42  SMOKING PROHIBITED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS; POSTING SIGNS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, SMOKING shall mean and
include the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, tobacco or other
plant growth in any form.



   (B)   Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any
areas of warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, places of
assembly, and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or
handled, the Fire Official is empowered and authorized to order the owner or
occupant in writing to post “No Smoking” signs in each building,
structure, room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited.  The Fire
Official shall designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any
building, structure, or place in which smoking may be permitted.



   (C)   “No Smoking” signs of approved sized lettering and
location required in accordance with division (B) of this section shall read
“By Order of the Fire Official.”



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any legally
required “No Smoking” sign or to smoke in any place where such signs are
posted.



('75 Code, § 7-6)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Cross-reference:



   Smoking and tobacco use regulations, see Ch. 96



FLAMMABLE AND
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS



§ 91.55  HOT ASHES AND OTHER DANGEROUS MATERIALS.



   No person shall deposit hot ashes or cinders, or smoldering coals, or
greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous ignition, into any
combustible receptacle, or place the same within ten feet of any combustible
materials, except in metal or other non- combustible receptacles.  Such
receptacles, unless resting on a noncombustible floor or on the ground
outside the building, shall be placed on non- combustible stands, and in
every case shall be kept at least two feet away from any combustible wall or
partition or exterior window opening.



('75 Code, § 7-8)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.56  ACCUMULATIONS OF WASTE MATERIALS.



   Roofs, courts, yards, sidewalks, alleys, vacant lots and open spaces
shall be kept free and clear of deposits or accumulations of waste paper,
hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, or combustible waste or rubbish of any
kind.  All weeds, grass, vines, or other growth, when same endangers
property, or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and removed by the
owner or occupant of the property.



('75 Code, § 7-9)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.57  FLAMMABLE, DECORATIVE MATERIALS IN BUILDINGS; STORAGE IN
ROOFED-OVER MALLS.



   (A)   Highly flammable materials such as cotton batting, straw, dry
vines, leaves, trees, artificial flowers or shrubbery, and foam plastic
materials shall not be used for decorative purposes in show windows or other
parts of mercantile and institutional occu- pancies unless first rendered
flameproof.  Electric light bulbs in mercantile and institutional
occupancies shall not be decorated with paper or other combust- ible
materials unless such materials shall first have been rendered flameproof. 
('75 Code, § 7-12)



   (B)   No combustible goods, merchandise, or decorations shall be
displayed or stored in a roofed- over mall unless approved by the Fire
Chief.  ('75 Code, § 7-13)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.58  OPEN FLAMES OR LIGHTS RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person shall take an open-flame or light into any building,
barn, or any other place where highly flammable, combustible, or explosive
material is kept, unless such light or flame shall be well secured in a glass
globe, wire mesh cage or similar approved device.



   (B)   No heating or lighting apparatus or equipment capable of
igniting flammable material of the type stored or handled shall be used in
the storage area of any warehouse storing rags, excelsior, hair, or other
highly flammable or combustible material, nor in the work area of any shop or
factory used for the manufacture, repair, or renovating of mattresses or
bedding, nor in the work areas of any establishment used for the upholstering
of furniture.



   (C)   No person shall install, maintain, or use within any building
or other structure in the city any open flame gas jet, or swinging bracket
light.



('75 Code, § 7-14)  Penalty, see § 91.99



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 91.70  ESTABLISHED.



   The City Fire Department is hereby established, to consist of a Chief,
who shall be known as the Fire Chief, and such number of full-time or
volunteer members, either or both, and such quarters, apparatus and other
property as may from time to time be authorized by the City Council.  The
organization of the Fire Department and the ranks of its members shall be as
prescribed in rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to § 92.75 of this
chapter.



('75 Code, § 7-29) (Ord. 15, passed  - - )



§ 91.71  FIRE CHIEF APPOINTED; COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be appointed annually by the City
Council, and he shall, before entering upon the discharge of the duties of
his office, take such oath and give such bond as may be specified by the City
Council.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall receive as compensa- tion for his
services such sum as may from time to time be prescribed for his office in
the annual budget or other ordinance or resolution of the City Council
provided that when the office of Fire Chief is held by a person other than a
full-time city officer, he shall receive no compensation for any month unless
he has attended practice drills and performed such other duties as may be
required of volunteer firefighters in the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant to § 91.75 of this chapter which relate to conditions precedent to
drawing pay by volunteer firefighters.



('75 Code, § 7-30(a), (b)) (Ord. 15, passed  - - )



§ 91.72  POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be the Chief of the Fire Department and
the commanding officer thereof, and shall be responsible to the City Manager
and the City Council for the administration, training, discipline, morale,
and effective deployment and utilization of the members of the Department and
for the maintenance and effective deployment and utilization of the property,
equipment, and apparatus of the Fire Department.  The Fire Chief shall have
all such powers as may be necessary and lawful to meet the responsibilities
imposed upon him by this section, including but not limited to the following:



      (1)   He shall have absolute command, control, management,
assignment to duties, and super- vision of every officer, member, and
employee of the Fire Department during a fire and at all practices and
drills, and during all hours when such personnel are on duty.



      (2)   He shall have absolute control, authority, and command
of the police officers present at the scene of any fire during the time and
con- tinuance of any fire or conflagration, and all orders issued by him to
such police officers, and to other persons present, shall be by them
explicitly obeyed and performed.



      (3)   He shall have supervision over the engine houses,
trucks, and all apparatus and equip- ment belonging to the Fire Department. 
He shall be responsible for the serviceable condition of all equip- ment
belonging to the Fire Department, and he shall be responsible that every
piece of fire apparatus is equipped at all times with the necessary wrenches
and all other equipment belonging to that piece of apparatus and necessary in
the successful fighting of fire.



      (4)   He shall have supervision over all repairs to apparatus
and the charge of all supplies, and shall issue them upon his own discretion
or upon the authority of the City Manager or City Council to the units of the
Fire Department, taking from them the receipt of the commanding officer of
the unit to which the supplies are issued.  He shall have sole control,
management, and command at fires and alarms of fire over all apparatus and
equipment belonging to the Fire Department.



      (5)   He shall be responsible for the keeping of necessary
records for the Fire Department, which shall be subject to the inspection of
the Mayor and members of the City Council at any time. Such record shall list
and note, inter alia, the state of repair of all property belonging to the
Fire Depart-ment.  He shall record and report monthly to the City Council a
statement of all fires occurring since the previous report, the units and
personnel responding to alarms, the loss and insurance as far as ascertained,
the causes of any such fires, together with such suggestions as he may deem
advisable to bring the number of fires to a minimum.  He shall also keep at
his office such books or other records as the City Council may prescribe.



      (6)   He shall keep a roll of the volunteer firefighters, and
shall keep a record of the attendance of such firefighters upon the practice
runs, and shall make a report of the names of the volunteers and the number
of such practice runs as each shall attend during the month previous, at each
regular meeting of the City Council, which report shall be filed with the
City Clerk and kept for permanent record.



      (7)   He shall cause one weekly practice drill of the
firefighters on a day and at a time as he shall appoint, provided that
attendance at a fire shall be accepted, in the discretion of the Fire Chief,
in lieu of such practice drill for any week.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall have such additional powers and perform
such additional duties as may be prescribed for his office by state law, this
code, and other ordinances and resolutions of the Council and administrative
regulations of the City Manager.



('75 Code, § 7-30(c), (d)) (Ord. 15, passed  - - )



§ 91.73  CHAIN OF COMMAND; OBEDIENCE TO SUPERVISORS.



   Authority within the Fire Department shall flow from the Fire Chief
through the Assistant Fire Chief and other officers and firefighters downward
in order of rank and seniority within rank, and subordinates shall have the
powers and perform the duties of their immediate superiors when such
superiors are absent or disabled.  Each member of the Fire Department shall
obey all lawful orders of his superiors in the chain of command.



('75 Code, § 7-31)



§ 91.74  AUTHORITY OF MEMBERS; INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.



   Members of the Fire Department shall have authority to do all acts
reasonably necessary to extinguish fires and protect life and property from
fire, and it shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner of
property which is burning, willfully to interfere in any manner with any
fire-fighter in the performance of his duty.



('75 Code, § 7-32)



§ 91.75  CITY MANAGER TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Manager, in consultation with the Fire Chief, shall prepare
rules and regulations for the government of the Fire Department and the
personnel thereof.  Such rules and regulations, which may be amended from
time to time, shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.  It shall
be unlawful for any member of the Fire Department to violate any such rule or
regulation which has been approved by resolution of the City Council and
placed on file in the office of the City Clerk, and a copy of all such
approved rules and regulations shall also be placed on file at Fire
Department headquarters.



('75 Code, § 7-33)



§ 91.76  SERVICES TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.



   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 58-80-15, the City
Council hereby resolves to accept and endorse the provisions of G.S. §§
58-80-1 through 58-80-60, thus making the city a participant in the State
Volunteer Fire Department.



   (B)   As required by G.S. § 58-80-25, the City Council hereby
designates the Fire Chief to have authority to grant or deny permission for
firefighters and apparatus to leave the city in all cases where request is
made for assistance beyond the city limits, and in the absence, disability or
unavailability of the Fire Chief, the Assistant Fire Chief is hereby desig-
nated for such purpose, and in the absence, disability or unavailability of
both the Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief, the City Manager is hereby
designated for such purpose.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, and in his absence or
disability, the Assistant Fire Chief, to keep the State Commissioner of
Insurance and the Secretary of the State Firemen's Association currently
informed as to the name, address, and telephone number of each of the persons
designated in division (B) of this section who have authority to grant or
deny permission for firefighters and apparatus to leave the city.



   (D)   In the event of a conflagration beyond the capability of the
City Fire Department to bring under control and prevent the spread thereof to
other property so as to endanger a considerable segment of the city, the
ranking officer of the Fire Department who is then in command shall forthwith
cause to be called upon for assistance such other Fire Depart- ments of the
State Volunteer Fire Department as, in his judgment, may be required to
control and extinguish such conflagration.



('75 Code, § 7-34)



§ 91.77  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW AND BYLAWS.



   (A)   The Fire Department is a member of the North Carolina State
Firemen's Association and shall comply with the constitution and bylaws
thereof, as required by G.S. § 58-84-50, and the Treasurer shall comply with
the provisions of G.S. § 58-84-45.  ('75 Code, § 7-35)



   (B)   The constitution and bylaws applicable to volunteer members of
the Fire Department shall be consistent with state law, this code, and other
ordinances and the rules and regulations of the Fire Department, and
provisions shall be made for election of officers at the annual meeting in
each year and for the holding of practice drills, with the names of those
participating to be reported monthly to the Fire Chief. Such constitution and
bylaws and all amendments thereto shall be approved by the City Council, by
resolution or motion, and filed in the office of the City Clerk, before
taking effect.  A copy of such approved constitution and bylaws shall also
be on file in the office of the Fire Chief.  ('75 Code, § 7-36)



Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to the penalty set
forth in § 10.99



   (B)   Violation of any provision of §§ 91.20 through 91.26 of this
chapter shall subject the offender to one or more of the following penalties.



      (1)   Civil penalties.  The Fire Official may impose civil
penalties for violation of the Fire Preven- tion Code in accordance with a
schedule of penalties adopted by the City Council from time to time and as
set forth in the Appendix § 2 at the end of this chapter.



      (2)   Criminal penalties.  Violation of the Fire Prevention
Code or failure to pay any properly imposed civil penalties shall result in
prosecution and fines spelled out in § 10.99.



      (3)   Abatement required.  The imposition of one or more
penalties for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor shall it allow
the violation to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not
otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are main-
tained shall constitute a separate offense.



      (4)   Forced removal.  The application of the penalties
provided in divisions (B)(1), (2), and (3) above, shall not be construed to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



   (C)   Violations of any provision of § 91.40 of this chapter shall
be a misdemeanor and shall be subject to enforcement under § 10.99, as
amended, or subject to a civil penalty as provided in § 10.99 of this code.



(Ord. passed 9-11-89; Am. Ord. 94-10-1, passed 10-10-94)



   (D)   Violations of §§ 91.43 of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $10 to be recovered by the
city.  Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid to
the city.  Failure to pay the civil penalty shall constitute a misdemeanor
or infraction punishable under § 10.99. 



(Ord. 93-8-1, passed 9-13-93)



APPENDIX: FEES AND CIVIL PENALTIES SCHEDULE



Section



   1.   Fee schedule



   2.   Application of civil penalties



   3.   Annual/bi-annual/tri-annual inspection process



§ 1.  FEE SCHEDULE.



 


Permit Code

 
Permit Type
 
Permit Fee





1

 
Airports, heliports, helistops
 

$ 75




2

 
Bowling pin/alley, resurfacing/refinishing
 

35




3

 
Combustible fibers, storage/handling >100 cubic feet
 

35




4

 
Compressed gas, storage/use/handling —

2000 cubic feet or more of flammable or

6000 cubic feet of nonflammable
 




35




5

 
Dry cleaning plant
 

35




6

 
Explosive, blasting agent, ammunition manufacture, possess, store, sell, or
dispose
 




35




7

 
Transport explosives or blasting agents
 

35




8

 
To use explosives, blasting agents one day
 

35




8B

 
To use explosives, blasting agents two days or more
 

75




9

 
Fireworks display
 

75




10

 
Hazardous materials/chemicals, 55 gallons or 500 pounds or less
 

25




11

 
Hazardous materials/chemicals, 56—550 gallons or 501—5,000 pounds
 

35




12

 
Hazardous materials/chemicals, 551—5,500 gallons

or 5,001—50,000 pounds
 




75




13

 
Hazardous materials/chemicals, >5,501 gallons or >50,001 pounds
 

100




14

 
Flammable and combustible liquids, storage/handling/use
 

35




15

 
Flammable finishes, spraying or dipping

(use of 1 gallon or more a day)
 




35




16

 
Fumigation/thermal insecticide fogging
 

$ 35




17

 
Combustible fibers, >100 cubic feet,

Storage/handling
 




35




18

 
High piled combustible stock, >2,500 square feet
 

35




19

 
Readily combustible material, >2,500 cubic feet gross volume
 

35




20

 
Lumber storage in excess of 100,000 board feet
 

35




21

 
Place of assembly (excluding churches)
 

35




22

 
Repair garage/motor vehicle
 

35




23

 
Tank vehicles/flammable and combustible liquids
 

35




24

 
Tire rebuilding plant
 

75




25

 
Tents, and air supported structures
 

35




26

 
Wrecking yard, junk yard, or waste handling plant
 

35




27

 
Installation of above-ground tanks
 

35




28

 
Underground storage tank system, installation/upgrading
 

35




29

 
Underground storage tank removal/abandonment
 

35




30

 
Matches—manufacture or storage  > 25 cases
 

35




31

 
Halloween spook house
 

75




32

 
Mall displays
 

35




33**

 
Family/group home/day care, and the like

**Inspection fee
 

20




34**

 
Change of building use or occupancy

**Inspection fee.
 

35




35

 
Reinspection fee         (2nd visit)

                  (3rd visit)
 

25



50




36

 
Standby assistance (Engine Co.)
 

100/hr.




37

 
All other permits required under Volume V
 

35




38

 
Burning permit
 

N/C




39

 
Failure to obtain any of the above required permits
 

Permit fee + $10



NOTE: In the case of multiple fees applying, only the highest single permit
fee will be charged.




 



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 2.  APPLICATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   Life safety hazards   $250



   (B)   Penalties for moderate and minor hazards are applicable only
after property representative has been given proper notice of the violation
and 30 days to rectify the situation.



   (C)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   LIFE SAFETY HAZARDS.  Those violations of the Fire Prevention Code
which involve hazards that pose severe threat to the life and health of
persons. Included are locked and blocked exits and exit routes, and other
hazards which can create a significant hazard to the life and safety of
humans.



   MINOR FIRE HAZARDS.  Hazards which can cause a fire but the likelihood
of damage or injury is low.



   MODERATE FIRE HAZARDS.  Fire hazards that are less likely to cause a
fire than a severe fire hazard, yet pose a threat to the structure.



   SEVERE FIRE HAZARDS.  Violations which create acute fire hazards that
pose a high probability of causing a fire.  Examples are improper use of
flammable liquids, improper chemical storage, and severely overloaded
electrical equipment.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



§ 3.  ANNUAL/BI-ANNUAL/TRI-ANNUAL INSPECTION PROCESS.



   (A)   Initial visit - no charge.



      (1)   Inspect structure for any Fire Code violations.



      (2)   Any violations noted will be given ample time to
correct, except life safety hazards which must be corrected immediately and
are subject to fine.



      (3)   If no violations are noted, the next inspection will be
the following year.



      (4)   The building occupant will be given a copy of the
initial inspection report.



   (B)   First reinspection. (Second visit for follow up).



      (1)   Return to check on initial violations.  If violations
have been corrected — no charge.



      (2)   Any violations not corrected at this time, there will be
a $25 re-inspection fee and you could be fined based on the severity of the
violation.



   (C)   Second reinspection.  (Third visit for follow up).



      (1)   Automatic re-inspection fee of $50.



      (2)   If violations are NOT corrected, subject to fines based
on the severity of violations.



      (3)   Can be fined per violation per day until corrected.



(Ord. 93-1-1, passed 1-11-93)



CHAPTER 92:  ABANDONED, JUNKED, AND NUISANCE MOTOR VEHICLES



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Purpose



   92.02   Definitions




Removal Procedures and Disposition of Vehicles




   92.10   Abandoned vehicles



   92.11   Nuisance vehicle



   92.12   Junked motor vehicles regulated



   92.13   Removal; pre-towing notice requirements



   92.14   Exception to prior notice requirements



   92.15   Post-towing notice requirements



   92.16   Hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle



   92.17   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings



   92.18   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles



   92.19   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property



   92.20   Protection against criminal or civil liability



   92.21   Exceptions




Administration and Enforcement




   92.35   Authority to administer



   92.36   Administrative order



 



   92.98   Procedures for assessing civil violations



   92.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  PURPOSE.



   Whereas, the City Council is authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-193, 160-303,
and 160-303.2 to regulate, restrain, or prohibit abandoned, nuisance, and
junked motor vehicles on public and private property within the city's
ordinance-making jurisdiction; and whereas, the City Council finds it
necessary and desirable to promote or enhance the quality of urban
attractiveness and aesthetic appearance of the city, the protection of
property values throughout the city, the preservation of the liveability and
attractiveness of neighborhoods, the promotion of tourism and other
opportunities for economic development for the city, the attractiveness of
the city's thoroughfares and commercial roads which present the primary
public visibility to visitors and to passersby of the city, and the promotion
of the comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of occu- pants of property
in the vicinity of junked motor vehicles the provisions that follow in this
chapter shall apply.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, an
abandoned motor vehicle is one that:



      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of
a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or



      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than
seven days; or



      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the city for
longer than 24 hours; or



      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant, or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours.



   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL.  The supervisory employee of the Police
Department or the City Manager or his designee respectively designated to
authorize the removal of vehicles under the pro- visions of this chapter.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE.  As authorized and defined in G.S. §
160A-303.2, the term JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE means a vehicle that does not
display a current license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that:



      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or



      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in a manner in which
it originally was intended to move; or



      (3)   Is more than five-years-old and appears to be worth less
than $100.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE.  All machines designed or intended to travel
over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.



   NUISANCE VEHICLE.  A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance,
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other
insects, rats or other pests.



      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious
vegetation over eight inches in height.



      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds or water.



      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil,
or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor.



      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be
operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, and the like.



      (6)   One so situated or located that there is a danger of it
falling or turning over.



      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food
waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind.



      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or
contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or



      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and
safety hazard and a public nuisance by the City Council.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



REMOVAL PROCEDURES AND DISPOSITION
OF VEHICLES



§ 92.10  ABANDONED VEHICLES UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be
abandoned as the term is defined herein.



   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the city
may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle
removed.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.11  NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a
nuisance vehicle.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the City Manager or his designee may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a
nuisance vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.12  JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES REGULATED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is
located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the
vehicle has been ordered removed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have more than one junked motor
vehicle, as defined herein, on the premises of public or private property. 
Single, permitted junked motor vehicles must strictly comply with the
location and concealment requirements of this section.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the
possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to
comply with the locational require-ments or the concealment requirements of
this section.



   (D)   Subject to the provisions of division (E) of this section,
upon investigation, the City Manager or his designee may order the removal of
a junked motor vehicle as defined in this chapter after finding in writing
that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens
imposed on the private property owner.  Such finding shall be based on a
balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the
corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community,
neighborhood, or area appearance.  The following among other rele- vant
factors may be considered:



      (1)   Protection of property values.



      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other eco- nomic development
opportunities.



      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety.



      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the
community.



      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional
stability of area residents.



   (E)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicle.



      (1)   One junked motor vehicle.



         (a)   One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be
located in the rear yard as defined by the city's zoning code (Chapter 155 of
this code of ordinances) if the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed
from public view from a street and from abutting premises by an acceptable
covering.



         (b)   The City Manager or his designee has the authority
to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately concealed as
required by this provision.  The covering must remain in good repair and
must not be allowed to deteriorate.  The covering or enclosure must be
compatible with objectives stated in § 92.01 of this chapter.



      (2)   More than one junked motor vehicle. Any other junked
motor vehicles must be kept in a garage or building structure that provides a
complete enclosure so that the junked motor vehicles cannot be seen from a
public street or abutting property.  A garage or building structure means
either a lawful, nonconforming use or a garage or building structure erected
pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which has been
constructed in accordance with all zoning and building code regulations.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.13  REMOVAL; PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   Except as set forth in § 92.14 of this chapter, an abandoned,
nuisance, or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after
notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the
vehicle.  In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if
the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first- class mail. 
The person who mails the notices shall retain a written record to show the
names and addresses to which mailed and the date mailed. If such names and
addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an
abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield
or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indication that the
vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date, no sooner than seven
days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by
owner or legal possessor prior to that time.  With respect to abandoned
vehicles on private property, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to
which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or person
entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the
determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the
case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic benefits of removing the
vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be made to the City Council
in writing, heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City
Council, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until
the appeal is heard and decided.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.14  EXCEPTION TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of
an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare.  Such findings
shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the
appropriate daily records.



   (B)   Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior
notice include:



      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets.  For vehicles left
on the public streets and highways, the City Council hereby determines that
immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:



         (a)   Obstructing traffic;



         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or
restricting parking;



         (c)   Parked in a no stopping or standing zone;



         (d)   Parked in loading zones;



         (e)   Parked in bus zones; or



         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking
restrictions imposed under code sections.



      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles.  With respect to
abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on city-owned property other than the
streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed
without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing
official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the
public health, safety, and welfare.  By way of illustration and not of
limitation, such circumstances include vehicles parked in such a location or
manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or
private property.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.15  POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which has
been ordered removed may, as directed by the city, be removed to a storage
garage or area by the tow-truck operator or towing business contracting to
perform such services for the city. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the
authorizing city official shall immediately notify the last known registered
owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following:



      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle.



      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored.



      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any.



      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the
vehicle.



      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a
probable cause hearing on the removal.



   (B)   The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5)
of this section, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known
address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his
agent.



   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall
be given within 24 hours.  If the vehicle is not registered in the state,
notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the
removal of the vehicle.



   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle is
removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates,
the authorizing city official shall make reasonable efforts, including
checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known
registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set
forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5) of this section.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.16  RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION
OF VEHICLE.



   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle, or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is
entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause
existed from removing the vehicle.  A request for hearing must be filed in
writing with the County Magistrate designated by the Chief District Court
Judge to receive such hearing request.  The Magistrate will set the hearing
within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11, as amended.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



§ 92.17  REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.



   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double
the amount of such fees and charges to the tow-truck operator or towing
business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of
a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle
shall not allow or engage in further violations of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



§ 92.18  SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.



   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed
by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the
tow-truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. 
Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in accordance with G.S.
Ch. 44A, Article 1.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



§ 92.19  CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   As a general policy, the city will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant, or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures.  In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the city from private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant, or lessee, except in those cases where a
vehicle is a nuisance or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed by the City Manager or his designee.  The city may require any
person requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor
vehicle from private property to indemnify the city against any loss, 
expense, or liability incurred because of the removal, storage, or sale
thereof.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



§ 92.20  PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.



   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance, or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle provided in
this chapter.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



§ 92.21  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:



   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or
junkyard as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard
Control Act, G.S. § 136-141, et seq.



   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building.



   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the enterprise.



   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 92.35  AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER.



   The Police Department and City Manager, or his designee, of the city
shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter.  The Police Department shall be responsible for admini- stering the
removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public
streets and highways within the city, and on property owned by the city. 
The City Manager, or his designee, shall be responsible for administering the
removal and disposi- tion of abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicles
located on private property.  The city may, on an annual basis, contract
with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store, and
dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles, and junked motor vehicles
in compliance with this chapter and applicable state laws.  Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers
of the City Police Department and Fire Department in enforcing other laws or
in otherwise carrying out their duties.



(Ord. passed 1-8-90)



§ 92.36  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.



   (A)   When the City Manager or his designee finds that a registered
owner or person entitled to possession of a junked, abandoned, or nuisance
motor vehicle has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the
Manager may issue an order to the owner or person entitled to possession
directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the owner
or person entitled to possession to do any of the following:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   To come into compliance with the provisions of this
chapter in accordance with a time schedule set forth in the order.



      (3)   Make such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to address a continuing or threatened violation of this
chapter, including halting operations being conducted on the property.



   (B)   Issuance of an administrative order shall not be a bar against
or prerequisite for the taking of any other action.



(Ord. 94-6-6, passed 6-13-94)



§ 92.98  PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSING CIVIL VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Authority to assess civil penalties. When the City Manager
finds that a registered owner or person entitled to possession of a junked,
abandoned, or nuisance motor vehicle has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this chapter, or any order, rule, or regulation issued
hereunder, the City Manager may assess a civil penalty to such owner or
person entitled to possession in an amount not to exceed $250 per day per
violation.



   (B)   Costs and attorney fees.  The City Manager may recover
attorneys fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the
enforcement activities undertaken pursuant to this chapter, including the
cost of determining ownership, towing, and the cost of any actual damages
incurred by the city.



   (C)   Determination of the amount.  In deter- mining the amount of
civil penalty to be assessed, the City Manager may consider any other
relevant circumstances, but shall consider the following:



      (1)   The degree or extent of harm, the gravity of the
nuisance, and the danger to the public health resulting from the violation.



      (2)   The gravity and duration of the violation.



      (3)   The cost of rectifying the damage caused to the city by
the violation.



      (4)   The amount of money saved by non- compliance and any
other economic benefit gained through the owner and person entitled to
possession's violation.



      (5)   Whether the violation has been committed willfully and
intentionally.



      (6)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



      (7)   The cost of enforcement by the city.



   (D)   Collection.  Actions for the collection of civil penalties
shall be referred to the City Attorney for collection.



   (E)   Appeals. The person who has been assessed a civil penalty by
the City Manager and who desires to dispute such penalty must file a written
notice of appeal with the city and follow the procedures set forth in this
chapter for prosecuting appeals.  During the pendency of such appeal the
assessment of such penalties shall be stayed.



   (F)   Assessment not a bar.  Assessment of a civil penalty shall
not be a bar against or prerequisite for the taking of any other action
against the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the junked,
abandoned, or nuisance motor vehicle.



   (G)   Other available remedies; injunctive relief.  In addition to
the remedies previously provided in this chapter, the City Manager or his
designee may use any one or combination thereof against a non- compliant
owner or person entitled to possession. Additional remedies shall include but
are not limited to injunctive relief sought through a petition filed with the
General Court of Justice by the City Attorney for the issuance of such
injunctive relief as may be appropriate seeking to restrain or complete the
activities necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 94-6-6, passed 6-13-94)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Penalty established.  In order to establish a fee schedule
for the enforcement of this chapter as allowed by §§ 92.36 and 92.37, the
following civil penalties are established.



   (B)   Initial civil penalty.  Failure to remove a vehicle after
initial notice and order to remove, to be imposed 10 days after the date of
initial notice to vehicle or property owner: $25 per day, per vehicle in
violation.



   (C)   Additional civil penalty.  To be imposed 10 days after notice
of the initial civil penalty for failure to remove: $100 per day, per vehicle
in violation.



   (D)   Fees.  In addition, the following fees may be imposed,
generally after imposition of the initial civil penalty:



      (1)   Photo
fee                                    $
5 for each photo



      (2)   Inspection trips after imposition of initial civil
penalty                  $10 per trip



      (3)   Certified
mailings                                 $3
each



      (4)   Attorney
fees                                    act
ual cost + 10%



      (5)   Court fees and
costs                                 actual
cost



      (6)   Towing fees - generally collected by the tow operator,
but if paid by city to the tow operator    actual cost + 10%



      (7)   Storage fee  -  generally collected by the tow
operator, but if paid by city to the tow operator   actual cost + 10%



(Ord. 94-6-6, passed 6-13-94)



CHAPTER 93:  ANIMALS



Section



   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Possession or harboring of wild animals



   93.03   Livestock prohibited to be at large



   93.04   Maintenance of stables, pens, coops, and the like; abatement
of nuisances



   93.05   City constitutes bird sanctuary



   93.06   Adoption of county animal control ordinance



   93.07   Dogs and cats



   93.08   Livestock or other domestic animal



   93.09   Existing animals



   93.10   Notice of violation



   93.11   Service animals



   93.12   Animals prohibited at street fairs, festivals and parades



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by the North Carolina General
Assembly, this animal control chapter is enacted to regulate, restrict, or
prohibit, if necessary, animals; to protect the public from unvaccinated,
diseased, stray, roaming, dangerous, or wild animals; to make unlawful acts
of animals that interfere with the enjoyment of property or the peace and
safety of the community, and to carry out any other lawful duties authorized
by state laws and applicable ordinances.



(Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate, restrict domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186



§ 93.02  POSSESSION OR HARBORING OF WILD ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or harbor within the
city any wild animal dangerous to persons or property or offensive to the
senses; provided, that this section shall not apply to any circus or
menagerie duly licensed by the city.



('75 Code, § 3-1)  (Am. Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14)
Penalty, § 93.99



Statutory reference:



   For state law as to authority of City Council to enact this section,
see G.S. § 160A-187



§ 93.03  LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED TO BE AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer any horse, barnyard
animal, fowl, cattle or livestock owned or harbored by him or her to stray
his or her own premises or to run at large within the city.



('75 Code, § 3-2)  (Ord. TC00-2, passed 2-14-00; Am. Ord. passed 7-14-03;
Am. Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  MAINTENANCE OF STABLES, PENS, COOPS, AND THE LIKE; ABATEMENT OF
NUISANCES.



   Each stable, pen, coop, or other place within the city where any animal
or fowl is kept shall be maintained by the keeper at all times in a clean and
sanitary condition and free of offensive odors and solid and liquid waste
matter.  Any place where an animal or fowl is kept which is found to be in
violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance, subject to
abatement by the city at the expense of the



person responsible therefor or the owner of the property whereon it exists.



('75 Code, § 3-4)  (Am. Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14) 
Penalty, see § 93.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see G.S. § 160A-182



§ 93.05  CITY CONSTITUTES BIRD SANCTUARY.



   The entire area of this city is hereby created and established as a
bird sanctuary, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to
hunt, kill, trap, or otherwise take any protected bird or to rob the nest of
any protected bird except pursuant to a permit issued under G.S. § 113-87.



('75 Code, § 3-6)  (Ord. 6, passed 4-15-54; Am. Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am.
Ord. passed 3-10-14)  Penalty, see § 93.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see G.S. § 160A-188



§ 93.06  ADOPTION OF COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.



   The revised animal control ordinance adopted by the Gaston County Board
of Commissioners on July 27, 1989 and amended on September 14, 1989 is hereby
adopted, along with any future amendments.



(Ord. passed 5-14-90; Am. Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14)



§ 93.07  DOGS AND CATS.



   A permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer, shall be required for
more than six dogs or cats, four months or older and kept outside.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, or keep custody of
or to take care of more than six  dogs, more than six cats or any
combination thereof, four months or older, who are frequently outside on the
premises, unless the person has a special permit issued by the city.



   (B)   If a person has more than six dogs or cats frequently outside
on the premises, then the Code Enforcement Officer must make the following
five findings in order to issue a special permit:



      (1)   Noise from the dog or cats will not substantially
interfere with an abutting occupant’s use and peaceful enjoyment of the
property.



      (2)   Any odor or unsanitary conditions caused by the dogs or
cats will not substantially interfere with an abutting occupant’s use and
peaceful enjoyment of the property.



      (3)   More than six dog runs or other dog-related structures
or any combinations thereof shall not be permitted if the structures can be
seen from an abutting occupant’s property in a residentially zoned district.



      (4)   There is no evidence that the dogs or cats pose any
health problems or disease exposure for abutting occupants.



      (5)   The dogs or cats do not substantially interfere in some
other similar manner with the peaceful use and enjoyment of abutting property.



(Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.08  LIVESTOCK OR OTHER DOMESTIC ANIMAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any horse, mule, donkey,
hog, cow, sheep, equine animals, bovine animals, llamas, alpaca, duck,
chicken, turkey, pigeon or similar domesticated fowl, or goat (or similar
animals), hereinafter designated livestock within the city limits.  The only
swine permitted on any residential lot are pet pigs (not livestock) housed
inside a residential structure.  The provisions of this section shall not be
applicable to bona fide farms (as defined in the city’s Unified Development
Ordinance) that have an area of at least five acres.



(Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.09  EXISTING ANIMALS.



   The maximum number of animals may not be legally increased as a result
of an animal giving birth. Any livestock legally existing on a lot prior to
March 10, 2014 that is in nonconformance with this chapter must conform to
these regulations within six months.



(Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.10  NOTICE OF VIOLATION



   Upon investigation and finding by a Code Enforcement Officer that there
exists on any city property a violation of § 93.07 or § 93.08, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall issue a notice of violation by first-class mail to
the violator as well as the owner of such property if different from the
violator.  The notice shall state that the alleged violator or property
owner shall have a period of up to 15 days from the date the notice was
received to either correct the situation or appeal the Code Enforcement
Officer’s decision to the City Council.  The notice required by this
division may also be served upon persons either personally or posted
conspicuously on the offending property.  Depending on the nature of the
violation, the Code Enforcement Officer may grant one or more extension of
time to cure or correct said violation.  When a person has failed to comply
with a notice of violation as described above, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall not be required to provide further notice of violation to that person
with regard to the same property before taking any of the enforcement actions
authorized by § 93.99.



(Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14)



§ 93.11  SERVICE ANIMALS.



   Service animals as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), Fair Housing Act and North Carolina General Statutes are exempt from
§§ 93.07 and 93.08 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 3-10-14)



§ 93.12  ANIMALS PROHIBITED AT STREET FAIRS, FESTIVALS AND PARADES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person that owns or possesses any
animal, including dogs or cats, to possess, lead, keep, run or allow such
animal to run at large within 150 feet of any street fair, festival or parade
sanctioned or permitted by the city.



   (B)   This prohibition shall not apply to guide dogs or other guide
animals for disabled persons under the control of such person. The
prohibition shall not apply to licensed or permitted kennels or to animals
legitimately a part of a parade, sanctioned street fair or festival.



   (C)   A sanctioned or permitted street fair, festival or parade is
an event approved or permitted by the City council of Bessemer City by
resolution. The geographical limitations of the street fair, festival, or
parade shall be delineated by the resolution.



(Ord. passed 4-10-17)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   If compliance has not occurred within the period specified
above, or if a violation of this chapter is a single, discrete event, a civil
penalty in the amount of $50 shall be issued and either delivered in person
to the violator or sent by certified mail. The citation shall direct that the
citation be paid to the city collections department within ten days of the
date of issuance and shall inform the violator that if this amount is not
paid within the allotted time, a civil action can be initiated to collect the
citation.



   (B)   Each day’s continuing violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense.



   (C)   This chapter may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable
action, including injunctions or orders of abatement.



   (D)   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor as provided in G.S. § 14-4 and shall subject each such violator
to the punishment provided in that section of the General Statutes.



   (E)   The city may enforce this chapter by any one or any
combination of the foregoing remedies.



   (F)   Violations of § 93.12 shall be misdemeanors, punishable upon
conviction.



(Am. Ord. passed 5-11-09; Am. Ord. passed 3-10-14; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-17)



CHAPTER 94:  NOISE REGULATIONS



Section



   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Unreasonably loud noise



   94.03   Noises expressly prohibited



   94.04   Noises impacting residential life



   94.05   Exceptions



   94.06   Permits



   94.07   Reports of violation



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless otherwise clearly
required by the context, the words and phrases defined in this section shall
have the meaning indicated when used in this chapter.



   NOISE.  Any sound or combination of sounds which because of its
volume, duration or intensity tends to disturb person(s).



   PERSON.  Any individual, association, firm, partnership or corporation.



   SOUND.  Any disturbance of the air that is detectable by the unaided
ear or which produces vibrations detectable by person(s).



   SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICE.  Any device or instrument for amplifying
the human voice, music or other sound, including but not limited to
loudspeakers, stereos, phonographs, radios or tape players, portable or
otherwise.



(Ord. passed 5-12-14)



§ 94.02  UNREASONABLY LOUD NOISE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize or cause to be emitted
from any property or source under the control of said person any noise that
is unreasonably loud, raucous or disturbing so as to constitute a nuisance,
annoyance, danger to the health, or serious disturbance.



(Ord. passed 5-12-14)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  NOISES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.



   Without limiting the generality of § 94.02, the following acts are
specifically declared to be unlawful and in violation of § 94.02.



   (A)   The excessive blowing of a horn on any motor vehicle except
when the horn is used as a warning device.



   (B)   The operation of any motor vehicle or any engine without a
muffler, or with a muffler that is so defective or so designed that the
vehicle emits an unusually loud noise.



   (C)   The operation of any motor vehicle so as to create loud or
unusual noises by the screeching of tires, racing of engines, backfiring or
other loud noises whether caused from disrepair, motor or accessory
alterations, or otherwise.



   (D)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air,
unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced.



   (E)   The creation of any loud or disturbing noise on any street
adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library, or any church
during services.



   (F)   The playing or use of any sound amplification device,
television, or any musical instrument, so as to unreasonably disturb the
comfort, quiet or repose of persons in any place of residence or so as to
interfere substantially with the operations of any church, school, theater,
library, or other similar place of assembly, unless a noise permit has been
obtained as required by § 94.06.



   (G)   The use of any sound amplification device, musical instrument,
or other medium for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of
noise to any performance, show, sale, display, advertisement or merchandise,
or other commercial venture, unless a noise permit has been obtained as
required by § 94.06.



   (H)   The use of any sound amplification device on any public
street, sidewalk, park or other public area within the city limits (whether
while operating a motor vehicle or otherwise) which is clearly audible by a
person at a distance of 50 yards or more from the source of the sound unless
a noise permit has been obtained as required by § 94.06.



(Ord. passed 5-12-14)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  NOISES IMPACTING RESIDENTIAL LIFE.



   It shall be unlawful to carry on the following activities in any
residentially zoned area of the city or within 300 feet of any dwelling in
any zoning district of the city:



   (A)   Operation of garage or service station machinery or equipment
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;



   (B)   Operation of construction machinery or equipment between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or



   (C)   Operation of lawn mowers or other power- operated domestic
tools out-of-doors between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



(Ord. passed 5-12-14)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  EXCEPTIONS.



   The following are excepted from the application of §§ 94.01 through
94.03:



   (A)   Noise or sound emanating from scheduled outdoor athletic
events.



   (B)   Noise or sound of safety signals, warning devices, emergency
pressure relief valves or church bells.



   (C)   Noise or sound emanating from properly equipped aircraft
operated in accordance with applicable federal rules and regulations.



   (D)   Noise or sound emitted from any authorized emergency or public
safety vehicle.



   (E)   Noise or sound emanating from parades, street fairs, festivals
or similar events which are conducted, sponsored or sanctioned by the city or
school system.



   (F)   Noise or sound from railroad operations.



   (G)   Amplified sound, either live or recorded, on Sunday through
Wednesday until 10:00 p.m., Thursday through Saturday until 11:00 p.m.  This
exception does not supersede § 94.02 of the chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-12-14)



§ 94.06  PERMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or cause to be used
any sound amplifying device, musical or other instrument for entertainment,
advertising or other purposes, or to otherwise engage in any activity
creating noise which exceeds the standards set forth in this chapter without
obtaining a noise permit in advance of these activities.



   (B)   All applications for noise permits shall be made to promptly
considered and acted upon by the City Manager or his or her designee.  In
considering and acting on all applications for permits, the City Manager
shall consider, but shall not be limited to, the following factors:



      (1)   The nature and duration of the proposed activity;



      (2)   Other uses in the vicinity or location proposed for the
activity;



      (3)   Effect of the activity on nearby residential areas;



      (4)   Cultural, social, recreational and/or education benefit
of the proposed activity;



      (5)   Previous experience with the applicant; and



      (6)   Previous violations of this noise chapter, if any, by
any applicant.



   (C)   Taking into consideration the factor listed in division (B)
above, the City Manager shall issue a noise permit upon finding that the
interest furthered by the proposed use or activity outweighs the public
interest in maintaining peace and quiet at the time and place involved.



   (D)   The City Manager may impose such reasonable and appropriate
conditions upon the permit as he or she deems necessary to assure that the
proposed use will be consistent with the intent of this section.



   (E)   The permit holder(s) shall agree to cooperate with the Police
Department in enforcing this chapter by being available at the site of the
event the entire time for which a permit has been issued and capable of
assisting the police in enforcing this chapter. Failure of the permit
holder(s) to be present or to assist the police in complying with this
chapter will be cause for revocation of the permit.



   (F)   Any application for a permit must be made at least 48 hours in
advance of the activity.



   (G)   If an application for a noise permit is denied, is approved
with conditions unacceptable to the applicant, or if a permit is revoked, the
applicant or permit holder shall be entitled to appeal the City Manager’s
action to the City Council after submission of a written request to do so.
Such appeal must be submitted to the City Manager at least ten days prior to
the date of the next regular meeting of City Council.



   (H)   A permit may be denied or revoked in the following cases:



      (1)   The activity constitutes a threat to the health, safety
or welfare of others;



      (2)   The applicant has violated any provisions of this
chapter within 12 months preceding the date of the application;



      (3)   The applicant violates any of the provisions during the
time allowed for the permitted activity; or



      (4)   The activity interferes with another previously
permitted activity.



(Ord. passed 5-12-14)



§ 94.07  REPORTS OF VIOLATION.



   In the event that reasonable grounds exist for believing that any
provision of this chapter is being violated, any person may make a report
thereof to the Police Department which shall investigate the alleged
violation. If such investigation reveals a violation, the investigating
officer shall cause a written complaint to be made, and may issue a criminal
or civil citation for violation thereof.



(Ord. passed 5-12-14)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil penalties. Each violation of this chapter shall result
in a civil penalty of $100.  If a person fails to pay this penalty within
ten days after being cited for a violation, the city may seek to recover the
penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of a debt.



   (B)   Criminal penalties. Any police officer may issue a criminal
citation for violation of any ordinance concerning noise.  A violation of
any noise ordinance provision shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for up to 30 days and/or a criminal fine in the amount of
$250.  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of the noise
ordinance two or more times in the past five years shall be subject to
imprisonment and/or a criminal fine in the amount of $500.



   (C)   The city may seek to enforce this chapter through any
appropriate equitable action.



   (D)   Each day that a violation continues after the offender has
been notified of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. passed 5-12-14)



CHAPTER 95:  YARD/GARAGE SALES



Section



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Regulations



   95.03   Coverage



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GOODS.  All tangible personal property, including by way of
illustration and not limitation, clothing, furniture, wares, merchandise or
any other personal property capable of being the object of sale.



   YARD SALE or GARAGE SALE.  A display and sale of used personal
property at a residence or residential property. The term YARD SALE or GARAGE
SALE does not include the isolated or incidental sale of one or two items of
personal property when such sale is not part of a general sale of a number of
items of personal property. The terms YARD SALE and GARAGE SALE have the same
meaning and may be used interchangeably.



(Ord. passed 11-11-02)



§ 95.02  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permit required. All persons conducting a yard sale or garage
sale shall first obtain a permit from City Hall.



   (B)   Consignment sales prohibited.  No goods from any commercial
business or enterprise may be offered for sale at a “yard sale” on a
consignment basis.



   (C)   Signs.  Four off-site directional signs may be permitted, but
only during the hours the sale is actively being conducted. Off-site signs
must be removed at the close of the sale activities, or by the end of
daylight, whichever occurs first, each day of the sale. No freestanding signs
may be placed in the public right-of-way. Signs may not, in any way, obstruct
the flow of traffic, or the view of motorists either on the road or
attempting to access the road.



   (D)   Number limited.  Not more than four such sales per year shall
be held at any premises if occupied by the same family or any member of such
family. No single sale shall be conducted for longer than one day.



   (E)   Hours.  “Yard sales” or “garage sales” may be
conducted during daylight hours only, and only between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.



   (F)   Non-owned premises.



      (1)   No “yard sale” or “garage sale” shall be
permitted on premises not owned or legally occupied by the person(s) holding
the sale.



      (2)   No “yard sale” shall be permitted on vacant lots
within the city limits.



      (3)   No “yard sale” shall be permitted in the Central
Business District as designated on the city zoning map, unless the premises
is the primary residence of the permit holder.



(Ord. passed 11-11-02)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  COVERAGE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect persons
selling goods pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction or
persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.



(Ord. passed 11-11-02)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 to be recovered by the city.
Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid in ten days.



   (B)   Each day the violation persists shall be considered a separate
offense.



(Ord. passed 11-11-02)



CHAPTER 96:  SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE REGULATIONS



Section



   96.01   Purpose



   96.02   Authority



   96.03   Definitions



   96.04   Areas in which smoking and the use of tobacco products,
including e-cigarettes, are prohibited



   96.05   Implementation requirements



   96.06   Signage



   96.07   Enforcement and penalties



   96.08   Public education



Cross-reference:



   Smoking prohibited under certain conditions, see § 91.42



§ 96.01  PURPOSE.



   Bessemer City is committed to providing a safe and healthy environment
for its citizens, youth and the visiting public. Bessemer City Council
recognizes that tobacco use and secondhand smoke exposure are leading
preventable causes of illness and premature death in North Carolina and the
nation and there is no safe level of secondhand smoke exposure. In order to
protect the public health and welfare, it is in the best interest of the
citizens of Bessemer City to prohibit smoking and the use of tobacco products
in all municipal buildings, vehicles, grounds, parks, and  enclosed areas of
public places.



(Ord. passed 8-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 96.02  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted pursuant to G.S. §§ 130A-498 and 160A-174(a).



(Ord. passed 8-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 96.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY BUILDING.  A building owned, leased as lessor, or the area leased
as lessee and occupied by the city.



   CITY PARKS SYSTEM.  Any tract of land or body of water comprising part
of the city's parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, greenways, or trails.



   CITY VEHICLE.  A passenger-carrying vehicle owned, leased, or
otherwise controlled by the city and assigned permanently or temporarily to
its employees, agencies, institutions, or facilities for official city
business.



   E-CIGARETTE.  Any electronic oral device that employs a mechanical
heating element, battery, or electronic circuit regardless of shape or size
and that case be used to heat a liquid nicotine solution or any other
substance, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term
shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed,
or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name
or descriptor.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who is employed by the City of Bessemer City, or
who contracts with the city or a third person to perform services for the
city, or who otherwise performs services for the city with or without
compensation.



   ENCLOSED AREA.  An area with a roof or other overhead covering of any
kind and walls or side coverings of any kind, regardless of the presence of
openings for ingress and egress, on all sides or on all sides but one.



   GROUNDS.  An unenclosed area owned, leased, or occupied by the city.



   LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT.  The district health department, public
health authority, or county health department, the jurisdiction of which
includes the city.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  An enclosed area to which the public is invited or
permitted.



   SMOKING.  The use or possession of a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar,
lighted pipe, or any other lighted tobacco product.



   TOBACCO PRODUCT.  Any product containing or derived from tobacco that
is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including but not limited
to cigarettes; e-cigarettes; cigars; little cigars; snuff; and chewing
tobacco. A TOBACCO PRODUCT excludes any product that has been approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and
is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.



   UNIVERSAL 'NO SMOKING AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS PROHIBITED' SYMBOL. 
Symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette and a
tobacco product enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it.



   UNIVERSAL 'NO SMOKING' SYMBOL.  Symbol consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it.



(Ord. passed 8-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 96.04  AREAS IN WHICH SMOKING AND THE USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, INCLUDING
E-CIGARETTES, ARE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Smoking and the use of tobacco products, including
e-cigarettes, are prohibited:



      (1)   In city buildings;



      (2)   In city vehicles;



      (3)   On city grounds;



      (4)   On the grounds of the city parks system;



      (5)   In the city buildings located in the city park system;
and



      (6)   Public places; excluding those places identified in G.S.
§ 130A-498(b1) as being exempt from smoking restrictions, including certain
tobacco shops, premises of tobacco manufacturers and growers, smoking guest
rooms in lodging establishments, certain cigar bars, private clubs, and live
production sets.



   (B)   The prohibition on smoking and the use of tobacco products,
including e-cigarettes, in the places listed in division (A) of this section
includes those times when they are being used for private events.



(Ord. passed 8-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 96.05  IMPLEMENTATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The city and persons who manage, operate, or control a public
place shall post signs that meet all the requirements in § 96.06.



   (B)   The city and persons who manage, operate, or control a public
place shall remove all ashtrays and other smoking receptacles from places
where smoking and tobacco products are prohibited, except for ashtrays and
receptacles for sale and not intended for use on the premises.



   (C)   The person in charge of the city building, vehicle, grounds,
or parks system or public place or his or her designee, shall direct a person
who is smoking or using a tobacco product in a prohibited area to cease and,
if the person does not comply, shall contact the City Police Department.



(Ord. passed 8-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 96.06  SIGNAGE.



   The signs required by § 96.05 must:



   (A)   State in English the applicable prohibition for the area (e.g.
smoking and the use of tobacco products are prohibited) and include the
applicable universal symbol (e.g., the "No Smoking and Use of Tobacco
Products Prohibited" symbol);



   (B)   Be of sufficient size to be clearly legible to a person of
normal vision, and be conspicuously posted;



   (C)   Be posted at the entrance to each city building and in other
locations within the building reasonably calculated to inform employees and
the public of the prohibition;



   (D)   Be posted in each city vehicle in areas visible to passengers,
provided that their placement does not interfere with the safe operation of
the vehicle. If the vehicle is used for undercover law enforcement
operations, a sign is not required to be placed in the vehicle;



   (E)   Be posted on city grounds in locations and at intervals
reasonably calculated to inform employees and the public of the prohibition;



   (F)   Be posted at the entrance to buildings in the city parks
system;



   (G)   Be posted on the grounds in the city parks system in locations
and at intervals reasonably calculated to inform employees and the public of
the prohibition; and



   (H)   Be posted at the entrance to each enclosed public place and in
other locations within the enclosed public place reasonably calculated to
inform employees and the public of the prohibition.



(Ord. passed 8-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 96.07  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Penalty for violation. Following oral or written notice by the
person in charge of an area described in § 96.04 or his or her designee,
failure to cease smoking or using tobacco products constitutes an infraction
punishable by a fine of not more than $50. A citation may be issued by a
sworn law enforcement officer. Conviction of an infraction under this section
has no consequence other than payment of a penalty, and no court costs may be
assessed.



   (B)   Additional sanctions for employees. In addition to any penalty
under division  (A) of this section, employees of the city who violate this
ordinance shall be subject to disciplinary action consistent with the city
human resources policies.



   (C)   Violations by persons who manage, operate, or control a public
place. A local health director may take the following actions and may impose
the following administrative penalty on a person who manages, operates, or
controls a public place and fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.



      (1)   First violation. Written notice of the person's first
violation and notification action to be taken in the event of subsequent
violations.



      (2)   Second violation. Written notice of the person's second
violation and notification of administrative penalties to be imposed for
subsequent violations.



      (3)   Third and subsequent violations. Impose an
administrative penalty of not more than $200. Each day on which a violation
occurs may be considered a separate and distinct violation.



(Ord. passed 8-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



§ 96.08  PUBLIC EDUCATION.



   The city shall engage in an ongoing program to explain and clarify the
purposes and requirements of this chapter to employees and citizens affected
by it and to guide operators and managers in their compliance with it. In
doing so, the city may rely upon materials and information provided by the
local health department.



(Ord. passed 8-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 5-14-18)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   BUSINESS LICENSES



      111.   VEHICLE TOWING SERVICE



      112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



      113.   VENDING



      114.   TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE



      115.   ADULT BUSINESSES



      116.   GAME ROOMS AND OTHER PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS



      117.   ESCORT AND DATING SERVICES



      118.   SOLICITATION AND PEDDLERS



      119.   SIDEWALK CAFÉ AND PUBLIC SPACE DINING



CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSES



Section



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   License taxes levied



   110.03   License required to conduct business; requirements



   110.04   Term of license; due date; late payment



   110.05   Refunds



   110.06   Application for license; false and incomplete statements



   110.07   Taxes payable; display of license



   110.08   Changes in business during the tax year



   110.09   Transferability of licenses



   110.10   Compliance with zoning code



   110.11   Denial; revocation; due process conference



   110.12   Enforcement and collection



   110.13   Provisions incorporated as part of license



   110.14   Schedule of business taxes



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENT.  The person having the agency for or being the representative
of the manufacturer, producer, or distributor of any good or service.



   BUSINESS.  Any BUSINESS, trade, occupa- tion, profession, franchise,
vocation, or calling of any kind which is subject, by the provisions of this
chapter, to a license tax. A BUSINESS is seasonal in nature when it is
conducted six months of the year or less. A single establishment may conduct
one or more businesses as defined by this chapter and may be taxed
accordingly.



   PERSON.  Includes any individual, trustee, agent, executor, other
fiduciary, corporation, unincor- porated association, partnership, sole
proprietorship, company, firm, or other legal entity.



   LICENSE ORDINANCE.  Those ordinances, collectively, which are
currently in effect at any time which levy, assess, impose, or define any
license or privilege tax upon persons engaged in specified businesses,
calling, trades, professions, occupations, vocations, or activities within
the city; and such ordinances, while in effect, shall be deemed to con-
stitute a part of this chapter.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)



§ 110.02  LICENSE TAXES LEVIED.



   (A)   In addition to the tax on property and pursuant to authority
conferred by G.S. §§ 160A-194 and 160A-211, there is hereby levied the
license and privilege taxes upon all persons who by this chapter, which
includes the license ordinance as defined in § 110.01, are subject to any
such tax; and such taxes shall be collected annually except as may be
provided otherwise in this chapter. The purpose of this section is to raise
funds for general municipal purposes. Therefore, it should be construed to
require payment of the maximum tax permitted for the privilege of carrying on
a business, trade, profession, calling or occupation within the corporate
limits of the city.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
City Council from imposing from time to time, as they may see fit, such
license taxes as are not specifically herein defined, or from increasing or
decreasing the amount of any particular license tax, or from prohibiting or
regulating the business or acts licensed, and all licenses are granted
subject to the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city, 
including  the  Bessemer  City  Zoning  Code (Chapter 155 of this code),
and all necessary zoning permits or approvals must be obtained prior to the
issuance of a license under this section.



   (C)   A license issued pursuant to this chapter reflects that the
appropriate tax has been paid. Issuance of a license does not constitute
regulatory approval and does not excuse a licensee from compliance with any
other applicable ordinance, regulation, or statue. By issuing a license, the
city has not determined that the recipient is in compliance with any
applicable local, state or federal regulation or law or that the recipient is
otherwise engaged in a legal activity or operating a business in a legal
manner.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 97-5-1, passed  - -97)



§ 110.03  LICENSE REQUIRED TO CONDUCT BUSINESS; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or employee
to engage in or carry on a business in the city for which there is required a
license, without first having paid the licenses tax and obtained the license.
For the purpose of this section, the opening of a place of business or
offering to sell, followed by a single sale, or the doing of any act or thing
in furtherance of the business, shall be construed to be engaging in or
carrying on such business; and/or if either personally or through agents, he
solicits business within the city limits, or picks up or delivers goods or
services within the city limits. Each day that such person shall engage in or
carry on such business as aforesaid, shall be construed to be a separate
offense.



   (B)   A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business
shall be valid only for the business conducted at the place and by the
licensee named therein. Every person doing business in more than one factory,
mill, warehouse, store, stall, stand, or other place of business shall
procure a separate license for each place of business unless such places of
business are contiguous to each other, communi- cate directly with and are
open to each other, and are operated  as a unit, including the keeping of
a  single set of books. If the business is moved, then the license shall be
endorsed by the Tax Collector so as to show the new location.



   (C)   The payment of any particular tax imposed by this chapter
shall not relieve the person so paying from the payment of any other tax
imposed by this chapter for any other business he may carry on, unless so
provided by the section imposing such tax, it being the intent of this
chapter that license taxes prescribed by various sections or divisions
thereof applicable to any business shall be cumulative except where otherwise
specifically provided.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.04  TERM OF LICENSE; DUE DATE; LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   The license year shall be from July 1 until the next
succeeding first day of July, and all annual licenses shall be issued so as
to expire at the close of business on the 30th day of June next succeeding
the date of issue.



   (B)   Annual licenses taxes shall be due and payable on or before
the first day of July of each year; provided that any person being first
licensed for any particular business during the period January 1 through June
30 shall be required to pay only one-half of the tax levied upon the
particular business for which the license is issued.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other enforcement provision allowed under
G.S.§ 105-109, a penalty of 5% of the total tax due shall be charged for
each 30 days or fraction thereof for the late payment of any tax due under
this section, and the penalty shall be paid prior to issuance of a license.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.05  REFUNDS.



   If for any reason a licensee discontinues his business during the
license year, he is not entitled to a refund. Furthermore, any license
revoked for any reason shall not be entitled to any refund.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)



§ 110.06  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FALSE AND INCOMPLETE STATEMENTS.



   Each application for a license under this chapter shall be submitted to
the Tax Collector in writing, on a form to be provided by the city, not less
than 30 days before the tax is due, and shall contain such information as may
be required by the Tax Collector to enable him to determine whether the
license applied for may be lawfully issued, including the name and address of
the applicant, the business and place of business sought to be licensed, the
date of the application, and such other pertinent information as may be
necessary in amplification thereof. It shall be unlawful for any applicant
for a license under this chapter knowingly to make any false statement or to
withhold any pertinent information when making application for a license
under this chapter.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.07  TAXES PAYABLE; DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   All business license taxes shall be payable to the Tax
Collector, who shall issue to each licensee an appropriate license
certificate showing the name of the licensee, the business and place of
business covered by the license, and the expiration date of the license and
the amount paid.



   (B)   Each business license shall be prominently displayed in the
place of business of the person to whom issued, or if such person has no
regular place of business, it shall be kept where it can be inspected by the
regular city officials and by customers as may be required. If a machine is
licensed, the license shall be affixed to the machine.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.08  CHANGES IN BUSINESS DURING THE TAX YEAR.



   A licensee shall report any change in the information contained in the
license application including but not limited to change of address,
ownership  and  changes or additions to the types of business conducted or
products or services sold, to the Tax Collector within ten days of the change
occurring. If the information included on the license itself is changed, the
person shall surrender the license to the Tax Collector when reporting the
change. If there are no reasons for the Tax Collector to refuse or revoke the
license and the change results in an increase of the tax due, then the Tax
Collector shall issue a new license upon payment of the additional tax due.
If no increase in tax is due then a new license shall be issued upon paying a
charge of $2.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)



§ 110.09  TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES.



   Each license issued under this chapter shall be a personal privilege
and shall not be transferable except to a person buying out the business of
the licensee with the purpose and intent of continuing the same business in
the same place when, on the presentation and a surrender of the original
license to the Tax Collector, who shall issue a new license to the successor
of such licensee; provided that the Tax Collector shall be entitled to charge
and receive a fee of $2 for issuing such transfer of license.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.10  COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING CODE.



   (A)   The issuance or transfer of a city license under this chapter
or under the license ordinance to any person to conduct a business or other
activity at a specified location in the city shall not be construed to
authorize or permit the licensee to conduct a business or other activity
which is prohibited or restricted in any manner at such location by any
provisions of the Zoning Code (Chapter 155 of this Code).



   (B)   Each applicant for a license under § 110.14, category Escort,
Dating Service or Similar Type Business, must have a valid unrevoked escort
service permit or dating service permit issued pursuant to Chapter 117 of the
Bessemer City Code. In addition, upon receipt of notice that an escort
service permit or dating  service has been revoked pursuant to § 117.06 of
the City Code, the collector of revenue shall revoke a license issued under
this Chapter to such business.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 97-5-1, passed  - -97)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.11  DENIAL; REVOCATION; DUE PROCESS CONFERENCE.



   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter shall be subject to
revocation by the Tax Collector for any cause which constitutes a ground for
denial of issuance of such license; for any violation of the terms of the
license or any provision of this chapter; for any violation of any provision
of this code, or state law regulating the business covered by the license; or
for conviction of the licensee of any crime involving moral turpitude.



   (B)   If the Tax Collector believes that grounds exist for refusing
to issue a license, or prior to the revoking of a license for any cause, the
Tax Collector shall advise the person affected, either personally or by
certified mail, of his right to request a conference with the Tax Collector.
This notice shall provide the reason for the proposed action. A person
requesting a conference shall provide in writing within five business days
the reason why the license should not be denied or revoked. The Tax Collector
shall then arrange the conference at a reasonable time. If after the
conference, the Tax Collector refuses to issue a license or revokes the
license, an applicant may reapply for a license at any time thereafter. If
the reason for refund or revocation no longer exists, and if no other reason
for the refusing to issue a license, the Tax Collector shall issue the
license in accordance with the ordinance.



   (C)   A record of any conference shall be held by the Tax Collector
for a period of three years from the date of conference and the record shall
contain a brief description of the issues discussed and conclusions reached.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)



§ 110.12  ENFORCEMENT AND COLLECTION.



   (A)   Duty to determine whether tax due. Each person has the duty to
determine whether the business he or she conducts is taxed under this
chapter, and if so, whether that tax has been paid for the current tax year.



   (B)   Tax Collector to investigate. If the Tax Collector has reason
to believe that a person is conducting a business in the city in violation of
this chapter, the Tax Collector shall conduct an investiga- tion to determine
the person's tax liability.



   (C)   Duty to keep books. Each person who conducts a business taxed
under this chapter shall keep all records and books necessary to compute the
tax liability. If a person fails to keep books and records as required, the
Tax Collector shall make a determination of that person's tax liability from
the information available.



   (D)   Duty to permit inspection. Each person who conducts business
in the city shall permit the Tax Collector to inspect the business premises
during normal business hours to determine the nature of the business
conducted there and to examine the books and records to determine the nature
and amount of business transacted.



   (E)   Notice of deficiency. If the Tax Collector determines that a
person has not paid the full amount of the tax due under this chapter, either
for the current license year or for a prior license year, the Tax Collector
shall give the person written notice of the deficiency. The notice of
deficiency shall specify the total amount of tax due; the section of this
chapter upon which the tax is based; the amount of tax paid; any interest
due; the balance owed; the manner and time period in which the person may
respond to the notice of the deficiency; and the consequences of failing to
respond as specified.



   (F)   Collection of deficiency. The Tax Collector may use any of the
following methods to collect a deficiency:



      (1)   Criminal prosecution in accordance with § 10.99 of this
code.



      (2)   Equitable relief in accordance with division (H) of this
section.



      (3)   Remedies of levy, sale, attachment, and garnishment in
accordance with G.S. § 160A-207.



      (4)   The remedies of levy and sale of real and personal
property of the taxpayer within the city in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 105-109.



   (G)   Failure to pay tax.  Any person who commences or continues to
conduct a business taxed under this chapter without payment of the tax is
liable for the additional tax of 5% every 30 days as imposed by G.S. §
105-109.



   (H)   Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set
forth in division (F)(1) of this section and in compliance with G.S. §
160A-175(d), the city may seek an injunction against any person who conducts
a business in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.13  PROVISIONS INCORPORATED AS PART OF LICENSE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a material part of
the license certificate issued as fully as if written therein and the
licensee shall be bound thereby.



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93)



§ 110.14  SCHEDULE OF BUSINESS TAXES.



   (A)   Privilege license taxes are required to be paid before
beginning operation of all types of businesses located within the city limits
of Bessemer City, except for those businesses exempted by federal, state or
local authority. Businesses located outside the city doing business within
the city limits are also required to obtain a privilege license.



   (B)   Listed below are Schedules A and B. Please review each
schedule for the tax(es) that may apply to your business activity.



   (C)   Note: Some businesses with various types of activities may be
required to pay taxes under more than one schedule of this section.



SCHEDULE A
PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES BASED ON GROSS SALES/RECEIPTS/INCOME



 

Businesses that are taxed under this schedule will use this tax table to
determine the tax amount due. The amount is based upon annual gross receipts
and income. New businesses should estimate gross receipts from their start
date until June 30 and apply the estimated amount to the table. Exclude any
income from business activities taxed under Schedule B. The license year runs
from July 1 through June 30.



Gross Sales/Receipts

 

License Tax ($)

 

Additional



Highlighted items subject to gross sales/receipt taxation **
 
$0.15 per $1,000.00
 
Taxes from Schedule B must be paid in addition to Schedule A if applicable.


** Refer to Schedule C below in this section for calculation.**



 



SCHEDULE B
BUSINESS TYPES SUBJECT TO TAXATION



 


Businesses Subject to Tax

 

Fee





ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS AND CABARETS (entertainment, books, movies, etc.)


+ Gross Receipts

 
$3,500


AGENCIES


Collection



Employment



Loan/check cashing

 
 

50

100

100


AGRICULTURE


Farm machinery sales and distribution (See also PEDDLERS)

 
50


AMUSEMENTS/CARNIVALS


Circuses, menageries, dog and pony shows and the like, based on total number
of vehicles used to transport.



2 or less vehicles



3 - 5



6 - 10



11 - 20



21 - 30



Dances - not exempted and charges a fee in excess of $0.50



Merry-go-rounds, riding devices, pinball machines and the like - per machine



Pool tables - per table



Electronic video games - per machine



Electronic gaming operations



Base fee



Per machine

 
 

 

 

25

50

50

75

100

50

15

15

15

 

2,500

2,500


ANTIQUES


Local retail + Gross Receipts



Itinerant dealers (See PEDDLERS)

 
 

50


AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES (INCLUDING MOTORCYCLES)


Car polishing or waxing



Car washing



By hand (any location)



Coin-operated self wash - per bay



Equipment, parts, supply



Wholesale/retail



Gasoline service stations - per pump



Body and paint shops



Automobile repair or body shop



Motor vehicle dealer

 
 

50

 

35

15

 

50

25

50

50

75


BAKERIES
 
35


BALLOONS (See PEDDLERS)
 
 


BARBERS and BEAUTY SHOPS
 
35


BEER


Off premises (G.S. § 105-113.77)



On premises (G.S. § 105-113.77)

 
 

5

15


BROKERS (STOCKS and SECURITIES)
 
75


BUILDING MATERIALS (See MERCHANT)
 
 


CABINET MAKING (See MERCHANT)
 
 


CARPET and RUG CLEANING (See JANITORIAL)
 
 


CATERERS
 
35


CHAIN STORE+ Gross Receipts
 
100


CLOTHING MAKER (See TAILOR)
 
 


CONTRACTORS


Building contractor



HVAC contractor



Electrical contractor



Plumbing contractor



Painting, paper hanger, utility, concrete grading, landscaping or any type
not named above

 
 

50

60

60

60

50


DAY CARE CENTERS
 
50


DANCING SCHOOLS (See INSTRUCTORS)
 
 


DRAPERY MAKER (See TAILOR)
 
 


DRY CLEANING
 
50


DRESS MAKER (See TAILOR)
 
 


FLEA MARKETS


Operator



Vendor at unlicensed flea market

 
 

150

25


FORTUNE TELLING and MIND READING
 
350


FURNITURE MERCHANT (new or used) (See MERCHANT)
 
 


GAMES


Not otherwise named or taxed

 
 

50


GARAGE (See AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES)
 
 


GARMENT MAKERS (See TAILORS)
 
 


GAS


Bottled propane for rental, delivery or home delivery

 
 

35


GOLD and SILVER DEALERS (See PRECIOUS METALS)
 
 


GROCERY (See MERCHANT or CHAIN STORE)
 
 


GUNS (See WEAPONS)
 
 


HOTELS, MOTELS and the like
 
5


INSTRUCTION


Music, voice, fine arts, dance, gymnastics, wrestling, karate and the like



+ Gross Receipts

 
 

50


ITINERANT MERCHANT (See PEDDLERS)
 
 


JANITORIAL SERVICE


Individual carpet cleaning, window cleaning, house and business cleaners and
the like

 
 

35


JUKEBOXES per machine
 
5


LAUNDRY OR LINEN SERVICE


Plant in city



Collection/distribution only

 
 

100

35


KNIVES (See WEAPONS)
 
 


MACHINERY


Manufacture, assembly, distribution, repair, including machine shop+ Gross
Receipts

 
 

50


MANUFACTURING: MANUFACTURING PLANTS


including remanufacturing or reprocessing + Gross Receipts

 
100

 


MERCHANT or DEALER


Any retail establishment, wholesale establishment or business not otherwise
taxed under this chapter+ Gross Receipts

 
 

50


MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES


All activities engaged in for gain or profit not otherwise taxed under this
chapter

 
 

50


NURSING or CONVALESCENT HOME
 
75


PAWN SHOP or BROKER
 
375


PEDDLER


With motor vehicle



On foot or pushcart



Itinerant merchant



See also FLEA MARKET

 
 

50

50

150


PETROLEUM PRODUCTS


Heating oil

 
 

50


PETS


Sale, grooming, kennels

 
 

50


PIANOS


Including organs, radios, televisions, phonographs, records and tapes (sales
and service)

 
 

35


PISTOLS (See WEAPONS)
 
 


POOL TABLES (See AMUSEMENTS)
 
 


PRECIOUS METALS + Gross Receipts
 
150


RADIOS (See PIANOS)
 
 


REPAIR SHOP


Not otherwise specified under this chapter

 
 

35


RESTAURANT


0 - 4 seats



More than 4 seats

 
 

25

50


SIGNS


Outdoor advertising, see Zoning Code for definition

 
 

150


SODA FOUNTAINS (See SUNDRIES)
 
 


SUNDRIES AND ICE CREAM


The sale of sandwiches in drugstores or other places not licensed and taxed
as a restaurant under G.S. § 105-62

 
 

5


TAILOR


Maker of any type of sewn goods; such as men’s clothes, women’s clothes,
draperies and the like. Includes mending and repair of such goods

 
 

35


TAXICAB OPERATORS (Police permit required)
 
50


TRAVEL AGENCIES
 
35


UNDERTAKERS


Funeral homes and casket sales

 
 

50


UPHOLSTERING (See REPAIR SHOPS)
 
 


WEAPONS


Ammunition only



Firearms (pistols/rifles)



Knives - less than 8" in length



Knives - greater than 8" in length, daggers, slingshots, leaded canes, metal
knuckles, oriental weapons or similar articles

 
 

50

50

50

250


WELDERS
 
35


WINE SALES


Off premises



On premises

 
 

10

15




 



SCHEDULE C
GROSS RECEIPTS CALCULATION



 


A.   All city classifications that are based on gross sales/receipts are
computed as follows:


   Rate of $0.15 per $1,000 in sales (i.e., $12,000.00 x .15/1,000 = $1.80)



B.   The minimum gross receipts tax is $50. For the above example, the fee
would be $50.




C.   The maximum gross receipts tax is $3,000. (Gross receipts would need
to be at least $20,000,000 to meet this amount.




D.   Any business taxed on the basis of gross receipts that does not
provide the required information will be taxed at the maximum amount.



GROSS RECEIPTS means the amount reported as gross income on a business’
state or federal income tax return for the most recently completed tax year.
If a business has not been in business long enough to file a return, an
estimate of receipts is acceptable. Any business outside of the city limit
but conducting business within the city shall report the revenue received
from Bessemer City operations.



 



(Ord. 93-7-1, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. passed 11-15-94; Am. Ord. 97-5-1,
passed  - -97; Am. Res. passed 7-9-12)



CHAPTER 111:  VEHICLE TOWING SERVICE



Section



   111.01   Jurisdiction



   111.02   Purpose



   111.03   Definitions



   111.04   License required



   111.05   Issuance of license



   111.06   Hours of operation



   111.07   Duties and responsibilities of rotation wreckers and drivers



   111.08   Dispatching regulations



   111.09   Sanctions for failure to comply with regulations



   111.10   Unlawful to respond to police radio calls for towing service



 



   111.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   For Traffic Code, see Title VII of this code



§ 111.01  JURISDICTION.



   On and after March 1, 1992, these regulations shall govern the
dispatching of wreckers by the city Police Department for the removal and
transfer of disabled vehicles, as defined by this chapter, within the city.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)



§ 111.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the regulations expressed herein is to guide and
regulate the efficient dispatch of wrecker vehicles to aid law enforcement
officers in the removal from the public highways and grounds of disabled
vehicles. Specifically, these regulations are designed to establish a list of
qualified wrecker operators who may be called upon, on a rotating basis, to
remove from the public highways and grounds, vehicles which have become
disabled by accident, collision, or otherwise present a hazardous condition
to the public. Furthermore, these regula- tions are designed to prohibit
wrecker operators from soliciting towing work by responding to radio com-
munication without having been directly dispatched by the Police Department.
It is the intent of these regulations to provide an equitable arrangement by
which police officers can order a tow truck to the scene of an accident if
the motorist has not designated a particular towing service to be called by
police.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)



§ 111.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of Bessemer City.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Includes any machine designed or intended to travel
over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to a self-propelled
vehicle.



   ROTATION WRECKER.  A person, firm, or corporation engaged in a
business offering the services of towing and storage of disabled or wrecked
motor vehicles or motor vehicles found to be in violation of a city ordinance
or state law under the direction of city police officers, State Highway
Patrol, or other law enforcement officers.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)



§ 111.04  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No wrecker operator shall offer services as a rotation wrecker
within the city without first having obtained a license as hereinafter
provided.



   (B)   Application for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon a
form prepared and made available by the Chief of Police and shall state:



      (1)   The name, home address, and business address of the
applicant.



      (2)   The type and quantity of equipment owned and maintained
by the business.



      (3)   That the applicant has available space for properly
accommodating and protecting all disabled motor vehicles to be towed or
otherwise removed from the place where they are disabled, together with the
location of the storage area and the method of protection.



   (C)   No license shall be issued to an applicant for a rotation
wrecker license until he has deposited with the Chief of Police Certificates
of Insurance showing that he has purchased the following insurance policies:



      (1)   Garagekeeper's policy.  A garage- keeper's legal
liability policy covering any motor vehicle towed or otherwise removed
pursuant to this chapter against fire, theft, windstorm, and explosions in
the minimum amounts of $25,000 per motor vehicle with each accident deemed a
separate claim.



      (2)   Garage liability policy. A garage liability policy
covering the operation of applicant's business, equipment or other vehicles,
for any bodily injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the amount
of not less than $100,000 for any one person injured or killed and a per
accident limit of not less than $300,000 and $50,000 dollars for property
damage.



      (3)   Thirty days prior to any material change or cancellation
of any policy required herein, written notice of such change or cancellation
must be given to the Chief of Police by the rotation wrecker or his insurance
carrier.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Within 15 days of receipt of an application as provided for herein, the
Chief of Police shall deter- mine if a license should be issued to said
applicant upon the following conditions:



   (A)   That the applicant has satisfied the equip- ment, storage, and
service requirements as set out in § 111.04 of this chapter and on the
application.



   (B)   That insurance policies as required by § 111.04 have been
procured.



   (C)   That requirements of this chapter and all other governing laws
and ordinances have been met.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)



§ 111.06  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Each rotation wrecker licensed by the city shall receive or release
towed vehicles 24 hours a day, seven days a week, including holidays. Each
rotation wrecker shall provide access to vehicles by owners for purposes
other than release between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., seven days a
week, without charge.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)



§ 111.07  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ROTATION WRECKERS AND DRIVERS.



   A rotation wrecker licensed under this chapter shall comply with the
following terms and conditions:



   (A)   Availability for service. If the rotation wrecker dispatched
cannot respond immediately to a service call, it shall so inform the Police
Department who shall call the next wrecker operator on the rota- tion list.
No rotation wrecker shall assign a call to another wrecker service.



   (B)   Identification. Each rotation wrecker vehicle used for service
calls shall have the business name, address, and telephone number printed in
at least three-inch letters on each side of the wrecker.



   (C)   Duty of wrecker drivers. It shall be the duty of each rotation
wrecker driver to:



      (1)   Clean the wreck area of glass, oil, auto parts, and
other debris, and to carry away the debris for disposal, provided that the
rotation wrecker driver shall not be responsible for the removal of spilled
cargo.



      (2)   To use a clean cover in order to protect the interior of
a vehicle if it becomes necessary to enter it.



   (D)   Telephones. Rotation wrecker operators shall designate two
telephone numbers which shall be listed with the Police Department to be
called for dispatching purposes. One number shall be designated for calls
during business hours and the secondary number shall be designated for
non-business hours.



   (E)   Maintenance of equipment. Rotation wreckers shall keep and
maintain tow-in equipment which is adequate to perform tow-in service in a
reasonably satisfactory manner.



   (F)   Interception of police calls. Rotation wreckers shall report
for service only when dis- patched by the Police Department. No rotation
wrecker shall report for service as a result of inter- cepting a police radio
transmission.



   (G)   Inspections and meetings. The Chief of Police shall be
permitted to conduct regular inspec- tion of the rotation wrecker business
office and its operations relative to the city rotation wrecker system, and
may hold meetings with the wrecker operators to resolve complaints,
procedural problems, and maintain lines of communication with wrecker
operators.



   (H)   Secured parking area. Rotation wrecker operators shall
maintain a fenced area to provide protection for towed vehicles. The fenced
area shall be large enough to store at least 20 cars, and the fence shall be
at least six feet high.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  DISPATCHING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The following regulations shall be observed for the purpose of
dispatching wrecker operators on rotation calls:



      (1)   Requests for dispatch of rotation wrecker operator shall
come from a law enforcement officer at the location of the disabled vehicle.



      (2)   Rotation wrecker operators shall be dispatched only by
the Police Department.



      (3)   The police dispatcher shall advise the officer at the
location of the disabled vehicle of the name of the wrecker which has been
dispatched. In the event that the wrecker operator does not respond to a
dispatched call, the police officer at the scene of the disabled vehicle may
request that the next wrecker operator on the rotation list be called. The
police officer at the scene should remain there until a wrecker arrives, and
longer if conditions warrant.



      (4)   Wrecker service operators shall not answer any call for
service coming directly from the owner of a vehicle unless he first notified
the City Communication Center as to the nature of the request and the
location of the disabled vehicle.



      (5)   The Police Department shall maintain a dispatch log upon
which the following information shall be recorded:



         (a)   The date of the call for service.



         (b)   The time the call was received.



         (c)   From whom the call was dis- patched.



         (d)   The location of the disabled vehicle.



         (e)   Which rotation operator the call was dispatched to.



         (f)   The log should also have recorded any information
received by the police dispatcher regarding calls directly from the owners of
disabled vehicles to wrecker services.



   (B)   Any owners of a disabled vehicle may request a wrecker service
of his own designation, without regard to the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Complaints regarding the dispatching pro- cedure for rotation
wreckers shall be directed to the Chief of Police.



   (D)   In the event that a rotation wrecker operator is incapable of
recovering stalled, abandoned, or wrecked vehicles, the operator may seek the
assistance of any wrecker service with equipment capable of moving the
disabled vehicles. It shall be the duty of the rotation wrecker operator
dispatched to the scene to work out financial arrangements, if necessary,
with the assisting wrecker operator.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.09  SANCTIONS FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police is authorized to remove a wrecker operator from the
rotation list for failure to follow the regulations set forth herein, for up
to ten days for first offense, 20 days for second offense, and 30 days for
third offense. The Police Chief shall give the offending wrecker operator
adequate notice and an opportunity to be heard before instituting any
suspension from the rotation list. A wrecker operator who fails to responds
to three consecutive calls shall be removed from the rotation list for up to
30 days by the Chief of Police. The operator may petition the City Manager by
registered mail for reinstatement within the 30-day period. Suspension for
failure to respond shall be instituted after notice to the operator and a
hearing before the Chief of Police.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)



§ 111.10  UNLAWFUL TO RESPOND TO POLICE RADIO CALLS FOR TOWING SERVICE.



   It shall be unlawful for any wrecker operator to respond to a call for
assistance to a vehicle that has been disabled due to an accident without
having been called directly by the owner of the disabled vehicle, or
dispatched by the police dispatcher.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. Notwithstanding § 10.99 of ths code of
ordinances, any person violating the provisions of § 111.10 of this chapter
may be found guilty of a misdemeanor under G.S. § 14-4, and may be subject
to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or
both, for each offense.



   (B)   Equitable remedies. This chapter may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. passed 3-1-92)



Cross-reference:



   For Traffic Code, see Title VII of this code



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




Consumption and Possession




   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Consumption on the public streets and on municipal property
prohibited



   112.03   Possession of open containers on the public streets and on
municipal property prohibited



   112.04   Possession during special events prohibited



Sale of Alcoholic Beverages



   112.15   Sunday sales hours



 



   112.99   Penalty



CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION



§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the common meanings of words, the following definitions
shall be applicable herein:



   MALT BEVERAGE.  Beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter, and any other
brewed or fermented beverage containing at least 0.5%, and not more than 6%
alcohol by volume. [G.S. § 18B-101(9)]



   OPEN CONTAINER.  A container whose seal has been broken or a container
other than the manufacturer's unopened original container. [G.S. §
18B-300(c)]



   PUBLIC STREET.  Any highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, alley,
bridge, or other way within and/or under the control of the city and open to
public use, including the sidewalks of any such street.



   UNFORTIFIED WINE.  Wine that has an alco- holic content produced only
by natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beet, or dextrose
sugar, and that has an alcoholic content of not more than 17% alcohol by
volume. [G.S. § 18B-101(15)]



(Ord. 95-11-1, passed  - -95)



§ 112.02  CONSUMPTION ON THE PUBLIC STREETS AND ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public
streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt
beverages and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or
outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied, or controlled by the city
including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant
thereto, municipal parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational
areas, tennis courts, and other athletic fields.



(Ord. 95-11-1, passed  - -95)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS ON THE PUBLIC STREETS AND ON
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified
wine on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person
to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any
property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned,
occupied, or controlled by the city including, but not limited to, public
buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto; municipal parking lots, public
parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts, and other athletic
fields.



(Ord. 95-11-1, passed  - -95)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  POSSESSION DURING SPECIAL EVENTS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess malt beverage and/or
unfortified wine on public streets, alleys, or parking lots which are
temporarily closed to regular traffic for special events, unless the
governing body adopts a resolution making other pro- visions for the
possession of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine at the special event.



(Ord. 95-11-1, passed  - -95)  Penalty, see § 112.99



SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 112.15  SUNDAY SALES HOURS.



   Pursuant to the authority granted in S.L. 2017-87 any establishment
located in the corporate limits of Bessemer City and holding an ABC permit
issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages allowed by
its permit beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.



(Ord. passed 6-11-18)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of §§ 112.01 through 112.04 shall con- stitute a
misdemeanor punishable in accordance with G.S. § 14-4. 



(Ord. 95-11-1, passed  -  -95)



CHAPTER 113:  VENDING



Section




General Provisions




   113.01   Purpose



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Vending prohibited in certain locations



   113.04   Prohibited conduct




Pushcart Vendors




   113.20   Puschart vendors



 



   113.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01  PURPOSE.



   The primary purpose of the public streets and sidewalks is for use by
vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Vending on the public streets and sidewalks
promotes the public interest by contributing to an active and attractive
pedestrian environment. Reason- able regulation of street and sidewalk
vending in the vicinity of a school is necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare. The regulations contained in this chapter do not
prohibit pure speech by religious organizations, but merely regulate the
activities of an organization which are commercial in nature.



(Ord. passed 1-14-85)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any vehicle used for the displaying, storing, or
transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor which is required to be
licensed and registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles.



   STAND.  Any table, showcase, bench, rack, pushcart, wagon, or other
wheeled vehicle or device which may be moved without the assistance of a
motor and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the
Department of Motor Vehicles, used for the displaying, storing, or
transporting of articles offered for sale by a vendor.



   VENDOR.  Any person engaged in the selling, or the offering for sale,
of food, beverages, or merchandise on the public streets or sidewalks, from a
stand or motor vehicle, or from his person.



(Ord. passed 1-14-85)



§ 113.03  VENDING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.



   Vending is prohibited with the following exceptions:



   (A)   Vending on the sidewalks is permitted in the central business
district subject to the restriction contained in § 113.04.



   (B)   Vending from motor vehicles is permitted throughout the city
subject to the restrictions contained in § 113.04.



   (C)   All vendors must possess any and all required business
licenses and permits.



(Ord. passed 1-14-85)



§ 113.04  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   No vendor shall vend within 600 feet of the grounds of any elementary
or secondary school between ½ hour prior to the start of the school day, and
½ hour after dismissal at the end of the school day.



(Ord. passed 1-14-85)  Penalty, see § 113.99



PUSHCART VENDORS



§ 113.20  PUSHCART VENDORS.



   (A)   Permit required for operation. Pushcart vendors may operate on
public rights-of-way that are designated by the City council on a map
maintained in the city Zoning Department or in other areas of the city
designated for commercial uses; all pushcarts must obtain and maintain a
permit for each location where the owner of the pushcart intends to operate.
Permit applications shall contain the following information:



      (1)   A food vending permit from Gaston County Health
Department.



      (2)   A valid City of Bessemer City business license.



      (3)   A scaled sketch plan or photographs showing proposed
cart dimensions and location. The cart operation area shall not exceed 100
square feet.



      (4)   A list of products to be sold.



      (5)   Proof of a valid insurance policy that provides a
minimum liability coverage of $1,000,000 with the city named as an additional
insured if on designated public rights-of-way.



      (6)   A written indemnity agreement that will hold harmless
the city, its officers, and employees, for any loss or liability or damage,
including costs, for bodily injury or property damage sustained by a person
as a result of the negligent installation, use, or maintenance of a permitted
space if upon any public rights-of-way.



      (7)   A food permit from the North Carolina Department of
Agriculture if the applicant intends to sell baked goods or ice cream.



   (B)   Permit suspended during special events. All permits issued
pursuant to this section shall be suspended during a special event approved
by the City Council. Carts are excluded within 400 feet of the edge of any
special events area unless the permit holder is given permission from the
event sponsor to set up within the designated event area. No more than three
permits per cart shall be issued to any cart owner.



   (C)   Operation regulations. Pushcarts shall conform to the
following regulations regarding location and operation:



      (1)   Carts must not locate in any area that impedes,
endangers, or interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



      (2)   Carts selling food products must be located at least 50
feet from the entrance to any business selling food unless the owner of the
other business gives written permission for the infringement of the “no
vending” area.



      (3)   Vendor must provide written permission from the property
owner on which the cart is located.



      (4)   No more than two carts will be allowed on any block face.



   (D)   Design standards. All carts must meet the following design
standards:



      (1)   Carts must be non-motorized with operable wheels.
Persons with disabilities may use a motorized system to propel the cart.



      (2)   All carts must be self-contained with a waste
receptacle. All equipment other than coolers must be contained on or within
the cart.



      (3)   A cart may not exceed six feet in height and nine feet
in length and five feet in width.



      (4)   Umbrellas or canopies must be attached to the cart and
must not exceed eight feet in height above grade. Maximum diameter of
canopies and umbrellas shall not exceed six feet.



      (5)   Carts must be constructed of durable material.



      (6)   Carts must comply with all local, state, and federal
rules regarding sanitation and protection of food from airborne contamination.



      (7)   All signage shall be attached to the cart. No
freestanding signage is permitted.



      (8)   Sales of goods and merchandise are limited to food and
beverage, fresh cut flowers, or original artwork and handicrafts produced by
the vendor. All items for sale must be confined to the cart. Food vendors may
place a maximum of three coolers within their containment area so long as the
coolers are neatly stacked to avoid visual clutter. No generators may be used
at any time.



      (9)   A vendor may maintain one chair for his or her own use.
No public seating is allowed. Pushcarts may not be stored, parked, or left
overnight on any city property.



      (10)   Carts may only be operated between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 12:00 a.m. The operator must be present at all times and must have a
valid permit on his or her person or on the cart at all times.



      (11)   The operator is responsible for all waste and trash
removal. The containment area must be kept clear of grease, trash, paper,
cups or cans associated with the operation.



   (E)   Revocation of license. Any violation of this section may
result in a revocation of the business license.



(Ord. passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both
fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. passed 1-14-85)



CHAPTER 114:  TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section




General Provisions




   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Establishment of rates; taxicab meters



   114.03   Rates to be displayed in cabs



   114.04   Excessive charges prohibited



   114.05   Prohibited uses of taxicabs by drivers and operators




Operator's Permits




   114.10   Operator's permit required



   114.11   Proof of financial responsibility



   114.12   Contents of operator's permit; requirements



   114.13   Expiration of operator's permit



   114.14   Operator's permit fee; annual license tax



   114.15   Transfer of permit or license



   114.16   Revocation or suspension



   114.17   Compliance




Taxicab Driver's Permits




   114.25   Taxicab driver's permit and chauffeur's license required



   114.26   Application for permit; annual renewal



   114.27   Form and contents of application



   114.28   Investigation of applicant by Police Chief



   114.29   Qualifications for granting permit



   114.30   Waiting period; temporary permit



   114.31   Fees



   114.32   Form of permit



   114.33   Duration of permit; renewals



   114.34   Display of permit



   114.35   Suspension or revocation for just cause



   114.36   Validity of permits



Statutory reference:



   Authority to regulate and license businesses, see G.S. § 160A-194



   Authority to regulate and control taxicab drivers, see G.S. § 20-37



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVER.  A person who, by manipulation of the mechanism of a vehicle
or by other means, causes the vehicle to move, increase or decrease speed,
change direction or stop moving.



   OPERATOR.  A person who owns or manages a taxicab business or other
business in which one or more vehicles are made available for hire.



('75 Code, § 15-1)



§ 114.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES; TAXICAB METERS.



   The City Council may establish rates to be charged by taxicab
operators, and all such rates so established shall be maintained on file in
the office of the City Clerk. The City Council may require that each taxicab
be equipped with a taxicab meter, to be maintained by the operator of such
taxicab in a serviceable and accurate condition at all times.



('75 Code, § 15-2)



§ 114.03  RATES TO BE DISPLAYED IN CABS.



   Every taxicab driven within the city or between the city and points not
incorporated within a radius of five miles of the city shall have at all
times prominently posted and displayed in such taxicab, so as to be visible
to the passengers therein, the rates and fares for the use of such cab.



('75 Code, § 15-3) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.04  EXCESSIVE CHARGES PROHIBITED.



   No person operating or driving a taxicab shall charge or attempt to
charge any passenger a greater rate of fare than that to which he is entitled
under the provisions of this chapter.  All taxicab drivers shall travel the
nearest and most direct route to the point of destination unless directed to
do otherwise by the passenger.



('75 Code, § 15-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.05  PROHIBITED USES OF TAXICABS BY DRIVERS AND OPERATORS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a city taxicab
driver's permit to accept or retain as a passenger in a taxicab driven by him
any person who he knows, or has reasonable suspicion to believe, to be then
and there in illegal possession of any alcoholic beverage, drug, narcotic or
marijuana.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a city taxicab
driver's permit to transport within a taxicab driven by him any alcoholic
beverage, drug, narcotic, or marijuana which is known by him, or which he has
reasonable suspicion to believe, to have been unlawfully obtained by or for
the person to whom it is to be delivered or is to be used in a manner
contrary to law.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a city taxicab
driver's permit to accept or retain as a passenger in a taxicab driven by him
any person who he knows, or has reasonable suspicion to believe, is then and
there bent upon the purpose of using the taxicab as a place for the
commission of any act of prostitution or as a means of travel to a place for
the commission of any act of prostitution.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person holding a city taxicab
operator's permit to knowingly counten- ance any violation of any other
division of this section by any taxicab driver in his employment.



('75 Code, § 15-5) (Ord. 57, passed  - - )  Penalty, see § 10.99



OPERATOR'S PERMITS



§ 114.10  OPERATOR'S PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab
or other motor vehicle for hire in the city or between the city and points
not incorporated within a radius of five miles of the city unless there has
been duly issued to him by the City Council a written permit to engage in
such business. The issuance of any permit shall be within the discretion of
the City Council and no permit shall be issued to any person it may find to
be unfit to operate a taxicab, and the Council may refuse to issue any permit
if public convenience and necessity does not require the services of an
additional taxicab or other vehicle for hire.



   (B)   Permits issued pursuant to division (A) of this section may
contain such prohibitions, restrictions and conditions as may be deemed
prudent by the City Council in the best interests of the city and its
inhabitants and not contrary to law, this code, or other ordinance.



('75 Code, § 15-6) (Ord. 56, passed 9-5-49)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.11  PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   No operator's permit shall be issued under this chapter until the
applicant therefor has filed with the City Clerk proof of financial
responsibility as provided in G.S. § 20-280.



('75 Code, § 15-7) (Ord. No. 56, passed 9-5-49)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.12  CONTENTS OF OPERATOR'S PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS.



   No operator's permit under this chapter shall be valid unless
authorized by the City Council, signed by the City Manager and attested to by
the City Clerk on a written form prepared by the City Attorney and approved
by the City Council. Each permit must also be signed by the person to whom it
is issued, indicating his acceptance thereof under the conditions set forth
in this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-8) (Ord. 56, passed 9-5-49)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.13  EXPIRATION OF OPERATOR'S PERMITS.



   Any operator's permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall become void
when the person to whom it is issued shall discontinue to engage in the
business authorized, and otherwise, unless revoked as herein provided, each
permit shall expire on the last day of June following the date of issuance
thereof.



('75 Code, § 15-9)



§ 114.14  OPERATOR'S PERMIT FEE; ANNUAL LICENSE TAX.



   Concurrently with the issuance of an operator's permit under this
chapter, the operator shall pay to the City Clerk a permit fee of $5 and a
license tax, computed at the rate of $1.25 per month from the date of
issuance of the permit until the next following 30th day of June, for each
taxicab authorized to be operated under the permit; and thereafter, on or
before the first day of July of each year, such operator shall pay a license
tax of $15 for each taxicab authorized to be operated under the permit.



('75 Code, § 15-10) (Ord. 56, passed 9-5-49)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to levy not to exceed tax on taxicab vehicles, see G.S. §
20-97(a)



§ 114.15  TRANSFER OF PERMIT OR LICENSE.



   No operator's permit or license under this chapter may be sold, leased,
assigned, or otherwise transferred except to the heirs, legatees, executors,
or administrators of a deceased permit holder who may desire to continue the
business authorized by the permit, with the approval of the City Council.



('75 Code, § 15-11) (Ord. 56, passed 9-5-49)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.16  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   An operator's permit under this chapter may be revoked by the
City Council at any time, upon proof satisfactory to the Council, that the
operator has violated, or that he knew or in the exercise of ordinary care he
should have known that a driver employed by him has violated any provision of
G.S. Ch. 18B appertaining to the transportation of alcoholic beverages; or
has committed any offense involving moral turpitude; or has violated any
provision of this chapter; or has suffered any vehicle authorized in the
permit to be driven while on business in an unsafe or unsanitary condition;
or has not maintained the liability insurance required by G.S. § 20-280; or
has violated any prohibition, restriction, or condition contained in his
operator's permit; or has been convicted of or paid fines for more than six
traffic violations in any one month.



   (B)   Prior to the revocation of an operator's permit under division
(A) of this section the City Council shall cause written notice to be given
the permit holder, stating the grounds for revocation and notifying him that
he shall be afforded, upon his request, an opportunity to be heard before the
Council in public, in person or by attorney, or both, with witnesses in his
behalf, at the next regular or special meeting of the Council after the
seventh day following service of such notice; and the Council shall comply
with any such request of the permit holder as herein provided, and shall not
revoke a permit until after such requested public hearing.



   (C)   The City Council, following notice given as  provided in
division (B) of this section, may suspend an operator's permit for any cause
specified in division (A) of this section, until such time as a permit may be
revoked under this section; provided, that the City Council shall find that
such suspension is immediately necessary to protect the safety of the
inhabitants of the city.



('75 Code, § 15-12) (Ord. 56, passed 9-5-49)



§ 114.17  COMPLIANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operator or driver of a taxicab or other vehicle for hire without a currently
valid permit so to do, or to operate a taxicab or other vehicle for hire
without having paid the license tax for the current year as provided in this
chapter, or to other-wise violate or fail to comply with any provision of
this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-13) (Ord. 56, passed 9-5-49) Penalty, see § 10.99



TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMITS



§ 114.25  TAXICAB DRIVER'S PERMIT AND CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire
from place to place within the city, or between the city and points not
incorporated within a radius of five miles of the city, unless he shall have
first applied to and secured from the City Council a taxicab driver's permit.



   (B)   No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire
from place to place within the city, or between the city and points not
incorporated within a radius of five miles of the city, unless he shall have
in his possession a city taxicab driver's permit and a state chauffeur's
license, each currently in effect.



   (C)   Each city taxicab driver's permit must be signed by the person
to whom it is issued, indicating his acceptance thereof under the conditions
set forth in this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-14) (Ord. 56, passed 9-5-49)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.26  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ANNUAL RENEWAL.



   An application for an original taxicab driver's permit may be made at
any time while the applicant is qualified for issuance of such permit to him.
All applications for annual renewal of taxicab drivers' permits shall be made
before January 1 of each year, and no reduction in the permit fee shall be
made for any renewal of permit for which application is made after January 1.



('75 Code, § 15-15)



§ 114.27  FORM AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall make
application therefor upon forms provided by the City Clerk for such purpose,
and he shall state thereon, among other things, his name, address, physical
condition and physical description, former employers, court record, state
chauffeur's license number, and length of residence in this state and in this
county. Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant.



   (B)   The applicant shall then appear at the office of the Police
Department for the purpose of having his fingerprints taken and photograph
made, both of which shall constitute a part of his application.



   (C)   The original copy of each application shall be retained on
file in the office of the City Clerk, and duplicate copies shall remain on
file in the office of the Chief of Police.



('75 Code, § 15-16)



§ 114.28  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT BY POLICE CHIEF.



   The City Clerk, upon receipt of a sworn applica- tion for a taxicab
driver's permit, shall transmit a copy thereof promptly to the Chief of
Police, who shall investigate the facts stated therein. The Chief of Police
shall then report his findings and recommenda- tions to the City Council.



('75 Code, § 15-17)



§ 114.29  QUALIFICATIONS FOR GRANTING PERMIT.



   If the City Council or its authorized committee finds that an applicant
for a taxicab driver's permit has not been convicted of a felony, a violation
of any federal or state statute relating to the use, trans- portation,
possession or sale of intoxicating liquors, any federal or state statute
relating to prostitution, or any federal or state statute relating to the
use, trans- portation, possession, or sale of narcotic drugs; and that the
applicant is a citizen of the United States and has resided in the county for
at least one year or in the state for at least 30 days and is not a habitual
user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs, and has not been an habitual
violator of traffic laws, the City Council or its authorized committee shall
order the City Clerk to issue a taxicab driver's permit to such applicant.



('75 Code, § 15-18)



§ 114.30  WAITING PERIOD; TEMPORARY PERMIT.



   No taxicab driver's permit shall be issued until 15 days after
application therefor has been made, provided that a temporary permit may be
granted by an authorized committee of the City Council pending investigation
to any person meeting the requirement as to residence in North Carolina as
set out in § 114.29. Such temporary permit shall be valid for a period of 72
hours after issuance thereof.



('75 Code, § 15-19)



§ 114.31  FEES.



   The City Clerk shall charge a fee of $3 for each original taxicab
driver's permit and a fee of $.50 for each annual renewal thereof.



('75 Code, § 15-20)



§ 114.32  FORM OF PERMIT.



   Taxicab drivers' permits shall be in substantially the following form
and must be displayed at all times when operating a taxi.



   “Taxicab Driver's Permit



   Permit number              City of Bessemer City, N.C.



               Date of issuance          



               Date of expiration        



   Issued to:                                       
         



   Address:                                         
           



   Age       Weight       Height       Race       Color of
hair:       Color of eyes:        



   Good until expiration date shown above unless earlier revoked by the
City Council of the City of Bessemer City, N.C.



            (Signed)                             
         



                  City Clerk.”



('75 Code, § 15-21)



§ 114.33  DURATION OF PERMIT; RENEWALS.



   A taxicab driver's permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall
entitle the person to whom it is granted to drive a taxicab until the
expiration of December 31 of the year in which it is granted, and it shall be
necessary for the holder of the permit to obtain a new permit as provided in
this chapter before he is allowed to drive a taxicab during any year
thereafter.



('75 Code, § 15-22)



§ 114.34  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   The driver of every taxicab shall, at all times while operating such
taxicab, prominently post and display in the taxicab, so as to be visible to
the passengers therein, his permit to drive a taxicab, with his photograph
attached.



('75 Code, § 15-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.35  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION FOR JUST CAUSE.



   The City Council retains the power to suspend or revoke for just cause
any taxicab driver's permit, and may consider that just cause exists if the
person holding such permit is convicted of a felony, a viola- tion of any
federal or state statute relating to the use, transportation, possession or
sale of intoxicating liquors, a violation of any federal or state statute
relating to the use, transportation, possession, or sale of narcotic drugs,
repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances, a violation of any state
or federal statute relating to prostitution, or becomes a habitual user of
intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs, pro- vided, that this enumeration of
grounds which may be considered as just cause shall not be construed as
exclusive.



('75 Code, § 15-24)



§ 114.36  VALIDITY OF PERMITS.



   Taxicab drivers permits valid immediately prior to the effective date
of this code are hereby continued in full force and effect for a period of 60
days after the effective date of this code, to enable the permit holders to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.



('75 Code, § 15-25)



CHAPTER 115:  ADULT BUSINESSES



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Location regulations



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT CABARET.  Any place featuring top- less dancers, go-go dancers,
strippers, male or female impersonators, or entertainers displaying specified
anatomical areas as defined by G.S. § 14-202.10 as such statute may be
amended from time to time, or other similar entertainers.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place as defined by G.S. § 14-202.10 as
such statute may be amended from time to time, including adult cabarets,
except that the definition of massage business shall not include any
establishment or business where massage is practiced that is a health club,
exercise studio, hospital, physical therapy business, or other similar
health-related business. ADULT ESTAB-LISHMENT specifically includes, however,
any massage business where massages are rendered by any person exhibiting
specified anatomical areas.Specified anatomical areas are those defined by
G.S. § 14-202.10 as such statute may be amended from time to time, or other
similar entertainers.



(Ord. passed 11-15-94)



§ 115.02  LOCATION REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to the location of any business
defined as an adult estab- lishment or adult cabaret:



   (A)   No such business shall locate within 1000 feet of any other
adult establishment as measured in a straight line from property line to
property line, with no consideration as to intervening structures, roads, or
land forms.



   (B)   No adult establishment shall be located within 1000 feet of a
church, public or private elementary or secondary school, child day care or
nursery school, public park or playground, or residentially zoned property.
The 1000 foot distance shall be measured in a straight line from property
line to property line, with no consideration as to intervening structures,
roads, or landforms.



   (C)   There shall not be more than one adult establishment on the
same property or in the same building, structure, or portion thereof.



   (D)   No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same
building, structure, property, or portion thereof with any adult
establishment.



   (E)   No printed material, slide, video, photo- graph, written
materials, live show, or other visual presentation shall be visible, nor
shall any live or recorded voices, music, or sounds be heard from outside the
walls of the establishment.



   (F)   Wall signs as defined and permitted in Chapter 155 of this
code are permitted as a means of advertising adult establishments. No
freestanding signs shall be permitted. No other advertisement, displays, or
signs or other promotional materials shall be visible to the public from
pedestrian sidewalks, walkways, or vehicular areas.



   (G)   Maximum gross floor area of the principal building shall be
2,000 square feet.



(Ord. passed 11-15-94)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 116:  GAME ROOMS AND OTHER PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Licenses required



   116.03   Certain prohibitions to be observed by licensee and
employees



   116.04   Rules for operation



   116.05   Licensee responsible



   116.06   Revocation of licenses



   116.07   Enforcement of chapter



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GAME ROOM.



      (1)   Any place of business that operates five or more
mechanical games, video games, pool tables, pay devices or tables for which
charge is made either directly or indirectly. Electronic gaming operations,
include internet sweepstakes and other games of chance, shall not be
considered a GAME ROOM.



      (2)   Examples of game rooms, by way of illustration and not
limitation, are poolrooms, bowling alleys, billiard halls, video arcades,
amusement centers, and the like.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed 11-11-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-9-07; Am. Res. passed
5-14-12)



§ 116.02  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every owner of a game room shall apply for and obtain a
license from the City Manager to operate a game room.  Application for such
a license shall be made upon forms provided by the City Clerk.  It shall be
unlawful to operate a game room within the city without a license as required
by this chapter.



   (B)   The City Manager shall not issue a license to any applicant
who:



      (1)   Has been convicted within the past two years of selling
intoxicating liquors and/or narcotic drugs, or of any felony.



      (2)   Is not a citizen and resident of North Carolina.



      (3)   Is a habitual user of intoxicating liquor or narcotic
drugs.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the application to operate a game room, the
matter shall be placed upon the agenda for the next regular City Council
meeting.  Council may grant or deny any license application without cause.



   (D)   The license shall only authorize the operation of the game
room by the owner to whom the license is issued, and at the location
specified in the application.  Licenses shall not be transferrable and shall
automatically expire two years from date of issuance.



   (E)   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify
the premises for which it is used, the number of tables, alleys, or games to
be operated, the name and address of the owner, and the dates upon which the
license begins and shall expire. License shall be posted in a prominent place
on the premises at all times.



   (F)   An application fee of $25 shall be paid to and collected by
the Finance Officer when the application is submitted, to cover the cost of
administration of this chapter.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed 11-11-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-9-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 116.03  CERTAIN PROHIBITIONS TO BE OBSERVED BY LICENSEE AND EMPLOYEES.



   Licensees under this chapter shall not directly, or through their
employees and agents:



   (A)   Suffer or permit any gambling on the licensed premises at any
time; nor the sale or use of any racing, football, or other parley cards.



   (B)   Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become disorderly;
or permit any profane, obscene, or indecent language thereon.



   (C)   Suffer or permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs to
be sold or kept or consumed on the licensed premises.



   (D)   Employ any person who has been convicted in the past year of
unlawfully selling alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs or any felony.



   (E)   Suffer or permit any person under 18 years of age to enter or
remain upon the licensed premises.



   (F)   Suffer or permit the willful violation of any of the General
Statutes of North Carolina.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed 11-11-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-9-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 116.04  RULES FOR OPERATION.



   The following rules shall be observed by all operators of poolrooms,
bowling alleys, and other amusements required to be licensed by this chapter
within the city:



   (A)   Game room establishments shall at all times be subject to
entry by the City Manager or Police



Officers for the purpose of verifying compliance with the terms and
conditions of this chapter.



   (B)   All game rooms shall close no later than 11:59 p.m., Sunday
through Saturday. All game rooms may open no earlier than 7:00 a.m., Monday
through Saturday, and no earlier than 1:00 p.m. on Sundays.



   (C)   Play on any table, alley, or machine shall be allowed only
during the hours set forth herein.



   (D)   The establishment shall remain closed on Sundays, except as
provided in division (B) above.



   (E)   No game or device shall, however, be screened from view so as
to not be readily visible from within the premises.



   (F)   No screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstruction
shall be placed between the entrance to the room where amusements or games
are played and the rear wall of the room.  A clear view of the interior
premises from the entrance to the rear of the premises must be maintained at
all times.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed 11-11-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-9-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 116.05  LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE.



   The acts and conduct of the agents and employees of the licensee in the
conduct of the business shall be deemed to be the acts and conduct of the
licensee. Additionally, the licensee and employees shall not permit patrons
to loiter in or about the premises.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed 11-11-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-9-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 116.06  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   After giving the operator of a game room adequate notice and
an opportunity to be heard, the City Council may revoke the license of any
game room operator who:



      (1)   Violates the provisions of this chapter, or



      (2)   Is convicted of unlawfully selling alcoholic beverages
or narcotic drugs.



   (B)   (1)   Additionally, the City Manager may temporarily revoke
the license of a game room upon a particularly egregious act or situation
involving the licensee, employees or patrons. 



      (2)   When license is so revoked, City Council, or a committee
thereof, shall hear any appeal of the action within two weeks.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed 11-11-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-9-07)



§ 116.07  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any of the remedies
enumerated in § 10.99 of this Code.



(Ord. 96-11-1, passed 11-11-96; Am. Ord. passed 7-9-07)



CHAPTER 117:  ESCORT AND DATING SERVICES



Section



   117.01   Escort and dating services; purpose and intent



   117.02   Definitions



   117.03   Permit required



   117.04   Application for escort or dating service permit



   117.05   Registration of escorts



   117.06   Revocation



   117.07   Appeals



§ 117.01  ESCORT AND DATING SERVICES; PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   Experience has shown that escort and dating services are frequently
fronts for prostitution. Experience has also shown that applicants for an
escort, dating service or similar type business privilege license under
Chapter 110 of the City Code frequently provide false information. It is the
intent of this chapter to ensure that owners and operators of escort and
dating services provide accurate and verifiable information about the
business and to establish accountability for any attempt to use an escort or
dating service as a front for prostitution.



(Ord. 97-5-2, passed 5-12-97)



§ 117.02  DEFINITIONS.



   DATING SERVICE.  Any business, agency or person who offers or performs
for pecuniary compensation any service to aid persons to become socially
acquainted or to otherwise assist persons to meet for social purposes.



   ESCORT.  A person who is an employee, agent or independent contractor
of an escort service, and:



      (1)   Whose name is furnished by the escort service; or



      (2)   Who is introduced or furnished by the escort service to
persons; or



      (3)   Who is provided by the escort service for the
accompaniment of other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or
places of amusement; or



      (4)   Who is provided by the escort service to consort with
others about any public or private place; and



      (5)   Who receives pecuniary compensation in exchange therefor.



   ESCORT SERVICE.  Any business, agency or person who for pecuniary
compensation furnishes or offers to furnish names of escorts, or who
introduces, furnishes or arranges for escorts, who may accompany other
persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or
who may consort with others about any public or private place.



   PERMITTING AUTHORITY.  The Chief of Police in the Bessemer City Police
Department or his designee.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, partnership, corporation or
association.



(Ord. 97-5-2, passed 5-12-97)



§ 117.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or
to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, the operation of (a) an
escort service as herein defined, without a valid escort service permit
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or (b) a dating service as
herein defined, without a valid dating service permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. The issuance of an escort service permit does not
authorize the permit holder to operate a dating service. The issuance of a
dating service permit does not authorize the permit holder to operate an
escort service. A separate permit shall be required for each location within
the city at which a dating service or escort service is established or name
under which it operates. An escort service or dating service permit is not
transferrable.



(Ord. 97-5-2, passed 5-12-97)



§ 117.04  APPLICATION FOR ESCORT OR DATING SERVICE PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate an escort
service or dating service shall make application to the Permitting Authority.



   (B)   An applicant for an escort service permit or dating service
permit shall provide the following:



      (1)   The full true name of the applicant/ owner of the
business.



      (2)   The full true name under which the business will be
conducted and, if the business will be conducted in a name other than that of
the applicant/owner, a certified copy of an assumed name certificate prepared
and recorded in the Gaston County Register of Deeds Office.



      (3)   The address where the business is to be conducted and
where the books and records are maintained for examination by the collector
of revenue, or his agent, pursuant to § 110.12 of this Code, and the hours
of operation during which the books and records are available for examination.



      (4)   If the owner of the real property upon which the
business is to be conducted is not the applicant,  the name and address of
the owner of  the real property upon which the business is to be conducted
and a copy of the lease or rental agreement.



      (5)   All telephone numbers to be used by the business.



      (6)   If the applicant/owner is a natural person, the
applicant/owner shall appear in person and complete and sign all applications
forms and provide the following information: (a) the present residence and
business addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant, (b) a valid
drivers license or other governmental issued picture identification, and (c)
government issued social security card.



   If the applicant/owner is a partnership: (a) the names and residence
addresses of each partner, including limited partners, and (b) a copy of the
partnership agreement. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the
provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply.



   If the applicant/owner is a corporation: (a) a certified copy of the
Articles of Incorporation, or if a foreign corporation, a certified copy of
the certificate of authority, and a certified copy of the most recent annual
report filed with the Secretary of State of North Carolina, and (b) the names
and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and of
each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the
corporation.



   If the applicant/owner is a partnership or corporation, the applicant
shall designate one of its general partners or officers to act as its
responsible managing officer. Such person shall appear in person and complete
and sign all application forms, and shall provide his or her present
residence and business addresses and telephone numbers, a valid drivers
license or other governmental issued picture identification, and government
issued social security card.



      (7)   A federal tax identification number assigned to the
business and a completed tax information authorization form (IRS Form 8821).



   (C)   Within 30 days of application, the Permitting Authority shall
investigate an application and verify all information submitted. If the
application is complete and all information provided is accurate, a permit
shall be issued. If the application is incomplete or if any information
provided is inaccurate, the application shall be denied.



   (D)   The holder of an escort service permit or dating service
permit shall notify the Permitting Authority in writing of any change of
information required under division (B) within 30 days of such change.



(Ord. 97-5-2, passed 5-12-97)



§ 117.05  REGISTRATION OF ESCORTS.



   Any person desiring to operate as an escort shall appear in person and
register with the Permitting Authority by providing the following information:



   (A)   Full true name and any alias(es) that might be used while
acting as an escort.



   (B)   Present residence address and telephone number.



   (C)   Valid drivers license or other governmental issued picture
identification.



   (D)   Government issued social security card.



   (E)   Name of the escort service(s) for which the registrant is an
employee, agent, or independent contractor.



(Ord. 97-5-2, passed 5-12-97)



§ 117.06  REVOCATION.



   The Permitting Authority may revoke an escort service permit or dating
service permit for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   An applicant/owner provides the Permitting Authority with any
false, inaccurate, or incomplete information, regardless of whether such
information was initially believed to be true or complete.



   (B)   Failure to provide notice of change in information as required
by § 117.04(D).



   (C)   The furnishing of or offer to furnish names of escorts who are
not registered as escorts of the escort service pursuant to § 117.05, or the
introduction, furnishing or arrangement for escorts who are not register as
escorts of the escort service pursuant to § 117.05, who may accompany other
persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or
who may consort with others about any public or private place.



   (D)   A dating service permit may be revoked for operation of an
escort service without a valid escort service permit.



   (E)   The escort service or dating service engages in, conducts,
permits, promotes or facilitates activities which constitute violations of
any subdivision of G.S. §§ 14-204 or 14-277, or which constitute
solicitations to commit violations of any subdivisions of those statutes.



(Ord. 97-5-2, passed 5-12-97)



§ 117.07  APPEALS.



   An applicant/owner may appeal the denial or revocation of an escort
service permit or dating service permit by providing written notice of appeal
to the Permitting Authority within ten business days of a denial or
revocation. Appeals shall be heard by the City Manager within 15 working days
from date of appeal.



CHAPTER 118:  SOLICITATION AND PEDDLERS



Section



   118.01   Purpose



   118.02   Invitation to dwellings required



   118.03   Permit process



   118.04   Display of permit required



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of the City Council in enacting this chapter to
improve the quality of life and economic vitality of the city, and to protect
the safety and general welfare of the general public, by imposing reasonable
restrictions on solicitation while respecting the constitutional rights of
free speech for all citizens.  The authority to enact this chapter is given
in G.S. § 160A-178.



(Res. passed 10-12-09)



§ 118.02  INVITATION TO DWELLINGS REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful, unless with the prior permission or
invitation of the owner or occupant, for any person to enter upon any
privately owned premises in the city used as a dwelling for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the immediate or future delivery of goods, merchandise,
or services, specifically including the taking of subscriptions for magazines.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to solicitation for charitable,
civic, religious or patriotic purposes by persons who serve without
compensation or remuneration, provided such person shall have first obtained
a permit from the city.



(Res. passed 10-12-09)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.03  PERMIT PROCESS.



   (A)   Any person desiring a permit to engage in business as a
solicitor or peddler within the city shall make written application to the
city on a form provided by the city.



   (B)   Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this
chapter, the applicant shall furnish a bond in the sum of $1,000 to the city
signed by the applicant and signed as surety by some surety company
authorized to do business in North Carolina, conditioned upon the final
delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines, and
newspapers in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to
delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or
customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist
in the article sold by the principal on such bond, at the time of delivery,
and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after
delivery.  Such bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons that
may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on such bond, or to
any agent or employee of the principal.  Only one bond shall be required for
each applicant.



   (C)   Applicants soliciting for charitable, civic, religious, or
patriotic purposes without compensation or remuneration shall be exempt from
the bond requirement.



   (D)   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
valid for 14 days.



   (E)   All permit applications shall be approved by city staff.



(Res. passed 10-12-09)



§ 118.04  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Every solicitor or peddler licensed under the provisions of
this chapter and doing business within the city shall display his or her
permit upon the request of any person.  Failure to display such license
shall be deemed a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of
this chapter, state law or city ordinance, rule, or regulation.



(Res. passed 10-12-09)  Penalty, see § 118.99



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any of the remedies
enumerated in § 10.99 of this Code.



(Res. passed 10-12-09)



CHAPTER 119:  SIDEWALK CAFÉ AND PUBLIC SPACE DINING



Section



   119.01   General



   119.02   Permit required



   119.03   Application



   119.04   Issuance of permit



   119.05   Alcoholic beverages



   119.06   Denial



   119.07   Terms; transfer



   119.08   Permit suspension



   119.09   Permit revocation



§ 119.01  GENERAL.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code to the contrary,
sidewalk cafes and dining areas shall be permitted in the Central Business
District and Downtown Overlay District as indicated on the official zoning
map of the city and shall be subject to regulations as are set forth in this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 119.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No restaurant owner may operate a sidewalk café without first
obtaining a permit from the City Manager in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter. As used in this section, the term CITY MANAGER includes his
or her authorized representative.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 119.03  APPLICATION.



   Any restaurant owner desiring to operate a sidewalk café shall prepare
and file an application with the City Manager which shall contain the
following information:



   (A)   The name, addresses and telephone number of the restaurant
desiring to operate a sidewalk café;



   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the restaurant
operator;



   (C)   The type of food, beverage or food product to be sold and
served at the sidewalk café;



   (D)   The hours of operation of the restaurant and the proposed
hours of operation of the sidewalk café;



   (E)   A site plan showing the section of sidewalk or pedestrian way
to be used for the sidewalk café, and the section to be kept clear for
pedestrian and fire lane use, and depicting the proposed placement of tables,
chairs, umbrellas, trash receptacles and other furnishings on the sidewalk or
pedestrian way;



   (F)   Proof of an insurance policy, issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state, protecting the permittee and the city
from all claims for damages to property and bodily injury, including death,
which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. The
insurance shall name the city as additional insured and shall provide that
the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date
without 30 days advance written notice to the city. The insurance shall
afford minimum limits of $1,000,000 aggregate annually. In addition to the
aforesaid general liability coverage provided by permittee on behalf of city,
the permittee shall also offer proof of a liquor liability policy or
endorsement issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, which protects the permittee and the city from all claims for damages
to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation
under or in connection with the permit (and specifically for the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages as authorized by this chapter). Additional
liquor liability policy or endorsement shall name the city as additional
insured and shall provide that the policy or endorsement shall not terminate
or be cancelled prior to the expiration date without 30 days written notice
to the city. The liquor liability insurance policy or endorsement shall
afford minimum limits of $1,000,000 aggregate annually;



   (G)   A copy of all the permits and licenses issued by the county,
state or the city, including health and ABC permits and business licenses,
necessary for the operation of the restaurant business, or a copy of the
application for the permit if no permit has been issued. This requirement
includes any permits or certificates issued by the city or other governmental
authority, for exterior alterations or improvements to the restaurant;



   (H)   A sworn statement describing any violation by the restaurant
operator of any laws, regulations or ordinances relating to the possession,
sale consumption or transportation of intoxicating beverages or controlled
substances during the five years immediately preceding the date of the permit
application;



   (I)   Additional information as may be requested by the City Manager
or his or her designee in order to determine compliance with this section; and



   (J)   An annual fee in the amount as set forth in the fee schedule
to cover the cost of processing and investigating the application and issuing
the permit.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 119.04  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   No permit for the operation of a sidewalk café may be issued unless
the application is complete and the following requirements are met.



   (A)   The sidewalk café must be associated with an operating
restaurant so that it is under the same management and shares the same food
preparation facilities, restroom facilities and other customer convenience
facilities as the restaurant. The sidewalk café must be operated under the
same name as the restaurant and may not be open or operated at any time when
the restaurant is not open for business.



   (B)   The operation of the sidewalk café must be clearly incidental
to the associated restaurant business. The seating capacity of the sidewalk
café may not be more than 50% of the interior seating capacity of the
associated restaurant.



   (C)   The placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings as shown
in the site plan must be done in a manner that at least five feet of
unobstructed space (as measured from the building façade or, in the absence
of a building façade, a straight line connecting the building façades)
remains on the sidewalk or pedestrian way for the passage of pedestrians. No
fire exits or lanes may be blocked and must remain clear at all times. The
pedestrian passage may not be used for the display of merchandise or for
portable signs otherwise authorized.



   (D)   The restaurant seeking to operate the sidewalk café must
front on and open onto the sidewalk or pedestrian way proposed for the
sidewalk café. The placement of tables, chairs and other furnishings may not
extend beyond the sidewalk or pedestrian way frontage of the associated
restaurant, with the following exception: tables, chairs and other
furnishings may extend up to eight feet onto adjacent property frontage in
either or both directions with the written permission (provided at the time
of application) of the occupant of the adjacent property.



   (E)   The tables, chairs and other furnishings used in the sidewalk
café shall not be anchored and shall be of a type of street furniture that
is easily movable.



   (F)   Except as elsewhere permitted by the code, the operation or
furnishing of the sidewalk café shall involve no permanent alteration to or
encroachment upon any street, sidewalk or pedestrian way or to the exterior
of the associated restaurant.



   (G)   Each sidewalk café shall provide adequate trash removal for
its patrons. At the end of each business day and during operating hours, the
operator shall remove all trash and debris of any sort from the sidewalk
area. In addition, the operator shall remove from the sidewalk alongside and
abutting properties any trash or debris originating as a result of the
operation of the sidewalk café.



   (H)   Tables, chairs and other furnishings that remain on the
sidewalk at times when the business is not in operation shall be secured in a
manner that allows clear access from the street equal to or exceeding half of
the frontage of the associated restaurant.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 119.05  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, alcoholic beverages
may be served in approved sidewalk cafés provided that the following
requirements are met.



   (A)   The sidewalk café shall be part of a restaurant and shall
otherwise be authorized, permitted or licensed under the state law and this
code to serve and sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption.



   (B)   The sidewalk café must be included as part of the premises
for which an ABC permit is issued pursuant to state law, for the purpose of
applying and enforcing state laws regarding the sale or consumption of
alcoholic beverages.



   (C)   Signs shall be posted, visible at all exit points from the
sidewalk café, that it is unlawful to remove alcoholic beverages from the
premises.



   (D)   The restaurant operator shall not have violated any law,
regulation or ordinance relating to the possession, sale, transportation or
consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances for the three
years preceding the commencement of the sale of alcoholic beverages at the
sidewalk café.



   (E)   No outdoor bar is allowed within the sidewalk café, nor shall
outdoor preparation of alcoholic beverages be permitted, except that
unfortified wine may be decanted or beer poured at a table as part of a meal.



   (F)   Any alcoholic beverages served and consumed at an approved
sidewalk café must be served and consumed in glasses or cups.



   (G)   Any alcoholic beverages served and consumed at an approved
sidewalk café can only be served to and consumed by a customer.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 119.06  DENIAL.



   A permit may be denied if it is found that the application does not
demonstrate compliance with this section and/or that the granting of the
permit would not be in the public interest. Any applicant denied a permit to
operate a sidewalk café shall receive a written statement outlining the
grounds on which the denial is based. The applicant may appeal the denial of
the permit to city, and City Council may take action as it shall find
necessary. The finding and determination of City Council shall constitute
final action by the city.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 119.07  TERMS; TRANSFER.



   Permits for a sidewalk café issued in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter shall be issued for the period beginning July 1 or thereafter
and expiring June 30 of each year. If a permittee discontinues the restaurant
operation or the sidewalk café, no refund of the permit fee shall be made.
Permits issued pursuant to this section shall not be transferable or
assignable. Permits may prohibit operation of sidewalk cafés during special
events and contain other conditions and restrictions as may be necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 119.08  PERMIT SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The City Manager may suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
section if he or she finds one or more of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   Violation of any provision of the County Health
Department regulations or of this chapter;



      (2)   Violation of any law, regulation or ordinance regarding
the possession, sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages
or controlled substances;



      (3)   Operation of the sidewalk café in a manner as to create
a public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare; specifically including failure to keep the café area clean and free
of refuse; and/or



      (4)   Operation of the restaurant or sidewalk café in
violation of any city, county or state law, ordinance or regulation.



   (B)   The permit suspension shall take effect immediately upon
delivery of a citation to the restaurant operator or, in his or her absence,
the person with supervisory authority over the operation of the restaurant
and shall be reinstated once the City Manager has verified that the condition
has been remedied.



   (C)   The restaurant operator may request a hearing contesting the
suspension of the permit by filing written notice thereof upon the City
Manager. The hearing shall be held and a written decision rendered within 15
days of the date of receipt. The decision of the City Manager may be appealed
to the City Council by written notice thereof filed with the City Clerk
within 15 days of the date of receipt of the decision.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



§ 119.09  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Manager may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this
section if he or she finds that the restaurant operator has:



      (1)   Deliberately misrepresented or provided false
information in the permit application;



      (2)   Violated any provision of the County Health Department
regulations or of this chapter;



      (3)   Violated any law, regulation or ordinance regarding the
possession, sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages or
controlled substances;



      (4)   Operated the sidewalk café in a manner as to create a
public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare; specifically including failure to keep the café area clean and free
of refuse;



      (5)   Failed to maintain any health, business or other permit
or license required by law or the operation of a restaurant business;



      (6)   Failed to consistently maintain the sidewalk café in a
neat and trash free manner; and/or



      (7)   Operated the restaurant or sidewalk café in violation
of any city, county or state law, ordinance or regulation.



   (B)   In the event the City Manager determines good grounds exist
for the revocation of a permit issued under this chapter, he or she shall
provide the restaurant operator a notice to show cause, stating with
particularity the grounds therefor, why the sidewalk café permit should not
be revoked. The restaurant operator shall be provided an opportunity for a
hearing, following which the City Manager shall render an order in writing.
The restaurant operator may appeal any order by filing a written appeal with
the City Clerk within 15 days of receipt thereof. City Council shall conduct
a hearing on the appeal and render its decision thereon. The finding and
determination of City Council shall constitute final action by the city.



(Ord. passed 8-12-13)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST CITY REGULATIONS



      131.   PARADES AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS



      132.   CONCEALED WEAPONS RESTRICTED



      133.   YOUTH PROTECTION REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST CITY REGULATIONS



Section



   130.01   Discharge of firearms and air rifles prohibited; exception



   130.02   Attempts; aiding and abetting



   130.03   Playing in streets prohibited



   130.04   Interference with or impersonation of city officials



   130.05   Damaging, tampering with, or trespassing on property



   130.06   Halloween visitations



   130.07   Park regulations



   130.08   Loitering



   130.09   Loitering for the purpose of drug activity



 



   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Youth protection regulations, see Ch. 133



§ 130.01  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND AIR RIFLES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, with the exception of a police
officer under the direction of the Police Chief, to discharge any firearm,
gun, pistol, air gun, or air rifle, or any similar device within the city, on
or off such person's premises.



('75 Code, § 11-1) (Ord. 122, passed 1-4-71; Am. Ord. 92-4-1, passed
4-13-92)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   City Council's authority to enact, see G.S. § 160A-189 and 160A-190



§ 130.02  ATTEMPTS; AIDING AND ABETTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit any
act which is prohibited by this code  or other ordinance or by any rule,
regulation, order, or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to authority
thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet the
commission or attempted commission of any act which is prohibited by this
code or other ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order, or notice duly
promulgated or given pursuant to authority thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to avoid the
doing of any act which is required by this code or other ordinance, or by any
rule, regulation, order, or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to
authority thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet the
avoidance or the attempted avoidance of any act required by this code, or
other ordinance, or by any rule, regulation, order, or notice duly
promulgated or given pursuant to authority thereof.



('75 Code, § 11-2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  PLAYING IN STREETS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the playing of a game
or group sports activity in any of the public streets within the city; and it
shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of any child under 16 years of
age to knowingly permit his child or ward to play a game or group sports
activity in any of the public streets in the city.



('75 Code, § 11-3) (Ord. 55, passed 6-3-46)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  INTERFERENCE WITH OR IMPERSONATION OF CITY OFFICIALS.



   (A)   Interference.    No person shall negligently or willfully
interfere with, hinder, or obstruct any officer or employee of the city who
is engaged in, en route to, or returning from the performance of official
duty, whether such interference, hindrance, or obstruction be by threat,
assault, or otherwise.



('75 Code, § 11-4)



   (B)   Impersonation. No person shall falsely represent himself to be
an officer or employee of the city, or without proper authority, wear or
display any uniform, insignia, or credential which identifies any city
officer or employee; nor shall any person without proper authority assume to
act as an officer or employee of the city, whether to gain access to
premises, obtain information, perpetrate a fraud, or for any other purpose;
provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a private
citizen from making a lawful citizen's arrest for felony or breach of peace
committed in his presence.



('75 Code, § 11-5)



   (C)   Courtesy.



      (1)   City officers and employees shall be courteous in their
official transactions with the public, and they shall conduct themselves in
the performance of their official duties so as to not knowingly deprive any
person, at the time and under the circumstances then and there existing, of
any lawful right or benefit to which such person may be entitled. Any person
who feels aggrieved by the conduct of any town officer or employee in
violation of this division (C)(1) is hereby invited to bring such matter to
the attention of such officer's or employee's department head, or the City
Manager, without prejudice to any other recourse to which the aggrieved
person may be entitled.



      (2)   Members of the public, in turn, should be courteous in
their transactions with city officers and employees, and it shall be unlawful
for any person to knowingly taunt, deride, jeer, or otherwise debase or
insult, whether by act, word or gesture, any city officer or employee at any
time or place while such officer or employee is lawfully engaged in the
performance of official duty.



('75 Code, § 11-6)



Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Restricting or obstructing public officers, see G.S. § 14-223.



§ 130.05  DAMAGING, TAMPERING WITH, OR TRESPASSING ON PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly use,
tamper with, render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest, or
other- wise interfere with any books, records, furniture, equipment, gear,
apparatus, tools, or other items of personal property belonging to, leased
to, or used by the city or any agency thereof.



('75 Code, § 11-7) (Ord. 36, passed 10-20-52)



   (B)   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly trespass
upon or damage, deface, molest, or otherwise interfere with any real property
belonging to, leased to, or used by the city or any agency thereof.



('75 Code, § 11-8) (Ord. 36, passed 10-20-52)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit on the floor of
City Hall any cigarette or cigar butt, or ashes therefrom, or to spit on the
floors, or to write on or otherwise deface the walls of the City Hall.



('75 Code, § 11-9) (Ord. 74, passed 9-15-55)



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  HALLOWEEN VISITATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on or in any
public place in the city for the purpose of making “trick or treat”
visitations, or to go on or in any private premises for such purpose, except
as provided in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply between the hours
of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on each Halloween night.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit his or
her child or ward to violate the provisions of this section.



('75 Code, § 11-11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  PARK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or drive a
minibike, motorcycle, automobile, or any other type of motorized vehicle in
any public park, except on roadways especially laid out and developed for
such purposes and specifically desig- nated by the City Manager. ('75 Code,
§ 11-12.1) (Ord. 1, passed  - -  )



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring alcoholic
beverages, illegal drugs, beer, or wine into a park, or other recreational
area.  ('75 Code, § 11-12.2) (Ord. 2, passed 9-4-51)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



      (1)   Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any swimming pool, wading pool, fountain, pond or
lake, stream, bay, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any
tributary system, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the
pollution of such waters.



      (2)   Dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other
trash anywhere on the park grounds; except, that such matter may be placed in
proper receptacles where provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all
such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.



('75 Code, § 11-12.3) (Ord. 3, passed 9-19-49)



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to engage in  disorderly conduct of any
kind in any city park or recreational area.



('75 Code, § 11-12.4) (Ord. 4, passed  - -  ) Penalty, see 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Consumption and possession of alcohol on municipal property, see §§
112.01 through 112.04



§ 130.08  LOITERING.



   (A)   No person shall loiter at any place within the city and while
so loitering, insult, threaten, intimidate, or in any manner interfere with,
or impede the progress of, any other person then and there conducting himself
or herself in a lawful and orderly manner.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the term LOITER shall
include, but is not restricted to, standing, lounging, sitting, or lying
about idly, whether alone or in the company of other loiterers.



('75 Code, § 11-12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.09  LOITERING FOR THE PURPOSE OF DRUG ACTIVITY.



   (A)   Definitions.   For the purpose of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR, SELLER.  A person who has, within
the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within
this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of
the substances referred to in the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act,
G.S. Ch. 90, Article 5, or has been convicted of any violation of any
sub-stantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of
any other state, or of federal law.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza,
park, driveway, parking lot or transportation facility, or the doorways and
entranceways to any building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor
vehicle in or on any of those places, or any property owned by the city.



   (B)   Prohibited activity. It shall be unlawful for a person to
remain or wander about in a public place in a manner as to raise a reasonable
suspicion that the person is about to engage in or is engaged in an unlawful
drug-related activity and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to
engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North Carolina  Controlled
Substances Act, G.S. Ch. 90, Article 5. Such circumstances shall include, but
not be limited to, any one or more or all of the following:



      (1)   Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping, or attempting to stop
passers-by, or repeatedly attempting to engage passers-by in conversation.



      (2)   Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicles.



      (3)   Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of other
persons.



      (4)   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or
seller.



      (5)   Such person engages in an unlawful drug related activity.



      (6)   Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from
passers-by, whether on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects.



      (7)   Such person takes flight upon the approach or appearance
of a police officer.



      (8)   Such person is at a location frequented by persons who
use, possess, or sell drugs.



      (9)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful
drug user, possessor, or seller, or is known to be or have been involved in
drug-related activities.



(Ord. 94-6-3, passed 6-13-94)  Penalty, see § 130.99 



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not already provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating § 130.03 shall be fined
$5.  ('75 Code, § 11-3) (Ord. 55, passed 6-3-46)



   (C)   In addition to or in lieu of any other penalty herein provided
by this code, or the General Statutes of North Carolina, violation of the
provisions of § 130.09 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the
amount of $100 per violation to be recovered by the city in a civil action in
the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a period
of 72 hours after the offender has been cited for viola-tion. Any action to
recover the civil penalty may be joined in an action for appropriate
equitable remedy, including injunctions and orders of abatement, and
including an action to recover damages owing to the city by reason of
expenses incurred by the city in abating, correcting, limiting, and otherwise
dealing with the offending action. (Ord. 94-6-3, passed 6-13-94)



   (D)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined, as determined by
the court for each offense. No court conviction shall prevent the city from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.



(Ord. passed 3-14-05)



CHAPTER 131:  PARADES AND PUBLIC DEMONSTRATIONS



Section



   131.01   Purpose



   131.02   Definitions



   131.03   Permit required; exceptions



   131.04   Application for permit



   131.05   Granting or denial of permit



   131.06   Conditions of permit and required compliance



   131.07   Authority of City Council to require posting of bond



   131.08   Weapons; animals



   131.09   Dispersal of riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies



   131.10   Molesting lawful paraders and demonstrators prohibited



§ 131.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that it is necessary for the good government and
the peace, safety, health, and welfare of the city and the inhabitants
thereof, as well as to maintain law and order and to provide for the free and
orderly flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the city streets and
sidewalks and in the public places of the city, to prohibit parades and
demonstrations within the city unless a city permit to use the city streets,
sidewalks, and public places for such purposes has first been granted.



('75 Code, § 6-2)



§ 131.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEMONSTRATION.  A group of three or more persons assembled together
and acting in concert to then and there call attention of the public to their
opposition to, support of, or  position with respect to any political,
social, or other controversial subject; but nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to apply to persons lawfully engaged in picketing in an orderly
manner.



   PARADE.  Any PARADE, march, or other procession of six or more persons
for the purpose of calling attention of the public thereto.



('75 Code, § 6-1)



§ 131.03  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor, organize, direct, lead,
or participate in any parade or demonstration upon any street or sidewalk or
upon or in any public place within the city unless a permit has been granted
to hold such parade or demonstration; provided, that this chapter shall not
apply to parades, processions, or convoys of any component of the armed
forces of the United States or this state or to any governmental
organization, or to any funeral procession.



('75 Code, § 6-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. 



   (A)   Any person desiring to sponsor, organize, direct, or lead a
parade or demonstration upon any street or sidewalk, or in any public place
within the city, shall file an application for a parade or demonstration
permit with the City Clerk; and in such application shall be set forth:



      (1)   The date and hour for the assembling of the participants
in such parade or demonstration, and the expected duration thereof.



      (2)   The streets, sidewalks, and public places over and upon
which the parade or demonstration is to take place.



      (3)   Whether the parade or demonstration is to be conducted
on foot, or with animals or vehicles, or any combination thereof, and the
number of persons, vehicles, and animals expected to participate.



      (4)   The purpose of the parade or demonstration.



      (5)   The names and addresses of the actual sponsors of such
parade or demonstration, and the organization or organizations, if any, of
which the expected participants are members.



      (6)   The name and address of the person who shall be
responsible for the conduct thereof and for compliance with all applicable
provisions of law, this Code and other ordinances by participants in such
parade or demonstration.



      (7)   Such other information as the City Council may require.



('75 Code, § 6-4)



   (B)   Each application for a parade or demonstration permit shall be
signed and sworn to by at least one person, who shall be the person named in
the application as the one who shall be in charge of such parade or
demonstration and who shall be responsible for the conduct thereof and for
compliance with all applicable provisions of law, this Code, and other
ordinances by participants in such parade or demonstration.



('75 Code, § 6-5)



§ 131.05  GRANTING OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Upon the filing of a completed and properly signed and sworn
application for a parade or demonstration permit, the City Clerk shall
transmit copies thereof promptly to all members of the City Council.



   (B)   In lieu of division (A), the City Manager may exercise the
authority to issue permits for parades upon receipt of application, as
spelled out in § 131.04,  from the  City Clerk.  This authority shall
extend only to parades or demonstrations sponsored by the city residents and
in which no special conditions need be imposed beyond routine traffic
control. The City Manager shall have the right to refer any parade or
demonstration application to the full Council for approval should he feel
that would be in the best interest of the city, in which case the procedure
spelled out in division (A) shall apply.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be part of
each parade or demonstration permit, whether or not specifically stated in
the permit.



('75 Code, § 6-6)



§ 131.06  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT AND REQUIRED COMPLIANCE.



   In granting a permit pursuant to this chapter the City Council may
include therein such prohibitions, conditions, restrictions, and limitations
as it may consider appropriate, under the general police powers of the city,
to safeguard the good government and the peace, safety, health and welfare of
the city and the inhabitants thereof, as well as to maintain law and order
and acceptable traffic conditions within the city, and it shall be unlawful
for any person covered by the permit to violate or fail to comply with any
such prohibition, condition, restriction, or limitation.



('75 Code, § 6-7)



§ 131.07  AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL TO REQUIRE POSTING OF BOND.



   Prior to the granting of a permit pursuant to this chapter, and as a
condition precedent for the granting of such permit, the City Council may
require that the person named in the application as the one to be responsible
for the conduct of the parade or demonstration to give bond to the city, in
such amount and with such surety as the City Council may consider necessary,
conditioned upon the full satisfaction of all claims, judgments, and decrees
which may result by reason of any negligent or unlawful act or omission of
any person participating in such parade  or demonstration  and included
within the permit; with the further condition that he will save the city
harmless from all claims and demands whatever which may arise by reason of
such parade or demonstration; and with the further condition that he will pay
the city for all extra expenses incurred for clearing the streets, sidewalks,
and public places of litter and waste matter resulting from such parade or
demonstration, and for the cleaning and repair of public property which may
be soiled or damaged by acts of vandalism during the period of organizing and
holding the parade or demonstration, and within the six hours thereafter when
such acts of vandalism are reasonably attributable to the holding of such
parade or demonstration.



('75 Code, § 6-8)



§ 131.08  WEAPONS; ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter shall carry any dangerous weapon,
provided that the City Council may, in the exercise of sound discretion,
include in such permit such variations from this division as it may consider
appropriate for members of color guards, drill teams, lodges, and other
persons by whom the display of weapons upon the occasion of such parade or
demonstration would not arouse anxiety on the part of spectators or
constitute a threat to the maintenance of law and order and the preservation
of the public peace.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or suffer to be
caused any animal to participate, accompany, or be ridden upon in any parade
or demonstration as defined in this chapter without first having obtained a
permit in addition to the permit required by § 138.04.



   (C)   Any person desiring to cause any animal to participate,
accompany, or be ridden upon in any duly permitted parade or public place
within the city shall first apply for a permit with the City Clerk to allow
such animal or animals to so participate, accompany, or be ridden therein;
and in such application shall set forth:



      (1)   The type and number of animals for which the applicant
is requesting a permit.



      (2)   The name, address, qualifications, and experience of
each person who is in control of each animal.



      (3)   The name, address, telephone number and such other
information as the city may deem reasonably appropriate of the person who is
responsible for the animals and for compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and the instructions or special conditions contained in any permit
issued pursuant to this chapter.



      (4)   A special events public liability policy effective for
the day of the parade or demonstration with policy limits not less than
$1,000,000 naming the city as a named insured providing coverage to the city
as well as any member of the public who suffers injury or loss as a result of
any act of any animal participated in the parade or demonstration pursuant to
any permit issued hereunder.



      (5)   Each application shall be signed and sworn to by at
least one person, who shall be the person named in the application as the one
who is responsible for the animals and for compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance complying
with the provisions of division (4) of this subsection.



   (D)   Applications for a permit to allow an animal or animals to
participate, accompany or be ridden upon in a parade or demonstration shall
be submitted at least 30 days prior to the parade or demonstration, and shall
be accompanied by the information and evidence of insurance set forth in
division (C) hereof. Except as otherwise herein provided, the procedures set
forth in §§ 131.05, 131.06 and 131.07 shall apply to animal permits.



   (E)   Exception. Domestic dogs kept by certified police or fire
departments as “police ”or “fire” dogs, when accompanied by qualified
handlers shall be exempt from this section.



   (F)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor punishable as such pursuant to G.S. 14-4.



('75 Code, § 6-10)  (Am. Ord. passed 11-11-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.09  DISPERSAL OF RIOTS, ROUTS, AND UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.



   Parades and demonstrations held pursuant to a permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter which become, or which reasonably appear to
present an imminent threat to becoming a riot, rout, or unlawful assembly
shall be dispersed forthwith by the city police or by any law enforcement
officer who may be present, and persons who are commanded to disperse by any
law enforcement officer shall promptly obey such command and peacefully
disengage themselves from such parade or demonstration and leave the scene
thereof, and persons who fail to obey such command shall be subject to
immediate arrest.



('75 Code, § 6-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.10  MOLESTING LAWFUL PARADERS AND DEMONSTRATORS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall hinder, molest, insult, or harass any parader or
demonstrator lawfully parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter.



('75 Code, § 6-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 132:  CONCEALED WEAPONS RESTRICTED



Section




Posting of Signs Prohibiting the
Carrying of Concealed Weapons




   132.01   Posting of signs required



   132.02   Location of signs



POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING THE
CARRYING OF CONCEALED WEAPONS



§ 132.01  POSTING OF SIGNS REQUIRED.



   The City Manager is hereby authorized and instructed to post
conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within each park and each
building or portion of a building owned, leased as lessee, operated,
occupied, managed, or controlled by the city, as well as the appurtenant
premises to such building, indicating that carrying a concealed handgun is
prohibited therein.



(Ord. 95-11-2, passed 11-13-95)



§ 132.02  LOCATION OF SIGNS.



   Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the exterior of each
entrance by which the general public can access the building. The City
Manager shall exercise discretion in determining the number and appropriate
location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises and parks.



(Ord. 95-11-2, passed 11-13-95)



CHAPTER 133:  YOUTH PROTECTION REGULATIONS



Section



   133.01   Purpose



   133.02   Definitions



   133.03   Offenses



   133.04   Exceptions



   133.05   Defense



   133.06   Enforcement



 



   133.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Playing in streets prohibited, see § 130.03



   Halloween visitations,  see § 130.06



   Loitering, see § 130.08



§ 133.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect juveniles from victimization
and exposure to criminal activity by establishing a curfew for juveniles
under the age of 18 years in the city. The Youth Protection Ordinance is
intended to reinforce and promote the role of the parent in raising and
guiding children, and promote the health, safety, and welfare of both
juveniles and adults by creating an environment offering better protection
and security for all concerned.



(Ord. 97-3-1, passed 3-10-97)



§ 133.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following works and phrases shall
have the following meanings:



   DIRECT ROUTE.  The shortest reasonable path of travel or a commonly
used route to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the
way.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or
death. This term also shall include any action that is reasonably necessary
in order to respond to the medical needs of a family member of the juvenile
regardless of whether the juvenile's action is taken in order to prevent
death or serious bodily injury.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any privately owned place of business operated for
profit to which the public has access or is invited including but not limited
to any place of amusement or entertainment.



   GUARDIAN.  A person who is court-appointed to be the guardian of a
juvenile.



   JUVENILE.  Any person under the age of 18 years.



   OWNER/OPERATOR.  Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation, operating, managing or conducting any establishment, including
the employees, members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



   PARENT.  A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster
parent or step-parent of another person, or a person to whom legal custody
has been given by court order.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place that is generally open to and used by the
public or a substantial group of the public, whether it be publicly or
privately owned, including but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, highways,
alleys, rights of way, public vehicular areas and parking lots,
transportation facilities, theaters, restaurants, shops, bowling alleys,
schools and school grounds, places of business and amusement, playgrounds,
parks, similar areas that are open to the public, and other common areas open
to or accessible to the public.



   REMAIN.  To linger or stay in a public place, or to fail to leave the
premises when requested to do so by a police officer, or to fail to leave the
premises of an establishment when requested to do so by the owner/operator or
employee of the premises.



   RESTRICTED HOURS.  The time of night referred to herein is based upon
the prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern
Daylight Savings Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the
city. Restricted hours shall mean:



      (1)   11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and



      (2)   1:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.



(Ord. 97-3-1, passed 3-10-97)



§ 133.03  OFFENSES.



   Except as provided by § 133.04, the following offenses constitute a
violation of this chapter:



   (A)   A juvenile commits an offense by being present in or remaining
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
during the restricted hours.



   (B)   A parent or guardian of a juvenile commits an offense if he
knowingly permits, or by insufficient control, allows the juvenile to remain
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
during the restricted hours. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that
a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of
a juvenile in that parent's legal custody. This requirement is intended to
hold a neglectful or careless parent up to a reasonable community standard of
parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no
defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct
or whereabouts of such juvenile.



   (C)   The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he knowingly allows a juvenile to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during the restricted hours. The term
“knowingly” includes knowledge that an operator or employer should
reasonably be expected to have con- cerning the patrons of an establishment.
The standard for “knowingly” shall be applied through an objective test:
whether a reasonable person in the operator's or employee's position should
have know that the patron was a juvenile in violation of this chapter.



   (D)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person 16
years of age or older to aid or abet a juvenile in the violation of division
(A).



   (E)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a parent or
guardian to refuse to take custody during the restricted hours of a juvenile
for whom the parent or guardian is responsible.



(Ord. 97-3-1, passed 3-10-97)



§ 133.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   A juvenile who is in a public place or establishment during the
restricted hours shall not be in violation of this chapter if the juvenile is:



   (A)   Accompanied by his parent or guardian.



   (B)   Accompanied by an adult 18 years of age or older authorized by
the parent or guardian of such juvenile to take the parent or guardian's
place in accompanying the juvenile for a designated period of time and
purpose within a specified area.



   (C)   On an errand, using a direct route, at the direction of the
juvenile's parent or guardian until the hour of 12:30 a.m.



   (D)   In a motor vehicle with parental consent engaged in interstate
travel through the city or originating or terminating in the city.



   (E)   Traveling in a motor vehicle with a parent or guardian, or
traveling in a motor vehicle with an adult 18 years of  age or older
authorized by the parent or guardian of such juvenile to take the parent or
guardian's place in accompanying the juvenile for a designated period of time
and purpose with a specified area.



   (F)   Engaged in a lawful employment activity, or using a direct
route to or from a place of employment.



   (G)   Reacting or responding to an emergency.



   (H)   Attending or traveling to or from, by direct route, an
official school, religious, or recreational activity that is supervised by
adults and sponsored by a public or private school, the city or other
government entity, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
accepts responsibility for the juvenile.



   (I)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech,
and the right of assembly.



   (J)   Married or emancipated.



   (K)   When authorized, by special permit from the Chief of Police or
his designee carried on the person of the juvenile thus authorized, as
follows. When necessary nighttime activities of a juvenile may be
inadequately provided for by other provisions of this chapter, then recourse
may be had to the Chief of Police, or his designee, either for a regulation
as provided in division (L) or for a special permit as the circumstances
warrant. Upon the findings of reasonable necessity for the use of a public
place to the extent warranted by a written application signed by a juvenile,
and by a parent of the juvenile, if feasible, stating (1) the name, age and
address of the juvenile; (2) the name, address, and telephone number of a
parent thereof; (3) the height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair and other
physical characteristics of the juvenile; (4) the necessity that requires the
juvenile to remain upon a public place during the restricted hours otherwise
applicable; (5) the public place; and (6) the beginning and ending of the
period of time involved by date and hour, the Chief of Police or his designee
may grant a permit in writing for the juvenile's use of a public place at
such hours as in the opinion of the Chief of Police may reasonably be
necessary and consistent with the purposes of this chapter.



   (L)   When authorized, by regulation issued by the Chief of Police
or his designee in other similar cases of reasonable necessity, similarly
handled as set forth in division (K) but adapted to reasonably necessary
nighttime activities of more juveniles than can readily be dealt with on an
individual special permit basis. Normally such regulation by the Chief of
Police or his designee permitting use of public places should be issued
sufficiently in advance to permit appropriate publicity through news media
and through other agencies such as the schools, and shall define the
activity, the scope of the use of the public places permitted, the period of
time involved not to extend more than one hour beyond the time for
termination of the activity, and the reason for finding that the regulation
is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 97-3-1, passed 3-10-97)



§ 133.05  DEFENSE.



   It is a defense to prosecution under § 133.03(C) that the owner,
operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police
department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment
during the restricted hours and refused to leave.



(Ord. 97-3-1, passed 3-10-97)



§ 133.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   First offense.



      (1)   Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter,
a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being
in the public place or establishment during restricted hours.



      (2)   The officer shall not prepare a juvenile arrest report,
issue a citation, or make an arrest under this chapter unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any
response and other circumstance, no exception or defense in §§ 133.04 and
133.05 is present.



      (3)   The police officer shall escort the juvenile  home to
his parent or guardian.  The officer will inform the parent/guardian in
writing of the acknowledging that they understand the chapter and agree to
abide by the chapter.  The minor will then be released to the custody of the
parent/guardian.



   (B)   Second offense.



      (1)   Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter
a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being
in the public place or establishment during restricted hours.



      (2)   The police officer will ascertain whether this is a
second offense of this chapter by the juvenile.



      (3)   The juvenile will be transported to the Police
Department and held until the parents or guardians can be notified to pick up
the juvenile.



(Ord. 97-3-1, passed 3-10-97)



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A juvenile who violates any provision of the chapter is
subject to being adjudicated delinquent.  The Court may, in its discretion,
impose any dispositional alternative(s) that are provided in the North
Carolina Juvenile Code for any juvenile who is delinquent.



   (B)   Any person other than a juvenile who violates any provision of
this chapter after first warning shall be subject to a civil penalty in the
amount of $50 as allowed by § 10.99(G) of this Code.



   (C)   Any person other than a juvenile who violates any provision of
this chapter a third or subsequent times shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100, and imprisonment in the
discretion of the court in accordance with G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. 97-3-1, passed 3-10-97)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING AND MINIMUM HOUSING REGULATIONS



      151.   MOBILE HOMES



      152.   DRAINAGE REGULATIONS



      153.   WATERSHED PROTECTION



      154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      155.   ZONING CODE



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING AND MINIMUM HOUSING REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   150.001   Fire district



   150.002   Numbering of buildings or dwellings



   150.003   Territory within perimeter



   150.004   Joint enforcement




Adoption of Regulatory Codes
by Reference




   150.015   Scope



   150.016   Building Code adopted



   150.017   Plumbing Code adopted



   150.018   Heating Code adopted



   150.019   Electrical Code adopted



   150.020   Gas Code adopted



   150.021   Residential Building Code adopted



   150.022   Mobile Home Code adopted



   150.023   Compliance with codes



   150.024   Noncompliance with codes



   150.025   Copies of codes filed with Clerk




Permits




   150.035   Zoning compliance permit



   150.036   Building permit



   150.037   Permit fees; payment prerequisite to issuance



   150.038   Permits not to be issued for unopened streets; exception



   150.039   Agreement to repair damage to streets or sidewalks




Moving of Buildings




   150.050   Permit required



   150.051   Application for permit; fee



   150.052   Insurance



   150.053   Building permits; minimum housing standards




Minimum Standard Housing Code




   150.065   Short title



   150.066   Exercise of police power; finding; purpose



   150.067   Code declared remedial



   150.068   Scope



   150.069   Definitions



   150.070   Existing buildings



   150.071   Maintenance of buildings



   150.072   Housing Inspector; duties and powers



   150.073   Utility services to substandard buildings or dwelling units



   150.074   Issuance of permit prior to inspection of substandard
buildings or dwelling units



   150.075   Minimum standards of fitness



   150.076   Certificate of compliance



   150.077   Plumbing systems and equipment



   150.078   Ventilation



   150.079   Electrical systems



   150.080   Heating



   150.081   Space; use and location



   150.082   Safe and sanitary maintenance



   150.083   Insects, rodents, and infestations



   150.084   Structural condition



   150.085.1   Rooming house and dwelling unit minimum standards



   150.085.2   Abandoned structures



   150.086   Responsibilities of owners and occupants



   150.087   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing



   150.088   Procedure after hearing



   150.089   Civil penalties; recovery of costs



   150.090   Failure to comply with order



   150.091   Appeals from orders of Housing Inspector



   150.092   Petition to Superior Court by owner



   150.093   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   150.094   Conflict with other provisions



   150.095   Fee schedule




Condemnation of Buildings
and Structures Other Than Housing




   150.105   Exercise of police power; finding; purpose



   150.106   Housing Inspector; duties and powers



   150.107   Utility services to dangerous buildings



   150.108   Issuance of permits prior to inspection of dangerous
buildings



   150.109   Preliminary investigation; condemnation; placarding



   150.110   Service of notice



   150.111   Hearing; procedure after hearing



   150.112   Failure to comply with order



   150.113   Appeals from orders of Inspections Superintendent




Inspections Division




   150.125   Creation; appointment of Superintendent; composition



   150.126   Duties; responsibilities and powers



   150.127   Conflicts of interest



 



   150.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  FIRE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Fire district established. The fire limits of the city shall
be and remain the area included within the following boundary: Beginning at
the intersection of the southerly margin of the alley in Block No. 14,
Section 3, and the easterly margin of 13th Street; thence southerly along
13th Street, to the northerly margin of the alley in Block No. 117 in Section
1; thence easterly along said alley to the westerly margin of 11th Street;
thence northerly along 11th Street to the alley in Block No. 13 in Section 3;
thence westerly along the southerly margin of said alley and the southerly
margin of the alley in Block No. 14 in Section 3, to the beginning.



   (B)   Prohibitions and restrictions.



      (1)   No frame or wooden building shall be hereafter erected,
altered, repaired or moved within the fire limits of the city, except upon
permit of the Building Inspector, approved by the State Insurance
Commissioner.



      (2)   No billboard or similar structure shall be erected or
maintained within the fire limits of the city in the construction of which
any wood or other combustible material is used.



      (3)   All wiring within the fire limits shall be encased in
approved rigid conduits or electrical metallic tubing except on finished
structures wherein approved metal raceways may be used. The Building
Inspector may make exceptions of special applications where suitable
precautionary means are followed.



      (4)   All other required provisions of the State Building Code
(all violations) relating to fire districts shall apply.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.002  NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS OR DWELLINGS.



   (A)   Assignment of numbers. The Planning Director in consultation
with the postmaster shall have the authority to assign and reassign numbers
in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Numbering system. For the purpose of providing for a uniform
numbering system, the following axis system is hereby established: Twelfth
Street is hereby designated as the north-south axis. Virginia Avenue from the
east city limit running west to the intersection at Skyland Drive then
projecting to Mickley Avenue, then along Mickley to the southern railway then
continuing west along the southern railway  to  the west  city limit 
shall  be the east-west axis.  Addresses  actually on  Mickley Avenue 
shall be on  the  north-south axis.  Streets and alleys running 
generally  north and  south shall be numbered  from  the  east-west 
axis consecutively to the  corporate  limits of  the extremity of  such
avenue,  alley  or street.  Avenues,  streets, or alleys running
generally east and west shall be numbered from the east-west axis
consecutively to the corporate limits of the extremity of such avenue, alley
or street. Avenues, streets, or alleys running generally east and west shall
be numbered from the north-south axis in the same manner. Whenever possible,
100 numbers shall be allowed to each block so that the number of each
consecutive block shall commence with consecutive hundreds and one.



   (C)   Owners to display numbers. Every property owner of improved
property shall display in a con- spicuous place on the property the number
assigned, and such numbers shall be clearly visible from the street.



   (D)   Numbers for future buildings. All residence and business
buildings erected after the adoption of this chapter shall be assigned a
number and shall display such number as provided in division (C) of this
section.



   (E)   Unlawful to deface number. It shall be unlawful for any person
to alter, deface or obscure any number placed on any property in accordance
with this chapter.



   (F)   Any person who violates this section is subject to a civil
penalty as provided in § 150.999 of this chapter, for each violation. Upon
learning that a person has violated any part of this section, the City
Manager or his designee shall first issue a written civil citation that
includes:



      (1)   A description of the activities violating this section
and a statement that the violator has 30 days in which to correct such
violation without penalty.



      (2)   A statement that if the violation is not corrected
within 30 days after the date of service of the warning citation, then the
violator will be issued a second citation assessing him with the penalty
provided in § 150.999 of this chapter.



      (3)   A statement that each day's continued violation shall be
a separate and distinct offense.



      (4)   A statement that if the penalty is not paid within five
working days after the date of service of the citation, the City Attorney
will be instructed to commence a civil action to collect the penalty.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. TC00-8, passed 1-8-01)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



§ 150.003  TERRITORY WITHIN PERIMETER.



   This chapter shall be applicable not only within the corporate limits
of the city, but also within the boundaries of its extraterritorial
jurisdiction estab- lished by the city for the enforcement of municipal
regulatory powers conferred by G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 19, and the Charter of
Bessemer City.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.004  JOINT ENFORCEMENT.



   As allowed for by G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 20, the city may enter into
contracts with the county or any other public agency for the enforcement of
all or any part of this chapter under terms agreeable to the city and the
contracting party.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



ADOPTION OF REGULATORY CODES
BY REFERENCE



§ 150.015  SCOPE.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter and the regulatory codes
herein adopted shall apply to the following:



      (1)   The location, design, materials, equip- ment,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving,
demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such building or structure.



      (2)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of plumbing systems con- sisting of house sewers, building
drains, waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all
fixtures and appurtenances thereof.



      (3)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of mechanical systems consisting  of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment, and
appurtenances thereof.



      (4)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.



   (B)   The adoption of this subchapter and the codes herein adopted
by reference shall constitute a resolution within the meaning of G.S. §
143-138(e), making the regulatory codes herein adopted applic- able to
dwellings and outbuildings used in connection therewith, to apartment
buildings used exclusively as a residence for not more than two families and
to temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes,
not exceeding 20 feet in any direction and not used for living quarters.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.016  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina State Building Code, Volume I, General Construction,
as enacted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as
modified by the cumulative supplements thereto covering amendments passed and
ratified, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein
as the building code of the city to the extent such code is applicable for
safe and stable design, methods of construction, minimum standards, and use
of materials in buildings or structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered,
repaired, or otherwise constructed or reconstructed.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.017  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Plumbing Code (State Building Code, Volume II,
Plumbing) as enacted and published by the North Carolina Building Code
Council and as modified by the cumulative supple- ments thereto and the
amendments adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council, is hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the plumbing code
of the city.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.018  HEATING CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Heating Code (State Building Code, Volume III,
Heating) as adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council
is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the
heating code for the city.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.019  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Electrical (State Building Code, Volume IV,
Electrical), which adopted by reference in the 1976 edition of the National
Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted by
the North Carolina Building Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as
fully as though set forth herein as the electrical code for the city.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.020  GAS CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Gas Code (State Building Code, Volume VI, Gas) as
adopted and published by the N.C. Building Code Council is hereby adopted by
reference as fully as though set forth herein.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.021  RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code as enacted by the
North Carolina Building Inspectors Association, as published by the North
Carolina Building Code Council and as modified by supplements is hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the residential
building code for one-family and two-family residential buildings in the city.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.022  MOBILE HOME CODE ADOPTED.



   The Uniform Standards Code for Mobile Homes as enacted and published by
the North Carolina Department of Insurance and by the North Carolina State
Building Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set
forth herein as the uniform standards code for mobile homes for the city.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.023  COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.



   (A)   All buildings or structures which are here- after constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards, and other
provisions of either the North Carolina State Building Code, General
Construction, Volume I, or the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building
Code, whichever is applicable, or both if both are applicable.



   (B)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation,
occupancy, or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems, or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired, or reconstructed in
accordance  with the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions
of the State Plumbing Code (State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing).



   (C)   All mechanical systems consisting of  heating, ventilating,
air conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel-burning equipment, and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used, and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other
provisions of the State Heating Code (State Building Code, Volume III,
Heating).



   (D)   All electrical wiring, installations, and appurtenances shall
be erected, repaired, used, and maintained in accordance with the minimum
standards, requirements, and other provisions of the State Electrical Code
(State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical).



   (E)   All gas piping, installations, and appur- tenances shall be
erected, repaired, used, and main- tained in accordance with the minimum
standards, requirements, and other provisions of the State Gas Code (State
Building Code, Volume VI, Gas).



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.024  NONCOMPLIANCE WITH CODES.



   The Inspections Superintendent may deal with any building or structure
which does not in his opinion comply with the requirements, minimum
standards, and other provisions of § 150.023 (herein collectively called
noncomplying buildings) as follows:



   (A)   Within the corporate limits of the city. Any such noncomplying
building within the corporate limits of the city may be ordered by the
Inspections Superintendent to be brought into compliance with the
requirements, minimum standards and other pro- visions of § 150.023, or upon
failure of the owner to bring such building or structure into such
compliance, may in some cases be ordered removed or demolished, all according
to the following terms, conditions and procedures:



      (1)   When such noncomplying buildings are used for human
housing, the entire provisions of §§ 150.065 through 150.095 of this
chapter shall apply. A building found pursuant to the procedure of the
Minimum Standard Housing Code to be not complying with the requirements,
minimum standards and other provisions of § 150.023 being hereby deemed to
be unfit for human habitation within the spirit of the Minimum Standard
Housing Code.



      (2)   For all other noncomplying buildings the entire
provisions of §§ 150.105 through 150.113 of this chapter shall apply.



   (B)   Without the corporate limits of the city. Any such
noncomplying building located outside the corporate limits of the city, but
within the city's boundaries of extraterritorial jurisdiction established by
the city for the enforcement of municipal regula- tory powers conferred by
G.S. Ch. 160, Article 19, may be ordered by the Inspections Superintendent to
be brought into compliance with the requirements, minimum standards and other
provisions of § 150.23, or upon failure of the owner to bring such building
or structure into such compliance, may be ordered removed or demolished, all
without regard to whether such building is used for housing or any other use,
and all according to the entire provisions of §§ 150.105 through 150.113 of
this chapter.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.025  COPIES OF CODES FILED WITH CLERK. 



   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted herein, and official
copies of all adopted amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office
of the City Clerk. Such copies shall be the official copies of the codes and
the amendments.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



PERMITS



§ 150.035  ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any new building,
addition, alteration or change in use of any building without first seeking a
zoning compliance permit. The applicant shall provide sufficient information
to ensure compliance with Chapter 155, Zoning Code and Chapter 152, Drainage
Regulations, and any other requirement of the city.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.036  BUILDING PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any new building,
addition, or alteration to any building without first securing a permit from
the Inspections Superintendent of the city or county in cases of the exercise
of joint enforcement as set out in § 151.004 of this chapter.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.037  PERMIT FEES; PAYMENT PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Before obtaining a zoning compliance permit, the applicant
shall pay to the Finance Officer such fees established from time to time by
the City Council.



   (B)   The applicant shall also be responsible to pay such fees for
building permits which shall be in accordance to fee schedules established by
the county and paid to the county.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.038  PERMITS NOT TO BE ISSUED FOR UNOPENED STREETS; EXCEPTION.



   No building permit shall be issued for construc- tion of a building or
a lot that will not have direct vehicular and pedestrian access to a publicly
dedi- cated, opened and maintained street or evidenced by the city's most
recent Powell Bill Map within the City or State Division of Highway Maps
within the ETJ unless otherwise approved by City Council.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.039  AGREEMENT TO REPAIR DAMAGE TO STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.



   Before issuing a zoning compliance permit the Inspections
Superintendent shall require the applicant therefor to submit a signed
statement by the con- tractor, owner or builder, agreeing to repair or
replace any damage to streets, curbs, gutters and sidewalks within the street
right-of-way arising from such proposed construction work.



(Ord. passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



MOVING OF BUILDINGS



§ 150.050  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall move or assist in moving any building on, through, or
across any street, public alley, or over any bridge or paved sidewalk within
the city unless and until a permit therefor has been issued by the
Inspections Superintendent or his designee. If it is determined by the Public
Works Director that the moving of any building may cause serious injury to
the streets or other public improve- ments, the permit shall not be issued
and the building shall not be moved over the streets.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.051  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.



   (A)   Any person desiring a permit under § 150.050 shall file a
completed application with the Inspections Division no later than 30 days
prior to the scheduled date of the move.



   (B)   At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay
a non-refundable fee of $100 to process the application.



      (1)   The application shall be signed by the owner of the
structure, the owner of the lot on which the structure will be placed if the
application is approved, the mover, the general contractor, and any
subcontractor or subsequent contractors, regardless of tier, hired for the
project. The application shall contain the name of a designated individual
who shall be responsible to accompany the structure throughout the duration
of the move, whose duty shall be the prevention of accidents. The person or
persons shall be trained in all pertinent OSHA and other governmental
ordinances, regulations, and statutes applicable to the project.



      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by the following:



         (a)   The applicant's structure moving license issued by
the State Department of Transportation.



         (b)   The applicant's structure moving permit issued by
the NCDOT if the proposed move is to be on state maintained streets.



         (c)   In the event the structure is to be placed within
the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, a map or plat drawn by a
registered land surveyor showing the dimensions of the lot on which the
structure is intended to be placed, the intended location of the structure on
the lot, the front, rear and side distances of the structure from lot lines,
and all zoning setback lines for the applicable zone, as well as all other
information necessary to determine compliance with the zoning ordinances of
the city.



         (d)   Current, valid certificates of insurance
evidencing worker's compensation coverage and general and business auto
liability coverage naming the city as an additional insured, as set forth in
§ 150.052.



         (e)   A certificate from the Public Works Director that
the proposed route of the move, which may occur only between 12:01 a.m.
Saturday and 11:59 p.m. Sunday, or as otherwise approved by the Housing
Inspector, will not cause serious injury to the streets or other public
improvements of the city. In the event that the Public Works Director
determines that the structure cannot be moved without causing serious injury
to the public streets or other improvements, no permit shall be issued, and
the structure shall not be moved over the city's streets.



         (f)   A certificate from the Housing Inspections
Superintendent stating that the records of the city indicate that the
structure will not be placed on land owned, leased, managed or otherwise
controlled by any person, firm, corporation or other entity which owns,
manages, leases, or otherwise controls properties within the city which are,
at the time of application, in violation of the minimum housing or building
codes or public nuisance ordinances. No permit shall be issued to any
applicant who is a person, firm, corporation, or other entity which owns,
manages, leases, or otherwise controls substandard properties which, at the
time of the application, are in violation of the minimum housing and building
codes or public nuisance codes, or who proposes to move a structure to land
owned, leased, managed or otherwise controlled by any person, firm,
corporation or other entity which owns, manages, leases, or otherwise
controls properties within the city, which are in violation of the minimum
housing and building codes or public nuisance codes at the time of the
application or a permit.



         (g)   Any other documentation and information as may be
required by the Inspections Superintendent to be necessary to insure that the
move will be conducted safely and in compliance with applicable law.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-00)



§ 150.052  INSURANCE.



   No permit for moving a structure through or into the city shall be
issued unless the applicant has first presented valid current certificates of
insurance evidencing policies and coverage for the move in the amounts
indicated as follows:



   (A)   Worker's compensation.  The applicant shall present a current
certificate of worker's compensation insurance bearing the applicant's name.
For structure moving operators employing fewer than three persons, a
voluntary compensation endorsement shall be required. Coverage must include
employer's liability with a limit of $100,000 for each accident, $100,000
bodily injury by disease for each employee, and $500,000 bodily injury by
disease policy limit.



   (B)   Comprehensive general liability.  Coverage shall have a
minimum limit of $3,000,000 per occurrence, combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage liability. This shall include contractual
liability. The city shall be included as an additional insured.



   (C)   Business auto liability.  Coverage shall have a minimum limit
of $3,000,000 per occurrence, combined single limit for bodily injury
liability and property damage liability. Coverage shall include owned
vehicles, hired and non-owned vehicles and employee non-ownership. The city
shall be included as an additional insured.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-00)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.053  BUILDING PERMITS; MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS.



   (A)   A building permit and all related permits shall be required
for the restoration of a structure under this subchapter. Those permits shall
expire and not be renewable after 90 days from the date of issuance if the
work authorized by the permit has not commenced. The structure must be in
compliance with the minimum housing standards of this subchapter within 90
days of the date of the relocation of the structure, together with any
extensions as may be granted by the Housing Inspector for good cause shown.



   (B)   Penalties for violation of this section may be assessed, as
appropriate, against the applicant, the general contractor, the structure
mover, the owner of the structure at the time of the move, and (if different)
the owner of the structure at the end of the move. The Inspections
Superintendent shall refuse to issue any further structure moving permits or
building permits or certificates of occupancy to the general contractor, the
structure mover, the structure mover's business, any owner of the structure,
or any lessee or manager of the structure, until all appropriate penalties
have been paid and all provisions of this subchapter have been complied with.
No structure moving permits shall be issued allowing structures to be moved
to properties owned, leased or otherwise controlled by persons, firms,
corporations or other entities which own, lease, manage or otherwise control
any properties, dwellings or other structures that are in violation of the
minimum housing or public nuisance codes.



(Ord. passed 4-10-00)  Penalty, see § 150.999



MINIMUM STANDARD HOUSING CODE



§ 150.065  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as “The Minimum
Standard Housing Code of the City of Bessemer City,” and will be
hereinafter called this subchapter.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.066  EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER; FINDING; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Finding. Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby found and
declared by the City Council that there exists in the city dwellings which
are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the
hazards of fire, accidents and other calamities, lack of ventilation, light
and sanitary facilities, and due to other conditions rendering such dwellings
unsafe or unsanitary, and dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety,
and morals, and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the
city.



   (B)   Purpose. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the city as authorized by G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 19, part 6,
it is the purpose of this subchapter to establish minimum standards of
fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for
human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-444, and to provide
procedures for the repair, closing and demolition of buildings not conforming
to such minimum standards of fitness, as expressly authorized by G.S. §
160A-443.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.067  CODE DECLARED REMEDIAL.



   This code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to
secure the beneficial interests and purposes hereof which are public safety,
health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability,
sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property
from fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair,
removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings, apartment houses,
rooming houses, or buildings, structures, or premises used as such.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.068  SCOPE.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the
construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal and demo- lition of every building or structure or any
appur- tenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.



   (B)   No provision of this code shall be held to deprive any federal
or state agency, or any municipal  authority having jurisdiction, of any
power or authority which it had on the effective date of this subchapter, or
of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it
deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law.



   (C)   The provisions of this code shall apply to all mobile homes
and house trailers used as a residential occupancy in excess of 30 days.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



Cross-reference:



   See Chapter 151, Mobile Homes



§ 150.069  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Whenever the words apartment, apartment house, dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit, premises, or structure are used in the code,
they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words or any part
thereof.



   ALTER or ALTERATION.  Any change or modification in construction or
occupancy.



   APARTMENT.  A room or a suite of rooms occupied, or which is intended
or designated to be occupied, as the home or residence of one individual,
family or household, for housekeeping purposes.



   APARTMENT HOUSE.  See MULTIPLE DWELLING.



   APPROVED.  Approved by the Inspections Superintendent or his
authorized agent.



   AREA.  As applied to the dimensions of a building, the maximum
horizontal projected area of the building at grade (See FLOOR AREA).



   ATTIC STORY.  Any story situated wholly or partly in the roof, so
designated, arranged, or built as to be used for business, storage or
habitation.



   BASEMENT.  A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having more than ½ of its clear floor-to-ceiling height (by cubic
measurement) above the average grade of the adjoining ground, and having
direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of the
adjoining ground.



   BUILDING.  Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.



   BUILDING CODE.  Any edition, together with all adopted amendments and
supplements thereto, of the State Building Code or of the State Uniform
Residential Building Code, or any other building rules or regulations adopted
by the city relating to the buildings and structures.



   BUILDING, EXISTING.  A building erected prior to the adoption of this
code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.



   CELLAR.  A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground,
having ½ or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height (by cubic measurement)
below the average grade of the adjoining ground, and having an inadequate
access to light and air from windows located partly or wholly below the level
of the adjoining ground.



   DETERIORATED.  A dwelling which is unfit for human habitation and can
be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this subchapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value,
as determined by the Inspections Superintendent. Repair at a cost not in
excess of 50% of the value is hereby deemed reasonable pursuant to G.S. §
160A-443(3).



   DILAPIDATED.  A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this chapter only at a cost in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by the Inspections Superintendent.



   DWELLING.  Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to
be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that temporary
housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling,
building or structure and forming a single habitable unit with facilities
which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and
eating. This includes any living arrangements, including living arrangements
in hotels, motels, lodges and other similar establishments where any
individual, family or extended family resides in the same unit or complex for
more than seven consecutive days within a 30-day period and the living
arrangements constitute the principal residence of the occupant(s). A living
arrangement shall not be considered a principal residence regardless of the
length of stay if it is the result of a temporary employment assignment.



   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimina- tion of insects, rodents, or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
method approved by the Inspections Superintendent.



   FLOOR AREA.  The area included within surrounded walls of a building
exclusive of vent shafts and courts.



   GARBAGE.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.



   HABITABLE ROOM.  A room used or intended to be used by one or more
persons for living, eating, or sleeping purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, serving and storage pantries, corridors,
cellars, and spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods.



   HEATING.  The definitions following under HEATING shall apply to
heating installations:



      (1)   CENTRAL HEATING BOILERS AND FURNACES.  Includes warm
air furnaces, floor- mounted, direct-fired unit heaters, hot water boilers,
and steam boilers operating at not in excess of 15 pounds of gauge pressure,
used for heating of buildings or structures.



      (2)   CHIMNEY.  A vertical shaft of masonry, reinforced
concrete, or other approved noncombustible, heat resisting material enclosing
one or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from
solid, liquid, or gas fuel.



      (3)   FLUE.  A vertical passageway for products of combustion.



      (4)   VENT PIPE.  As applied to heating, means a pipe for
removing products of combustion from gas appliances.



      (5)   WATER HEATER.  A device for the heating and storage of
water to be used for other than heating or industrial purposes.



   HOUSING INSPECTOR.  The public officer authorized to exercise the
powers of this code, and such designation includes his duly authorized
representative.



   INFESTATION.  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING.  Any dwelling con- taining more than one dwelling
unit.



   OCCUPANT.  Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.



   OPENABLE AREA.  That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care, or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER  CONDITIONS.  The temperature 20° F. above
the lowest recorded temperature for the previous 15-year period.



   OWNER.  Any person who jointly or severally:



      (1)   Has title or any interest in or to any dwelling or
dwelling unit, without regard to actual possession; or



      (2)   Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or representative of the owner, or a fiduciary of the estate
of the owner. It is specifically noted that any person meeting the definition
of OWNER under this division (2) shall be bound to comply with the provisions
of the code to the same extent as though he were an OWNER under the above
division (1).



   PERSON.  A natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators, or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.



   PLUMBING.  The practice, materials, and fix- tures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances, and appurtenances in connection with any of the following:



      (1)   Sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities.



      (2)   The venting system and the public or private water
supply system, and the public or private water supply systems within or
adjacent to any building, structure, or conveyance.



      (3)   The practice and materials used in the installation,
maintenance, extension, or alteration of storm water, liquid waste, or
sewerage, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with
any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal.



   ROOMING HOUSE.  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or
father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.



   ROOMING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,  wood
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust.



   SUBSTANDARD DWELLING or STRUC- TURE.  A dwelling, dwelling unit,
multiple dwelling, apartment, apartment house or any other space used or
intended to be used as a habitable living space in any building or structure
which does not meet the basic minimum requirements of this code for such use.



   SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.



   TEMPORARY HOUSING.  Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable, and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.  Condi- tions that exist in a dwelling
which violate or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards of
fitness or one or more of the provisions established by this code.



   WALLS. 



      (1)   BEARING WALL.  A wall which supports any vertical load
in addition to its own weight.



      (2)   EXTERIOR WALL.  A wall, bearing or non-bearing, which
is used as an enclosing wall for a building, but which is not necessarily
suitable for use as a party wall or fire wall.



      (3)   FOUNDATION WALL.  A wall below the first floor
extending below the adjacent ground level and serving as support for a wall,
pier, column, or other structural part of a building.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 4-9-12)



§ 150.070  EXISTING BUILDINGS.



   The provisions of this code shall apply to any dwelling, apartment
house, or rooming house irrespective of when the building was constructed,
altered, or repaired:



   (A)   If, within any period of 12 months, altera- tions or repairs
are made to an existing building costing in excess of 50% of the then
physical value of the building, such building shall be made to conform to the
requirements of the building code for like new buildings.



   (B)   If an existing building is damaged by fire or otherwise in
excess of 50% of its then physical value before such damage is repaired, it
shall be made to conform to the requirements of the building code for new
buildings.



   (C)   If the cost of such alterations or repairs, or the amount of
such damage, is more than 25% but not more than 50% of the then physical
value of the building, the portions to be altered or repaired shall be made
to conform to the requirements of the building code for the new building to
such extent as the Building Official may determine.



   (D)   Repairs and alterations not covered by divisions (A) through
(C) of this section, restoring a building to its condition previous to damage
or deterioration, or altering it in conformity with the provisions of the
building code or in such manner as will not extend or increase an existing
nonconformity or hazard, may be made with the same kind of materials as those
of which the building is con- structed.



   (E)   For the purposes of this section the physical value of a
building or structure, as hereinbefore mentioned, shall be determined by the
Inspections Superintendent, and he shall use as a guideline the fair market
value of the building exclusive of land.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.071  MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS.



   All buildings or structures, both existing and new, and all parts
thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or
safeguards which are required by this code in a building when erected,
altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner,
or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures, and premises.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.072  HOUSING INSPECTOR; DUTIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   Establishment; duties and powers. Pursuant to G.S. § 160-443
there is hereby created and established a position to be known as the Housing
Inspector, who shall be appointed by the City Manager and designated as the
public officer to exercise the duties and powers prescribed in this
subchapter.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Housing Inspector:



         (a)   To investigate and to inspect all buildings,
dwelling units and rooming units located in the city in order to determine
which such buildings, dwelling units and rooming units are unfit for human
habitation as well as to carry out the general spirit and purpose of this
code.



         (b)   To enforce the provisions of this code and to take
such action, alone or together with other appropriate departments and
agencies, public or private, as may be necessary to carry out the general
spirit and purpose of this code.



         (c)   To keep adequate records of all activity conducted
pursuant to this code, including but not limited to an inventory of those
buildings, dwelling units and rooming units that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness prescribed by this code.



         (d)   To report annually to the City Manager concerning
the work of his division, and specifically the housing section, during the
preceding year.



         (e)   To perform each and every duty necessary and
incidental to the fulfillment of the general spirit and purpose of this
subchapter.



      (2)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-448, the Housing Inspector is
hereby authorized to exercise any powers necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the general spirit, purpose, and provisions of this code,
including specifically, but not limited to the following:



         (a)   To investigate the dwelling condi- tions in the
city in order to determine which buildings are unfit for human habitation.



         (b)   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine
witnesses and receive evidence.



         (c)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making
examinations and inspections in a manner that will do the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession.



         (d)   To appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents
and employees necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter.



         (e)   To delegate any of his functions and powers under
this code to other officers and other agents.



   (B)   Housing Inspector appointed. There is hereby created and
established a position to be known as the Housing Inspector appointed by the
City Manager.



   (E)   Records. The Housing Inspector shall keep, or cause to be
kept, a record of the business of the Inspections Division. The records of
the Inspector shall be open to public inspection.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.073  UTILITY SERVICES TO SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS OR DWELLING UNITS.



   The city shall not provide, nor permit another to provide (either
public or private) utility services such as water, gas, electricity, sewer,
and the like, to any substandard building or dwelling unit which becomes
vacant until such building or dwelling has been inspected, brought into
compliance with this code, and a valid certificate of compliance, as
required, has been issued. This requirement shall not preclude the temporary
use of such utility services as may be deemed necessary during construction,
repair or alteration. The Inspections Superintendent shall be responsible for
making the determination as to when such temporary services may be necessary.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.074  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT PRIOR TO INSPECTION OF SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS
OR DWELLING UNITS.



   No building, plumbing, electrical, gas or other permit, as may be
required, for an addition, altera- tion or repair of an existing substandard
building or dwelling unit shall be issued until such time as an inspection of
the property has been made to deter- mine the feasibility of rehabilitation
of such building or dwelling unit.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.075  MINIMUM STANDARDS OF FITNESS.



   All buildings, dwelling units, and rooming units shall provide for a
healthful environment with living facilities arranged and equipped to assure
such a condition. Under §§ 150.076 through 150.084 appear the fundamental
requirements of this code which shall be observed in determining the fitness
of a building for human habitation.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.076  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.



   No person shall occupy or allow another to occupy, or hold out for
intended use, or allow another to hold out for intended use for human
habitation any building, dwelling unit, or rooming unit designed or intended
to be used for the purpose of human habitation which does not comply with the
standards of this code and for which a valid certificate of compliance has
not been issued.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.077  PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND EQUIPMENT.



   Minimum standards for plumbing systems and equipment shall be that
every building and dwelling unit (and where applicable, rooming unit) shall
contain not less than the following:



   (A)   A connection to a potable water supply and to the public sewer
or other approved sewage disposal system.



   (B)   A kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet,
all in good working condition and installed in accordance with the adopted
plumbing code, and located within the dwelling unit and access- ible to the
occupants. The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or
rooms affording privacy to the user.



   (C)   Plumbing, all of which meets the standards of the adopted
plumbing code and which is in a state of good repair and in good working
order.



   (D)   Connections to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower
of an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be
supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable
water supply.



   (E)   Installations of all hot water heating appliances according to
the plumbing code adopted by the city and capable of supplying a continuous
source of hot water, on demand, to all the required fixtures at a temperature
of not less than 120° F.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.078  VENTILATION.



   Minimum standards for ventilation shall be that every building,
dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall contain not less than the following:



   (A)   Windows, and the like. Every habitable room shall have a least
one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum size
shall be 8% of the floor area of such room. When-ever walls or other portions
of structures face a window of any such room and such light-obstruction
structures are located less than five feet from the window and extend to a
level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be
deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as
contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only
window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total
window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area
of such room.



   (B)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area sign
or minimum skylight- type window size, as required, or shall have other
approved, equivalent ventilation.



   (C)   Bathroom and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements
for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.



   (D)   Air conditioning. Year-round mechanically ventilating
conditioned air systems may be substituted for windows, as required herein,
in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window-type air
conditioning units are not included in this exception.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.079  ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS.



   Minimum standards for electrical systems shall be that every building,
dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall contain not less than the following:



   (A)   Every building, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall be wired
for electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall
contain at least two floor- or wall-type electric convenience receptacles,
connected in such manner as determined by the electrical code adopted by the
city. In every kitchen, at least one convenience receptacle must be installed
for use of kitchen appliances, this receptacle must be protected by a ground
fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) receptacle. All receptacles within 24 inches
of a water source or a countertop (either fixed or mobile) must be protected
by a (GFCI) receptacle.  There shall be installed in every bathroom a
convenience wall type, (GFCI) receptacle. There shall be installed in every
bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In the event wall or
ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then each such
habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall-type electric
convenience receptacles.



   (B)   Hallways. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when
natural daylight is not sufficient.



   (C)   Smoke detectors.  A minimum of one approved listed smoke
detector shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendation
and listing and maintained in working condition.



   (D)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring should be
maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and
installed in accordance with the electrical code adopted by the city.



   (E)   The minimum capacity of the service supply and the main
disconnect switch shall be sufficient to carry adequately the total load as
required by the electrical code adopted by the city, and in no case shall the
service be less than 100 amps per dwelling unit.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. passed
4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.080  HEATING.



   Minimum standards for heating shall be that every building, dwelling
unit, and rooming unit shall have facilities for providing heat in accordance
with either division (A) or (B) of this section, as well as complying with
division (C) of this section:



   (A)   Central and electrical systems. Every central or electric
heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat each dwelling
unit to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70° F. measured
at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary minimum winter
conditions.



   (B)   Other heating facilities. By October 1, 1995, where a central
or electrical heating system is not provided, each dwelling unit shall have
adequate heating appliances installed and maintained in good and safe working
condition and capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments so as to furnish a minimum
temperature of 70° F. measured at a point three feet above the floor during
ordinary minimum winter conditions. Under no circumstances will portable
heating devices be permitted as a primary source for heating. In addition,
each dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient chimney, flues, gas
vents, and/or fireplaces in accordance with the provisions of the State
Building Code.



   (C)   Installation and maintenance. Heating appliances and
facilities shall be installed in accordance with the building code adopted by
the city, and shall be maintained in safe and good working condition.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.081  SPACE; USE AND LOCATION.



   Minimum standards for space, use and location shall be that every
building, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall contain not less than the
following:



   (A)   Dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150
square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100
square feet of additional habitable floor area for each of the next three
occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for
each additional occupant.



   (B)   Room sizes.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall contain at
least the minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the
building code adopted by the city.



      (2)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each occupant 12 years-of-age and over, and at least 35 square feet of
floor area for each occupant under 12 years-of-age.



      (3)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated
on the basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and hall area
within the dwelling unit, where provided, may count for not more than 10% of
the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than four and one-half feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the
room to determine maximum permissible occupance.



   (C)   Occupant. For the purpose of this division, a person under one
year-of-age shall not be counted as an occupant.



   (D)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet.



   (E)   Cellar.  No cellar shall be used for living purposes.



   (F)   Basement. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless
the floor and walls are substantially watertight, the total window area,
total openable window area and ceiling height are equal to those required for
habitable rooms, and the required minimum window area of every habitable room
is entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the
window or windows face a stair- well, window well or accessway.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.082  SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.



   Minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance shall be that every
building, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall comply at least with the
following:



   (A)   Exterior foundation walls and roofs. Every foundation wall,
exterior wall, and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight,
watertight, and rodent proof, shall be capable of affording privacy, and
shall be safe to use, and capable of supporting the load which normal use may
cause to be placed thereon. Exterior surfaces not inherently resistant to
deterioration shall be treated with a protective coating or covering and
maintained in good repair to prevent deterioration.



   (B)   Insulation. Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of R-19
insulation in the attic area. The approved types include blown insulation,
batt insulation, or other insulation equivalent to a total of R-19 insulation
value. A minimum clear opening into each attic space of 14 inches by 24
inches shall be provided to allow for access, inspection and repair. The
Housing Inspector or designee can grant a waiver of this requirement in the
event that this requirement would necessitate major alteration of the
structure, or would produce harmful accumulations of heat or moisture that
cannot be removed by ventilation.



   (C)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior
wall, and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof, shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every tub or shower
shall have a wall surface constructed and maintained so as to be
substantially impervious to water and shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition.



   (D)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, and basement
or cellar door and hatch-way shall be substantially weathertight, watertight,
and rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good
repair. Doors shall be provided at all doorways leading to bedrooms, toilet
rooms, bathrooms, and all rooms adjoining a public space. All doors leading
to the exterior must have an apparatus for opening and closing the door on
both sides, a locking mechanism, and shall be kept in sound working condition
and good repair.



   (E)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside
stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable
of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (F)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
substantially imperious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (G)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this code shall be so
constructed and installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be maintained in sound working condition.



   (H)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain
thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.



   (I)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with means of
egress as required by the building code adopted by the city.



   (J)   Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property areas
shall be kept free of noxious weeds or plant growth which are in excess of 12
inches, and which cause or threaten to cause a hazard detrimental to the
public health and safety.



   (K)   Accessory structures and fences. Every fence and accessory
structure shall be:



      (1)   All accessory structures shall be structurally sound and
maintained in good repair and all fences and walls shall be structurally
sound and maintained in good repair so that there are no broken, loose,
damaged, removed or missing parts (i.e., pickets, slats, posts, wood rails,
bricks, panels). Repair of fences and walls shall be made with materials that
are comparable in composition, color, size, shape, design and quality to
those originally used to construct the fence or wall being repaired. Nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit or restrict the replacement of a fence
or wall;



      (2)   Free from physical hazards and other matter detrimental
to public health or safety;



      (3)   Exterior surfaces, not inherently resistant to
deterioration, shall be treated with a protective coating, such as paint or
other suitable preservative, and with sufficient frequency to prevent
deterioration; and



      (4)   Any electrical, plumbing, heating or other utilities
furnished to an accessory structure shall be installed in accordance with
applicable provisions and maintained in a safe condition.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. passed
4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.083  INSECTS, RODENTS, AND INFESTATIONS.



   Minimum standards for control of insects, rodents, and infestations
shall be that every building, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall at least
comply with the following:



   (A)   Screens. For protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other
insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space
shall have supplied and installed screens and a self-closing device; and
every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended
to be used for ventilation shall likewise be supplied with screens installed
so as to not be permanently affixed to the window frame, sash or structural
members of the dwelling unit; and maintained in good condition without rips
or tears.



   (B)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or
intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens
installed or such other approved device as will effectively prevent their
entrance.



   (C)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a
dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be
responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this division, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the actual owner to maintain a dwelling
in a rodent-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition, extermination shall
be the responsibility of the actual owner, as opposed to the tenant/occupant.
Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any
dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or
more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the
owner, and not the tenant.



   (D)   Rubbish. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate
rubbish storage facilities.



   (E)   Garbage. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage
disposal facilities or garbage storage containers in accordance with Chapter
52 of this code.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.084  STRUCTURAL CONDITION.



   Minimum standards for structural condition shall be that every
building, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall at least comply with the
following:



   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists,
rafters, or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and
shall not be rotted, deteriorated, or damaged, and shall not have holes or
cracks which might admit rodents.



   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. Roof coverings shall be
maintained in good condition; no more than two roof coverings on any roof (if
more than two roof coverings exist, the roof coverings will not have to be
removed until the current roof covering has deteriorated).



   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation
supports shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or
collapse.



   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fail
or collapse.



   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall
be provided.



   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets, and
hallways shall be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of
reasonable household methods promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be
maintained in such a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain
reasonable privacy between various spaces.



   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors,
and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be weathertight and watertight.



   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are
defective, deteriorated, or in danger of falling, or in such conditions or
location as to constitute a fire hazard.



   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors
on the ground.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.085.1  ROOMING HOUSE AND DWELLING UNIT MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   All of the provisions of this subchapter, and all of the minimum
standard requirements of this subchapter, shall be applicable to rooming
houses and dwelling units, and to every person who operates a rooming house,
or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit or any
rooming house, except as provided in the following divisions:



   (A)   Rooming house. All rooming houses must comply with the
following requirements:



      (1)   Water closets, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At
least one water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly
connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house
wherever said facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located
within the residence building served and shall be directly accessible from a
common hall or passage and shall be not more than one story removed from any
of the persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required
facilities shall not be located in the cellar.



      (2)   Sanitary conditions. The owner or operator of every
rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls,
floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of
the building, and he or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building
(within which the rooming house is contained) is leased or occupied by the
operator.



      (3)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal,
lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required by division (A)(1) of this
section shall be located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms
which afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are
accessible from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or
through any other room therein.



      (4)   Safety. To assure the safety of all occupants of a
rooming house the following standards must be met:



         (a)   Bathroom and kitchen must have at least one
receptacle accessible to the countertop and lavatory without the use of a
drop cord or other device and must be installed to meet the criteria of a
ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) type receptacle.



         (b)   Smoke detectors must be provided in every rooming
unit, bedroom, hallway and on every level.



         (c)   All doors leading to individual rooming units must
be provided with a secure locking mechanism and door handle. No padlocks or
hasps allowed.



         (d)   No cooking appliances except microwaves can be
located within the rooming units.



         (e)   No portable heating appliances (fuel or electric)
shall be allowed in any area of the rooming house.



         (f)   All cord and plug appliances, whether provided by
the owner or occupant, must be



installed in a safe and secure manner and in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations.



         (g)   All points of ingress/egress and hallways must be
lighted automatically upon diminished natural light.



         (h)   All rooming houses must be in compliance with all
applicable city ordinances to receive a certificate of occupancy.



      (5)   Cooking and eating facilities. All rooming houses must
be supplied with the following facilities for cooking and eating.



         (a)   At least one room not less than 120 square feet
shall be located in every rooming house to be used for cooking and eating.



         (b)   All facilities for cooking and eating shall be
located within the residence building served and shall be directly accessible
from an interior common hall or passage way and shall not be more than one
story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities.



         (c)   At least one kitchen sink shall be supplied with
hot and cold water at all times. A cook stove and oven of the built-in type
shall be provided and maintained in good working condition at all times and
the unit must be hardwired into the electrical/gas system,



         (d)   All connections to kitchen sink, oven and cook top
must be in conformance with the State Building Code and standards of this
chapter.



         (e)   Counter tops must be provided, not less than 24
inches by 48 inches, in kitchen area.



         (f)   The floor covering in all rooms provided for
cooking and eating shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
substantially impervious to water and permit such to be easily kept clean and
sanitary.



   (B)   Dwelling unit. All dwelling units and rooming units must
comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   All dwelling units must comply with the minimum
standards set forth in this chapter.



      (2)   All dwelling units must complete site plan approval
through the housing inspector and if applicable the Zoning Department, and
receive proper permits from the Building Inspections Department.



      (3)   Site plan must contain room sizes and layout, location
of bathroom, eating and cooking areas, sleeping areas, ingress/egress
locations, and all interior measurements.



      (4)   Rooms must conform to the minimum room sizes and the
total size of the unit must not be less than 240 square feet of interior
space.



      (5)   Kitchen sink must be a double compartment sink and
cannot be a lavatory.



      (6)   Countertops must be provided in the kitchen area and
cannot be less than 24 inches by 48 inches.



      (7)   Ground fault receptacles are required at the kitchen
counter top and at the bathroom lavatory space. A receptacle is required in
the kitchen area for the use of a refrigerator without the use of a drop cord.



      (8)   The floor covering in all rooms provided for cooking and
eating shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially
impervious to water and permit such to be easily kept clean and sanitary.



      (9)   A cook stove and oven of the built-in type shall be
provided and maintained in good working condition at all times and must be
hard-wired into the electrical system for the structure.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 4-9-12)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.085.2  ABANDONED STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Any abandoned structure that is a health or safety hazard as a
result of the attraction of insects, rodents, conditions creating a fire
hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children, or frequent
use by vagrants as living quarters, or the absence of sanitary facilities,
shall be repaired, closed, or demolished. It shall be unlawful for the owner
of an abandoned structure to allow the same to become or to remain a health
or safety hazard as defined in this section.



   (B)   The Code Enforcement Official shall have the authority to
attempt to accomplish the repair, closing, or demolition of unsafe abandoned
structures through the procedure set out in § 150.087, except that if the
estimated cost to repair the structure is 50% or more of its value, the
structure shall be considered dilapidated, and the Code Enforcement Official
shall order that it be demolished and removed. Upon the failure of the owner
of an unsafe abandoned structure to comply with an order of the code
enforcement official to repair, close, or demolish such structure, the Code
Enforcement Official shall present the matter to City Council. If the City
Council finds that the abandoned structure is unsafe pursuant to division (A)
of this section, it may adopt an ordinance ordering the Code Enforcement
Official to cause such abandoned structure to be repaired, closed, or
demolished. Each such ordinance shall be recorded as provided in § 150.087,
and the cost of any repair, closing, or demolition caused to be made by the
code enforcement official shall be a lien on the premises as provided in §
150.087.



   (C)   For the purposes of divisions (A) and (B), ABANDONED STRUCTURE
shall mean any structure that has not been occupied or used, by its owner or
by some person acting under the authority of its owners, for a continuous
period of 30 days or longer.



   (D)   If the City Council shall have adopted an ordinance, or the
Code Enforcement Official shall have issued an order, ordering a dwelling to
he repaired or vacated and closed, and if the owner has vacated and closed
such dwelling and kept such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of six
months pursuant to the ordinance or order, then if the governing body shall
find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or
improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that
the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be
inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the municipality in
that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and
safety hazard, would he a threat to children and vagrants, would attract
persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight
and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render
unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made
available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in
this state, then in such circumstances, the City Council may, after the
expiration of such six-month period, enact an ordinance and serve such
ordinance on the owner, setting for the following:



      (1)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to
render it fit for human habitation can be



made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then current value of the dwelling,
the ordinance shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and
remove the dwelling within 90 days; or



      (2)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to
render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50%
of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the
owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days. Such ordinance
shall be recorded as provided in § 150.090(B), and the cost of any repair,
closing, or demolition caused to be made by the Code Enforcement Official
shall be a lien on the premises as provided in § 150.090(B).



(Ord. passed 10-20-03)



§ 150.086  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   Cleanliness.



      (1)   Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall be responsible
for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas
of the dwelling and the premises thereof.



      (2)   Every occupant of a building, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling
and premises thereof which he occupies and controls. The occupant shall keep
the occupied area and all facilities in a clean and sanitary condition. A
clean and sanitary condition shall include but is not limited to the
following:



         (a)   Floors, floor coverings and other walking surfaces
shall be kept clean and free of dirt, filth, garbage, fecal matter, litter,
refuse and other unsanitary matter.



         (b)   Walls, ceilings, windows, and doors shall be kept
clean and free of dirt, greasy films, soot and any other unsanitary matter.



         (c)   Plumbing fixtures shall be kept in a clean,
sanitary, and operable condition. No materials shall be deposited in any such
fixture which may result in the obstruction of such fixture or any lines
connected thereto.



         (d)   Cookstove, refrigerator, cabinets, and other
furnishings shall be kept clean, free of dirt, film, soot and any other
unsanitary condition.



         (e)   No occupant shall obstruct in any manner any means
of egress/ingress to or from any portion of the premises.



   (B)   Rubbish and garbage.



      (1)   Except as stated below in division (B)(2), every owner
of a building, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall be responsible for the
availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.



      (2)   Every occupant of a building, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit shall dispose of all of his rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary
manner by placing it in the supplied storage facility. Occupants of buildings
containing one or two dwelling units shall be responsible for the
availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.



   (C)   Supplied plumbing fixtures.



      (1)   Every owner of a building, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit shall supply such plumbing and plumbing fixtures as are required by this
code.



      (2)   Every occupant of a building, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit shall keep all supplied plumbing and plumbing fixtures therein in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in their proper use and operation.



   (D)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure. No occupant shall
wilfully destroy, deface, or impair any of the facilities or equipment of any
part of the structure of a building, dwelling unit or rooming unit which he
occupies.



   (E)   Extermination. For the responsibilities of occupants
concerning extermination, see § 150.083(C) of this subchapter.



   (F)   Care of premises. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of a building, dwelling unit, or rooming unit to utilize the
premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned motor
vehicle, icebox, refrigerator, stove, glass, building materials, building
rubbish, or any other similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility
of every such owner and occupant to keep the premises of such property clean
and to remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed above,
including but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, trash, garbage, and the
like. It is hereby noted that for the purposes of this division an abandoned
motor vehicle is defined as one that is in a state of disrepair and incapable
of being moved under its own power.



   (G)   Inspections and examinations.



      (1)   Every owner of a building, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit shall give the Housing Inspector free access to such property at all
reasonable times for the purposes of any inspection, examination or survey
being conducted by the Inspections Superintendent or his office.



      (2)   Every occupant of a building, dwelling unit, or rooming
unit shall give the owner thereof access to any part of such building,
dwelling unit or rooming unit at all reasonable times for the purpose of the
owner making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to affect
compliance with the provisions of this code, or with any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this code. Additionally, every occupant of a
building, dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall give the Inspections
Superintendent free access to such building, dwelling unit, or rooming unit
at all reasonable times for the purposes of any such inspection, examination,
or survey conducted pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03)  Penalty, see §
150.999



§ 150.087  PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION; NOTICE; HEARING.



   (A)   Whenever a petition is filed with the Inspections
Superintendent by a public authority or by at least five residents of the
city charging that any building, dwelling unit, or rooming unit is unfit for
human habitation, or whenever a tenant currently occupying a dwelling unit
makes a written or oral complaint; or whenever it appears to the Housing
Inspector, upon inspection, that any building, dwelling unit, or rooming unit
(hereinafter collectively called “unsafe building”) is unfit for human
habitation, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner, as defined in §
150.069, of such unsafe building a complaint stating the charges and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Housing Inspector
at a place and time therein fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days
after the serving of the complaint. The owner shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. If applicable, notice
of such hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a
petition relating to such unsafe building. Any person desiring to do so may
attend such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The
rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Housing Inspector.



   (B)   At the hearing, the Housing Inspector may determine pursuant
to G.S. § 160A-444 that an unsafe building is unfit for human habitation if
he finds that conditions exist in the unsafe building that render it
dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of
the unsafe building, the occupants of the neighboring buildings, or other
residents of the city. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to
the following:



      (1)   Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire,
accidents, or other calamities.



      (2)   Failure in any way to conform to the minimum standards
set forth in this code.



      (3)   Especially dangerous to life because of bad condition of
walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay, unsafe wiring or
heating system, or inadequate means of egress.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. TC00-5, passed 10-9-00)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



§ 150.088  PROCEDURE AFTER HEARING.



   After such notice and hearing, the Inspections Superintendent shall
state in writing his determination whether the unsafe building is unfit for
human habitation, and, if so, whether it is deteriorated or dilapidated.



   (A)   If the Housing Inspector determines that the unsafe building
is deteriorated, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of
such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to repair, alter, and
improve such unsafe building to comply with the minimum standards of fitness
established by this code within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90
days. Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and close
the unsafe building until such repairs, alterations, and improvements have
been made. Upon application by the owner within the specified period of time,
the Inspections Superintendent may grant extensions of up to one year if the
unsafe building is occupied by the owner, or up to 180 days if the dwelling
is not occupied by the owner, for good cause shown.



   (B)   If the Housing Inspector determines that the unsafe building
is dilapidated, he shall state in writing his findings of fact to support
such determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof an order directing and requiring the owner to vacate, close and
remove, or demolish the same within a specified period of time not to exceed
90 days, unless the owner elects to proceed under the provisions set forth
below, or unless an application for an extension of up to 90 days is applied
for by the owner within the time provided for compliance and granted by the
Housing Inspector for good cause shown.



   (C)   Within ten days from the date of the order determining that
the building is dilapidated, the owner may notify the Housing Inspector in
writing of his intent to make such repairs or alterations to the dwelling so
as to comply with the minimum standards of fitness. Upon receipt of an
owner's written intent to repair the dwelling, within the time provided
herein, the Housing Inspector shall issue a supple-mental order directing the
owner to commence and complete the repairs or alterations necessary to comply
with the minimum standards of fitness. The Inspections Superintendent shall
allow a reasonable period of time for the owner to make such repairs or
alterations, but in no event shall the period of time allowed for such
repairs or alterations be less than 30 days nor more than 90 days unless an
extension is granted by the Inspections Superintendent for good cause shown.
Upon application by the owner within the specified period of time, the
Housing Inspector may  grant extensions of up to one year if the dwelling is
occupied by its owner, or up to 180 days if the dwelling is not occupied by
its owner, for good cause shown.



   (D)   Extensions and appeals. In order to be con-sidered for any
extension of time for compliance with an order issued pursuant to this
subchapter, the owner must have made a good faith effort to comply with the
order and all dangerous conditions must have been repaired. The Inspections
Superintendent shall have sole authority to grant extensions. City Council
shall have no authority to hear or act upon extension requests or appeals of
any order issued by the Housing Inspector.



   (E)   If the owner fails to give notice of either an intent to
repair as herein provided, or notice of appeal of the decision of the
Inspections Superintendent to the Board of Adjustment within the time
specified for such an appeal, the Housing Inspector shall proceed in
accordance with the provisions of § 150.089(A) or (B) of this subchapter.



   (F)   Whenever a determination is made pursuant to division (B)
above that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished,
under the pro- visions of this section, notice of the order shall be given by
first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring
dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for such
notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be
given before removal or demolition by action of the Housing Inspector, to
allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to
make repairs, lease, or purchase the property for the purpose of providing
affordable housing. The Housing Inspector or the City Clerk shall certify the
mailing of the notices, and the certification shall be conclusive in the
absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for
such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the
sole remedy shall be an order requiring the Inspections Superintendent to
wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition.



   (G)   (1)   If the Code Enforcement Officer shall have issued an
order, ordering a dwelling to be repaired or vacated and closed, pursuant to
§ 150.087(B), and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling and kept
such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one year pursuant to the
ordinance or order, then if the City Council shall find that the that the
owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the
dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation and that the
continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be
inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the municipality in
that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire and
safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would attract
persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to blight
and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render
unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made
available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing,
then in such circumstances, the governing body may, after the expiration of
such one year period, enact an ordinance on the owner, setting forth the
following:



         (a)   If it is determined that the repair of the
dwelling to render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not
exceeding 50% of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall
require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling
within 90 days; or



         (b)   If it is determined that the repair of the
dwelling to render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not
exceeding 50% of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall
require the owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.



      (2)   The ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the
Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in
the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with the ordinance, the Code
Enforcement officer shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03)  Penalty, see §
150.999



Statutory reference:



   For statutory authorization of ordinances to repair, close, or demolish
buildings, see G.S. § 160A-443



§ 150.089  CIVIL PENALTIES; RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   (A)   Administrative fees and costs. The City Council may from time
to time adopt a schedule of administrative fees to be charged and collected
by the Housing Inspector in order for the city to recover its costs in
administering and enforcing this chapter.



   (B)   Authority to assess civil penalties. When the Housing
Inspector finds that the owner has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this chapter, or any order, rule, or regulation issued
hereunder, the Housing Inspector may assess a civil penalty to such owner, as
provided in § 150.999.



   (C)   Costs and attorneys fees. The Housing Inspector may recover
attorneys fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the
enforcement activities undertaken pursuant to this chapter, including the
cost of determining ownership, expenses of notification, attorneys fees, and
the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.



   (D)   Determination of the amount. In deter- mining the amount of
civil penalty to be assessed, the Housing Inspector may consider any other
relevant circumstances, but shall consider the following:



      (1)   The degree or extent of dilapidation or deterioration,
public harm, the gravity of the violations of the Minimum Housing Code and
the danger to the public health resulting from the violations.



      (2)   The gravity and duration of the viola- tions.



      (3)   The cost to the city caused by the violations.



      (4)   The amount of money saved by non- compliance and any
other economic benefit gained through the owner's violations.



      (5)   Whether the violations have been committed willfully and
intentionally.



      (6)   The prior record of the owner in complying or failing to
comply with the minimum housing provisions of this chapter.



      (7)   The cost for enforcement by the city.



   (E)   Collection. Actions for the collection of civil penalties
shall be referred to the City Attorney for collection.



   (F)   Appeals. The person who has been assessed a civil penalty by
the Housing Inspector and who desires to dispute such penalty, must file a
written notice of appeal with the City Manager and follow the procedures set
forth in this chapter for prosecuting appeals. During the pendency of such
appeal the assessment of such penalties shall be stayed.



   (G)   Assessment not a bar. Assessment of a civil penalty shall not
be a bar against or prerequisite for the taking of any other action against
the owner.



   (H)   Other available remedies, injunctive relief. In addition to
the remedies previously provided in this chapter, the Housing Inspector may
use any one or combination thereof against a non-compliant owner or person
entitled to possession. Additional remedies shall include but are not limited
in injunctive relief sought through a petition filed with the General Court
of Justice by the City Attorney for the issuance of such injunctive relief as
may be appropriate seeking to restrain or compel the activities necessary to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.090  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.



   (A)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated unsafe
building shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspections Superintendent
to repair, alter, or remove the same within the time specified therein, or if
the owner of a dilapidated unsafe building shall fail to comply with an order
of the Housing Inspector to vacate, close, and remove or demolish the same
within the time specified therein, the Housing Inspector may submit to the
Council at its next regular meeting a resolution directing the City Attorney
to institute in the general court of justice an appropriate action to seek an
order of the court directing such owner to comply with the order of the
Housing Inspector, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).



   (B)   In rem remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated unsafe
building shall fail to comply with an order of the Housing Inspector within
the time fixed by that order to repair, alter, or improve the same within the
time specified therein, or if the owner of a dilapidated unsafe building
shall fail to comply with an order of the Housing Inspector to vacate, close,
and remove, or demolish the same within the time specified therein, or if
judicial relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided in
the preceding § 150.089 (A), then in any of these events and pursuant to
G.S. § 160A-443(4) and (5) the Housing Inspector shall request the Council
to order him by an ordinance specifically describing the subject property to
do the following, either to cause such unsafe building to be repaired,
altered, and improved to comply with the minimum standards of fitness
established by this code, or to cause such unsafe building to be vacated,
closed, and removed or demolished. The Council, in ordering one of the
aforesaid alternatives, shall order the specific action that will best
effectuate the purposes of this code. Once the ordinance is adopted by the
Council, a true copy of such ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the
Registrar of Deeds of Gaston County and the Registrar shall index the name of
the property owner in the Grantor Index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5).
Once such an ordinance is adopted by the Council the Housing Inspector shall
forthwith cause such repair, alteration, and improvement or closing, vacation
and removal, or demolition to be carried out by any public authority or
private concern. Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-443(6) the amount of the cost of
repairs, alterations, and improvements, or vacating, closing and removal, or
demolition shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was
incurred. Such lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be collected
as the lien for special assessment provided in G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 10. If
the unsafe building is removed or demolished by the Inspections
Superintendent, he shall, if possible, sell in any commercially reasonable
manner the materials of the unsafe building and shall credit the proceeds of
the sale, if any, against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any balance
remaining shall be deposited by the Housing Inspector with the clerk of
superior court for subsequent disbursement by the court to the persons found
by the court to be entitled thereto.



   (C)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
dwelling, the Housing Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the
city to remove such occupant. Such action shall be filed and conducted in
accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 160A-443(7).



   (D)   None of the provisions of this code shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or
otherwise, or to enforce this code by criminal process pursuant to G.S. §
14-4, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the
enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in any
ordinance of the city, or any statute of the state.



   (E)   Placarding. After there has been a failure of the owner to
comply with an order of the Housing Inspector to repair, alter and improve,
or to vacate, close, and remove or demolish the unsafe building, then the
Housing Inspector shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any such
unsafe building a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit
for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for habitation
is prohibited and unlawful.”  Occupation or use of a building so posted is
a violation of this code and shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to G.S.
§ 14-4.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.091  APPEALS FROM ORDERS OF HOUSING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   An appeal from any director or order of the Housing Inspector
may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Any appeal from the Housing
Inspector shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision,
or if either the owner or his attorney was not present when the decision was
rendered, then within ten days of service of such order. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the Housing Inspector and with the Board of Adjustment
created in Chapter 155, Zoning Code, (hereinafter called “the Board”) a
notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is
based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Housing Inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the decision appealed from was made. When any appeal is from a decision
of the Housing Inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do
any act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When
any appeal is from a decision of the Housing Inspector requiring the person
aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the
requirement until the hearing by the Board, unless the Housing Inspector
certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be
furnished to the appellant), a suspension of his requirement would cause
imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the requirement shall be
suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause
upon not less than one day's written notice to the Housing Inspector by the
Board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. §
160A-466(f) and this division (A).



   (B)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all
appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and order as
in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have
all the powers of the Housing Inspector, but the concurring vote of
four-fifths of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or
modify any decision or order of the Housing Inspector.



   (C)   The Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in
any case where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adopt the
application of the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that
the spirit of the ordinance shall be  observed, public safety and welfare
secured, and substantial justice done.



   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by the
County Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted
within 15 days of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.092  PETITION TO SUPERIOR COURT BY OWNER.



   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Housing Inspector or a
decision rendered by the Board shall have the right, within 30 days after the
issuance of the order or rendering of a decision, to petition the Superior
Court for a temporary injunction, restraining the Inspector pending a final
disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-466(f).



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.093  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS BY OTHERS.



   (A)   (1)   Complaints and all orders issued by the Housing
Inspector shall be served by the Housing Inspector upon persons either
personally, by registered or certified mail. Where service of a complaint or
order is accomplished personally or by registered or certified mail, such
service is hereby deemed to be complete on the day of delivery to or receipt
by the person served.  When service is made by registered or certified mail,
a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail.  Service
shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed
or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within
ten days after mailing.  If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.



      (2)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of
persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Housing
Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are
known but have refused to accept service by registered or certified mail and
the Housing Inspector makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of
such complaint or order upon the owners or other persons may be made by
publication in the Gaston Gazette at least once no later than the time at
which personal service would be required under the provisions of the Minimum
Housing Code and G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, part 6.  When service is made by
publication, a copy of the complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, in the
case of the complaint, it must be posted at least ten days prior to the
hearing.



   (B)   Notice of lis pendens. Upon the issuance of a complaint and
notice of hearing or an order pursuant thereto, a notice of lis pendens, with
a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing or order attached thereto, may
be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court of Gaston County. The
notice of lis pendens and a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing or
order attached thereto shall be indexed and cross indexed in accordance with
the indexing procedures of G.S. § 1-117. From the date and time of indexing,
the complaint and notice of hearing or order shall be binding upon the
successors and assigns of the owners of and parties in interest in the
dwelling. A copy of the notice of lis pendens shall be served upon the owners
and parties in interest in the dwelling at the time of filing in accordance
with G.S. § 160A-445. The notice of lis pendens shall remain in full force
and effect until canceled. The notice of lis pendens shall be canceled upon
compliance with the order. Upon receipt of notice of cancellation from the
city, the clerk of superior court shall cancel the notice of lis pendens.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. passed 3-9-09)



§ 150.094  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this code is
found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of
the city, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more
stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the city shall prevail.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.095  FEE SCHEDULE.



   Because of budgetary considerations and because the city deems it
appropriate to place the monetary burden of enforcing the minimum housing
code on the owners of property who fail or refuse to maintain their property
so as to meet the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation, the City
Council hereby adopts the following schedule of administrative fees:



   (A)   Initial inspection of dwelling or  building   No Charge



   (B)   Second inspection for corrections   No Charge



   (C)   Third inspection   $25



   (D)   Fourth and subsequent inspections   $50 each



   (E)   Hearing before Inspection Officer (after hearing):



      (1)   House found not in violation   No Charge



      (2)   House found in violation, collect the following fees as
appropriate:



         (a)   Title exam   $250



         (b)   Hearing fee   $150



         (c)   Service on parties (per person)   $5



         (d)   Photo fee   $10



         (e)   Order/ordinance fee   $50



   (F)   If court action is necessary, the city shall seek recovery of
its reasonable attorney fees and court costs for the prosecution or defense
of the actions of the city.



(Res. passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



CONDEMNATION OF BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES OTHER THAN HOUSING



§ 150.105  EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER; FINDING; PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the city
structures and buildings other than buildings utilized for housing of humans
(hereinafter called “buildings”) which are especially dangerous to life
because of defects in such buildings increasing the hazard of fire,
accidents, and other calamities; or because of bad condition of walls,
overloaded floors, defective construction, decay, unsafe wiring or heating
system, or inadequate means of egress; or because of their violation of the
minimum standards prescribed in the chapter; or because of other conditions
rendering the buildings unsafe or unsanitary, and dangerous and otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the citizens of the city.



   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city, it is the purpose of this subchapter to provide
procedures for the repair, closing, or demolition of the aforesaid buildings.



   (C)   No provisions of this subchapter shall be held to deprive any
federal or state agency, or any municipal authority having jurisdiction, of
any power or authority which it had on the effective date of this subchapter
or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall
it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by
law.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.106  HOUSING INSPECTOR; DUTIES AND POWERS.



   The Housing Inspector of the Inspections Division of the Planning
Department is hereby designated the public officer to exercise the duties and
powers prescribed by this subchapter.



   (A)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Housing Inspector to:



      (1)   Investigate all buildings located in the city, in order
to determine whether such buildings are especially dangerous to life because
of defects in such buildings increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and
other calamities, or because of bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors,
defective construction, decay, unsafe wiring or heating systems, inadequate
means of egress, or because of their violation of the minimum standards
prescribed in the regulatory codes adopted by the city and appearing in §§
150.015 through 150.025 of this chapter, or because of other conditions
rendering the buildings unsafe or unsanitary, and dangerous and otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the citizens of the city.



      (2)   To take the action prescribed in this subchapter, alone
or together with other appropriate departments and agencies, public or
private, as may be necessary to carry out the general spirit and purpose of
this subchapter.



      (3)   To keep adequate records of all activity conducted
pursuant to this subchapter, including but not limited to, an inventory of
those buildings that do not meet minimum standards prescribed by this
sub-chapter.



      (4)   To report annually to the City Manager concerning the
work of his division under this subchapter.



      (5)   To perform each and every duty necessary and incidental
to the fulfillment of the general spirit and purpose of this subchapter.



   (B)   Powers. The Housing Inspector is hereby authorized to exercise
any powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the general
spirit, purpose, and provisions of this subchapter, including specifically,
but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   To investigate the buildings covered under this
subchapter which are located in the city in order to determine which
buildings are especially dangerous to life under the provisions of § 150.105.



      (2)   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses,
and receive evidences.



      (3)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making
examinations and inspections in a manner that will do the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession.



      (4)   To appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents, and
employees necessary to carry out the purposes of this subchapter.



      (5)   To delegate any of his functions and powers under this
subchapter to other officers and other agents.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.107  UTILITY SERVICES TO DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.



   The city shall not provide, nor permit another to provide (either
public or private) utility services such as water, gas, electricity, sewer,
and the like, to any building which is especially dangerous to life because
of any of the conditions set forth in § 150.105, and which has become
vacant, until such building has been inspected and brought into compliance
with the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter, and a valid certificate of
compliance as required has been issued. This requirement shall not preclude
the temporary use of such utility services as may be deemed necessary during
construction, repair or alteration. The Inspections Superintendent shall be
responsible for making the determination as to when such temporary services
may be necessary.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.108  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS PRIOR TO INSPECTION OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.



   No building, plumbing, electrical, gas or other permit, as may be
required, for an addition, alteration or repair of an existing building which
is especially dangerous to life because of the conditions set forth in §
150.105 shall be issued until such time as an inspection of the property has
been made to determine the feasibility of rehabilitation of such building.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.109  PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION; CONDEMNATION; PLACARDING.



   (A)   Whenever it appears to the Housing Inspector that a building
is in the state described in § 150.105, the Housing Inspector shall condemn
the building by posting on a conspicuous place on an exterior wall of the
building a notice with the following words:




   “This building is hereby declared unsafe and is condemned; the use or
occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful.”




   (B)   Occupation or use of a building so posted is a violation of
this subchapter and shall constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 14-4.
The unauthorized removal of such a notice shall constitute a misdemeanor
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-427. A copy of the posted notice, a detailed report
of the Housing Inspector and a request that the owner take prompt corrective
action with respect to the building shall be personally delivered or mailed
to the owner of the building, if he and his address are known.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.110  SERVICE OF NOTICE.



   If the owner of a building that has been condemned pursuant to §
150.109 shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the Housing Inspector
shall give him written notice by serving pursuant to § 150.093 a notice
stating the following:



   (A)   That the building is in a condition that appears to constitute
a fire or safety hazard, or to be dangerous to life, health or other property.



   (B)   That a hearing will be held before the Housing Inspector at a
designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice.



   (C)   That the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel, and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter.



   (4)   That following the hearing, the Housing Inspector may issue
such order to repair, close, vacate, or demolish the building as appears
appropriate.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.111  HEARING; PROCEDURE AFTER HEARING.



   Any person desiring to do so may attend a hearing and give evidences
relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence in courts of law
and equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Housing Inspector.
If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the requirement of this subchapter, the
Housing Inspector shall find that the building is in a condition that
constitutes a fire or safety hazard, or renders it dangerous to life, health
or other property, he or she shall make an order in writing, directed to the
owner of the building, requiring the owner to remedy the defective conditions
by repairing, closing, vacating, or demolishing the building, or taking other
necessary steps, within such period, not less than 60 days, as the Housing
Inspector may prescribe.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



§ 150.112  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.



   (A)   In personam remedy. If the owner of a building fails to comply
with an order of the Housing Inspector issued pursuant to § 150.111 within
the time specified therein, the Housing Inspector may follow the procedure of
§ 150.090(A).



   (B)   In rem remedy. If the owner of a building fails to comply with
an order of the Housing Inspector issued pursuant to § 150.111 within the
time specified therein, or if judicial relief has not been sought or has not
been granted as provided in the preceding division (A), then in any of these
events the Housing Inspector shall follow the procedure of § 150.090(B).



   (C)   Misdemeanor. Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-431, if the owner of a
building fails to comply with an order issued under § 150.111 from which no
appeal is taken, or fails to comply with an order of the Council following an
appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of such failure to
comply shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. TC00-7, passed 1-8-01)  Penalty, see
§ 150.999



§ 150.113  APPEALS FROM ORDERS OF INSPECTIONS SUPERINTENDENT.



   (A)   Under this subchapter, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-430, any owner
who has received an order issued under § 150.111 may appeal from the order
to the Council by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Housing Inspector
and to the City Clerk within ten days following the issuance of the order. In
the absence of such an appeal, the order of the Housing Inspector shall be
final. The Council shall hear an appeal under this section within a
reasonable time, and may modify, affirm or revoke the order.



   (B)   Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Housing Inspector
shall forthwith transmit to the Council all the papers constituting the
record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from
a decision of the Housing Inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved
thereby to do any act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or
reversed. When an appeal is from a decision of the Housing Inspector
requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the
effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Council unless
the Housing Inspector certifies to the Council, after the notice of appeal is
filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy
of which shall be furnished to the appellant), a suspension of his
requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order granted by
the Council for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written notice
to the Housing Inspector, or by a restraining order of any court of record.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



INSPECTIONS DIVISION



§ 150.125  CREATION; APPOINTMENT OF SUPERINTENDENT; COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a division of the City Manager's Office to be
known as the Inspections Division. The Inspections Division shall be headed
by the Inspections Superintendent to be appointed by the City Manager, which
Inspections Superintendent shall be under the immediate direction and control
of the City Manager or his designee. The Inspections Division shall be
composed of such inspectors and personnel as the Council may from time to
time authorize.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)



Cross-reference:



   Joint enforcement with county, see § 150.004



§ 150.126  DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   The duties and responsibilities of the Inspections Division
and of the Inspectors therein shall be to enforce within the city and the
extra- territorial area provided in this chapter, all state and local laws
relating to the following:



      (1)   The construction of buildings and other structures.



      (2)   The installation of such facilities as plumbing systems,
electrical systems, heating systems, refrigeration systems and air
conditioning systems.



      (3)   The maintenance of buildings and other structures in a
safe, sanitary, and healthful condition.



      (4)   The enforcement of the city minimum housing code, zoning
code, and the condemnation of non-housing.



      (5)   Other matters that may from time to time be specified by
the Council.



   (B)   These duties shall include, but not be limited to, the receipt
of applications for permits and the issuance or denial of permits, the making
of any necessary inspections, the issuance or denial of certificates of
compliance, the issuance of orders to correct violations, the recommendation
to the Council to institute judicial actions against actual or threatened
violations, the keeping of adequate records, and the taking of any other
actions that may be required in order to adequately enforce those laws.



   (C)   The Inspections Superintendent is hereby granted all power
necessary to carry out the mandates of the Council in the operations of the
Inspections Division. This shall include in addition to any incidental powers
necessary, any specific powers which may from time to time be granted by city
Council in any specific ordinances.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94) 



§ 150.127  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   No member of the Inspections Division shall engage in any work that is
inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the city.



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of § 150.002 of this
chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50 for each violation.



   (C)   (1)   Failure to obtain a permit prior to moving a
structure or failure to comply with any other requirements of §§ 150.050
through 150.053 shall result in a civil penalty being imposed on the
responsible party, who shall include but not be limited to the general
contractor, the structure mover, the owner of the structure at the time of
the move, and, if different, the owner of the structure at the end of the
move, in the amount of $2,500. In addition, the inspections superintendent
may refuse to issue any further structure moving permits or building permits
to the general contractor, mover, the mover's business, the owner of the
structure at the time of the move, or, if different, the owner of the
structure at the end of the move, until all appropriate penalties have been
paid and all provisions of §§ 150.050 through 150.053 have been complied
with. No other structure moving permits shall be issued allowing structures
to be moved to properties owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by persons,
firms, corporations or other entities which own, lease, manage or otherwise
control properties, dwellings or other structures that are in violation of
the minimum housing or public nuisance codes. If a person fails to pay this
civil penalty within ten days after being cited for a violation, the city may
seek to recover this penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of a debt.



      (2)   Violations of the above-mentioned sections shall be
considered a misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, punishable by imprisonment
for up to 30 days and/or a criminal fine in the amount of $500.



      (3)   The City Council hereby finds that the placement of a
structure on a lot within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction in
violation of §§ 150.050 through 150.053 endangers the health, safety, and
welfare of its citizens, and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In
the event any person, firm or entity moves any structure onto property in the
city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction without first having obtained a
permit as required by §§ 150.050 through 150.053, the city shall be
entitled to obtain injunctive relief through an action in the nature of an
action to abate a nuisance to cause the immediate removal from the city of
the offending structure.



   (D)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any unsafe
building to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, and improve the same;
or to fail to vacate, close, and remove or demolish the same, upon order of
the Inspections Superintendent duly made and served as herein provided,
within the time specified in such order, and each day that any such failure,
neglect, or refusal to comply with such order continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
unsafe building with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to §
150.087 of this chapter, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after
the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration, and improvement
or its vacation, closing, and removal or demolition, and each day that such
occupancy continues after such prescribed time shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.



      (2)   Any owner of a building who fails to comply with any
order described in § 150.088(A) and (B), or who allows occupancy of the
building subject to the order after the compliance period in the order has
expired, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $250 for each day that
noncompliance continues following the expiration of the compliance period
specified in the Order of Compliance. If a person fails to pay the civil
penalty within ten days of receipt of the citation, the city may seek to
collect it in a civil action in the nature of a debt.



      (3)   Failure by any owner to comply with any order described
in division (D)(1) of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days.



      (4)   Each day that a violation continues after notification
that the violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
for purposes of the penalties and remedies set forth in this section.



      (5)   Sections 150.065 through 150.095 may be enforced by any
appropriate equitable action.



      (6)   Sections 150.065 through 150.095 may be enforced by any
one, all, or any combination of the remedies authorized in this division (D).



(Ord. 94-8-4, passed 8-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-00; Am. Ord. TC00-5, passed
10-9-00; Am. Ord. TC01-04, passed 1-14-02)



CHAPTER 151:  MOBILE HOMES



Section




General Provisions




   151.01   Definitions



   151.02   Temporary mobile home conditional use permit for emergency
use



   151.03   Additions to mobile homes



   151.04   Enforcement; inspections



   151.05   Responsibility of licensee




Licenses




   151.20   Application



   151.21   Prerequisites to issuance of license



   151.22   Posting license



   151.23   Separate licenses; apportionment of fees



   151.24   Assignment



   151.25   Annual renewal; license fee



   151.26   Revocation



   151.27   Appeals; hearings



 



   151.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LICENSEE.  Any person licensed to operate or maintain a mobile home
park under the provisions of this chapter.



   MOBILE HOME (MANUFACTURED HOME). A dwelling unit that:



      (1)   Is not constructed in accordance with the standards set
forth in the North Carolina State Building Code for uniform residential
building code for one and two-family dwellings; and



      (2)   Is composed of one or more components, each of which was
substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be
transported to the home site on its own chassis; and



      (3)   Exceeds 40 feet in length and eight feet in width.



   MOBILE HOME (MANUFACTURED HOME) PARK.  A parcel of land under single
ownership on which two or more mobile homes are occupied as residences.



   MOBILE HOME SPACE.  An area within the park which has been approved
for a single mobile home and which is located in a mobile home park.



('75 Code § 9.1-1) (Am. Ord. passed 1-9-89; Am. Ord. passed 3-8-93)



§ 151.02 TEMPORARY MOBILE HOME CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT FOR EMERGENCY USE.



   (A)   A conditional use permit (CUP) may be granted by the Zoning
Administrator for placement of a mobile home in the RA-15, R-15, R-10, R-5,
and RMF zoning jurisdictions (see Chapter 155, Zoning Code) where due to fire
or other similar unanticipated catastrophic event, the principal structure is
deter-mined by the Zoning Administrator to be unfit for safe and healthy
human habitation. All such mobile homes shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   Said permit shall be valid for a maximum period of six
months. This permit may be extended on a one-time basis only for a maximum of
three months by the Board of Adjustment if it is determined that:



         (a)   Substantial progress has been made in constructing
a new structure on the lot or repairing the existing structure.



         (b)   The structure being constructed or repaired, at
the time the permit extension is applied for, is still not fit for human
habitation.



      (2)   The mobile home must be located in the rear yard if
topographically and practically possible, provided if the mobile home cannot
be placed in the rear yard for such topographical or practical
considerations, then the mobile home must be located so that it is not within
20 feet of any residential structure (except the applicant's residence which
was damaged in the event) or any street. No variances will be granted on
these requirements.



      (3)   No mobile home may be placed on a lot which already
contains another mobile home.



      (4)   The mobile home shall be removed at the end of the
six-month period, or nine-month period (if an extension is granted by the
Board of Adjustment), or within one week of the completion of all repair or
construction work to the principal structure, whichever comes first.



      (5)   The mobile home will have adequate access to city water
and sewer or to a well and septic tank as verified by permits from the Gaston
County Health Department.



      (6)   The granting of the CUP will not materially endanger the
public health, safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Such permit is granted to a particular owner on the basis of
circumstances peculiar to that owner and it shall not remain in effect in the
event of a change of ownership of any land structure, use, or other item
covered by the CUP.



   (C)   When granting the CUP, the Zoning Administrator may impose
reasonable conditions, restrictions, and safeguards as considered necessary
to protect the public health, safety, and welfare in accordance with the
purpose and intent of this section. Violation of these conditions,
restrictions, and safe-guards shall be considered a violation of this section.



(Ord. passed 4-10-95)



§ 151.03  ADDITIONS TO MOBILE HOMES.



   No living compartment shall be added to any mobile home parked within a
mobile home park, except for a prefabricated structure specifically designed
by the manufacturer for mobile home extension and approved by the Zoning
Administrator.



('75 Code, § 9.1-18) (Ord. passed 11-12-72) Penalty, see 151.99



§ 151.04  ENFORCEMENT; INSPECTIONS.



   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and it shall be his duty
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall have the right and is
hereby empowered to enter upon any premises on which any mobile home park is
located, or about to be located, and to inspect the same and all
accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time.



('75 Code, § 9.1-2) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.05  RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE.



   The licensee, together with any duly authorized attendant or caretaker,
shall be answerable for the violation of any law or ordinance to which the
mobile home park is subjected.



('75 Code, § 9.1-3) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)  Penalty, see § 151.99



LICENSES



§ 151.20  APPLICATION.



   (A)   All persons who are operating a mobile home park at the time
of the effective date of this chapter or who desire to engage in the business
of operating a mobile home park shall apply in writing to the Zoning
Administrator for a license. The appli-cation for a license shall be made
upon a form to be provided by the Zoning Administrator, shall be signed by
the person who is to engage in the business and shall contain the following:



      (1)   The complete and exact name under which the business is
proposed to be operated.



      (2)   If the business is proposed to be operated by an
individual under an assumed name, the name of such individual and his address.



      (3)   If the business is a partnership, the name and address
of each partner.



      (4)   If the business is a corporation, the names and
addresses of the officers of the corporation and the location of the
principal or registered office.



      (5)   A physical survey and legal description of the land upon
which the mobile home park is to be located.



      (6)   A site plan including the following: grading,
engineering, design, construction size, height, shape and location of
buildings, location and design of parking areas, pedestrian and vehicular
circulation on site, recreational facilities and areas, means for collection
and depositing storm water and natural or artificial water courses and
utilities systems.



('75 Code, § 9.1-5) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.21  PREREQUISITES FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   No license shall be granted to any mobile home park unless:



   (A)   The license fee herein imposed is paid.



   (B)   The Zoning Administrator is satisfied that compliance has been
made with the requirements of the city code and with the laws of the state.



   (C)   The site plan has been approved by the Public Works Director
and by the Planning Director of the city Planning and Zoning Commission;
provided, that if the site plan is disapproved, the applicant may appeal such
decision to the City Council.



('75 Code, § 9.1-6) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.22  POSTING LICENSE.



   Any license issued under this chapter must be posted conspicuously in
the place of business. If such licensee has no regular place of business, the
license must be kept wherever the business is being operated and where it may
be inspected at all times by the proper city officials.



('75 Code, § 9.1-8) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.23  SEPARATE LICENSES; APPORTIONMENT OF FEES.



   (A)   Separate licenses. Every person operating a mobile home park
in more than one place shall secure a separate license for each place of
business unless such places of business are contiguous to each other,
communicate with and open in to each other, and are operated as a unit, and
such person shall pay the prescribed license fee for each place of business.
('75 Code, § 9.1-10)



   (B)   Apportionment of fees. When any mobile home park is opened and
operations commenced after February 1, the licensee shall pay for such
business, and the privileges of operating the same, one-half of the license
fee prescribed. ('75 Code, § 9.1-9)



(Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.24  ASSIGNMENT.



   No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be
assigned except to the purchaser of a mobile home park who elects to carry on
the same business at the same place. Upon delivery to the Zoning
Administrator of the license properly assigned, the applicant shall be
entitled to have a new license issued to him upon payment of $10. The Zoning
Administrator shall cancel such assigned license upon the issuance of a new
license. 



('75 Code, § 9.1-11) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.25  ANNUAL RENEWAL; LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   Any license issued by the Zoning Admini- strator shall expire
on June 30 of each year but may be renewed under the provisions of this
chapter for additional periods of one year. ('75 Code, § 9.1-12)



   (B)   The annual license fee or renewal thereof for any mobile home
park shall be $5 for each mobile home space improved and available for
occupancy within the corporate limits of the city.



('75 Code, § 9.1-13) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.26  REVOCATION.



   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to revoke any license
issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter if after due investigation he
determines that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or that any mobile home park is being maintained in an unsanitary
manner, or is a nuisance.



('75 Code, § 9.1-14) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.27  APPEALS; HEARINGS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an order of the Zoning Administrator
granting, denying, renewing, or revoking a license for a mobile home park
under this chapter may appeal to the City Council within ten days after the
issuance of such order by the Zoning Administrator. The City Council shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal and give due notice to the
appellant. Any appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement of
the Zoning Administrator until the hearing by the City Council.



('75 Code, § 9.1-15) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a mis- demeanor and may be punished by a fine of not
more than $50 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or punished by both fine
and imprisonment in the discre-tion of the court. Each day that a violation
continues to exist shall be considered a separate offense.



('75 Code, 9.1-4) (Ord. passed 11-12-72)



CHAPTER 152:  DRAINAGE REGULATIONS



Section



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Drainage devices; installation, maintenance; permit required



   152.03   Approval of permit



   152.04   Construction and alteration of land surfaces



   152.05   Drainage piping



   152.06   Roadway crossings



   152.07   Natural channel maintenance on private property



   152.08   Storm drain crossing



   152.09   Storm drainage plan required



   152.10   Streets without curbs or gutters



   152.11   Ditch lines; rights-of-way



   152.12   Storm drainage systems



Cross-reference:



   Subdivision regulations, see Chapter 154



   Building regulations, see Chapter 150



   Streets and sidewalks, see Chapter 96



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



      For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRAINAGE DEVICE.  Any culvert, pipe, ditch, swale, or other device
used to channelize, collect, divert, or in any way modify the natural flow of
surface water over property.



   DRAINAGE POLICY.  The set of policies and regulations as modified from
time to time, drawn by the City Manager, approved by the City Council, and
made available to the public. The City Manager shall present to the Council a
proposed set of policies and regulations together with such amendments as
become necessary from time to time.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



§ 152.02  DRAINAGE DEVICES; INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, no drainage
device other than drain pipes from down spouts from residences shall be
placed, installed, or maintained in any manner contrary to the drainage
policies of the city.



   (B)   No drainage device may be installed or maintained within the
city, without the owner of the property on which the proposed installation is
to take place, first obtaining a permit from the City Manager issued pursuant
to the drainage policy.



   (C)   The city shall issue a permit for the installa- tion and
maintenance of a drainage device only after a determination that the proposed
installation meets the requirements of and conforms to the drainage policies.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.03  APPROVAL OF PERMIT.



   No plat, plan of subdivision, or building permit shall be approved or
issued by the city without the property owner first submitting for review and
approval, a plan and map or plat showing the flow and discharge of surface
water from the site or subdivision, which plan shall be filed with the City
Manager. The City Manager may waive all or any portion of this requirement if
the proposed work to be performed will not, in his opinion, substantially
affect the flow of surface water from the property.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



Cross-reference:



   Subdivision regulations, see Chapter 154



   Building regulations, see Chapter 150



§ 152.04  CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATION OF LAND SURFACES.



   All construction, excavation, and alteration of land surfaces within
the jurisdiction of the city shall be done in accordance with the drainage
policies of the city as modified from time to time.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.05  DRAINAGE PIPING.



   All streams or natural waterways having a water- shed greater than ten
acres shall not be piped except at road crossing by any party with the
exception that such a stream may be piped for a 25-year storm and that such
piping system must be designed by a licensed engineer.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



§ 152.06  ROADWAY CROSSINGS.



   The city shall be responsible for all roadway crossings on city streets
and other storm drain systems located in city street right-of-ways in
existence as of the first adoption of these regulations. This responsibility
shall exist only as to the width of the street right-of-way.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



§ 152.07  NATURAL CHANNEL MAINTENANCE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Except as noted in § 152.08 of this chapter, the city will
not be responsible for natural waterway channel maintenance on private
property. It shall be incumbent on the property owners to clear and leave
open all natural drainage waterways on his property and he shall not place
any restrictions in the water- way that would hamper the natural flow.



   (B)   In cases existing where private drainage systems presently
connect to city system piping, either up stream or down stream, the city
shall not be responsible for operation or maintenance of any off right-of-way
piping or assume any liability for such except as noted in § 152.08 of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



§ 152.08  STORM DRAIN CROSSING.



   In cases where a storm drain crossing is made, the city, upon
recommendation of the Public Works Director, approved by the City Manager,
and accepted by City Council, may assume maintenance responsibilities across
private property if a drainage easement is granted for such drainage for the
property effected at no cost to the city save legal and recording costs.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



§ 152.09  STORM DRAINAGE PLAN REQUIRED.



   All proposed subdivision plats or individual building plats (except
single-family residences) shall have a storm drainage plan to show natural
drainage over the property and the proposed method of collecting storm water
prior to its release to adjacent properties. The plats shall be made part of
the zoning permit application and shall be approved by the city. Permanent
drainage easements may be required and these shall be obtained or granted at
no expense to the city.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



§ 152.10  STREETS WITHOUT CURBS OR GUTTERS.



   In presently existing streets without curbs and gutters, the following
regulations shall apply:



   (A)   No single driveway entrance shall exceed 24 feet in width, and
at a ditch crossing, no pipe shall be smaller than 15 inches, and larger pipe
may be required. In cases where smaller driveway pipes presently exist they
may continue except at the discretion of the city they may be ordered to be
removed or enlarged at no expense to the city. The sheet flow of one driveway
may be drained upon the street but any additional driveways shall be designed
to drain onto the side ditch on the same side as the drive. Driveways shall
not be constructed lower than the street grade, present or future, except at
the risk or liability of the driveway owner. The city shall assume no
liability for sheet flow into a driveway constructed lower than street grade.
It is suggested as a design standard that a minimum elevation of 6 inches be
required for all such driveways as they cross the ditch line or right-of-way.



   (B)   The front ditch line may be piped, by permit issued by the
city and at no expense to the city. Such piping shall not be smaller than 15
inches, and larger pipe may be required. A ditch line or swale shall still be
required to have the effect to drain the street and to prevent sheet flow
drainage from the property from coming into the street. A drop inlet and/or
catch basin shall be required at every property line or 150 feet, whichever
is smaller. All piping, basins, and the like shall be at the sole expense of
the requesting property owner. Labor rates shall be charged as per charges
adopted by Council. All such piping shall be subject to removal by the city
at any time it is in the best interest of the city. The city will assume
maintenance responsibility for such systems properly constructed and approved
by the city.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.11  DITCH LINES; RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The city hereby reemphasizes its right to re- establish any
ditch lines or drainage situations in its rights-of-way at its discretion. In
cases where down stream adjacent property owners object to such action, the
city shall not assume any liability for its not taking any action.



   (B)   The city shall not be responsible nor shall it take any action
to modify any sheet flow type drainage or any unopened right-of-way, present
or future, or any other city-owned property not in use.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



§ 152.12  STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.



   All storm drainage systems shall be designed for a ten-year storm and
all cross drainage in natural water courses shall be designed for a 25-year
storm. The city shall endeavor to inventory its cross street drainage over
the next two years with regards to condition and adequacy, and shall develop
a five-year plan to upgrade any shortcomings found.



(Ord. passed 1-13-86)



CHAPTER 153:  WATERSHED PROTECTION



Section



   153.01   Adoption of the Unified  Development Ordinance (UDO) by
reference



§ 153.01  ADOPTION OF THE UNIFIED  DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (UDO) BY
REFERENCE.



   The watershed protection regulations are now included in the Unified
Development Ordinance (UDO), which is hereby adopted by reference as if set
forth in full.  Copies of the UDO are available for public review during
regular office hours in the Office of the City Planner.  Questions
concerning the UDO should be directed to the City Planner.



(Ord. passed 8-13-07)



CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   154.01   Adoption of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) by
reference



§ 154.01  ADOPTION OF THE UNIFIED  DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (UDO) BY
REFERENCE.



   The subdivision regulations are now included in the Unified Development
Ordinance (UDO), which is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in
full.  Copies of the UDO are available for public review during regular
office hours in the Office of the City Planner.  Questions concerning the
UDO should be directed to the City Planner.



(Ord. passed 8-13-07)



CHAPTER 155:  ZONING CODE



Section



   155.001   Adoption of the Unified Development Code (UDO) by
reference.



§ 155.001  ADOPTION OF THE UNIFIED  DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE (UDO) BY
REFERENCE.



   The Zoning Code is now included in the Unified Development Ordinance
(UDO), which is hereby adopted by reference as if set forth in full.  Copies
of the UDO are available for public review during regular office hours in the
Office of the City Planner.  Questions concerning the UDO should be directed
to the City Planner.



(Ord. passed 8-13-07)



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina General Statutes





References to 1975 Code of Ordinances





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Cite
 
Code Section




1-117
 
150.093


14-4
 
10.99, 35.99, 54.22, 70.99, 77.99, 93.99, 111.99, 112.99, 131.08, 133.99,
150.090, 150.109, 150.999


14-202.10
 
115.01


14-204
 
117.06


14-223
 
130.04


14-277
 
117.06


Ch. 18B
 
114.16


18B-101(9)
 
112.01


18B-101(15)
 
112.01


18B-300(c)
 
112.01


18B-1001
 
112.15


Ch. 20
 
70.05, 78.99


20-37
 
Ch. 114


20-97
 
74.01


20-97(a)
 
114.14


20-219.11
 
92.16


20-280
 
114.11, 114.16


25-3-512
 
34.04


Ch. 44A, Art. 1
 
92.18


58-80-1 - 58-80- 60
 
91.76


58-80-15
 
91.76


58-80-25
 
91.76


58-84-45
 
91.77


58-84-50
 
91.77


Ch. 90, Art. 5
 
130.09


Ch. 105, Art. 5, Subch. 1
 
34.05


Ch. 105, Art. 5, Subch. VIII
 
34.99


Ch. 105, Art. 9, Subch. 1
 
34.99


105-62
 
110.14


105-109
 
110.04, 110.12


105-113.77
 
110.14


105-164.3(17)
 
34.05


105-187.1(3), (4)
 
34.05


105-230
 
34.99


105-241.7
 
34.05


105-242
 
34.99


105-349
 
34.05


105-368
 
34.99


113-87
 
93.05


130A-498
 
96.02


130A-498(b1)
 
96.04


135-23
 
31.04


136-141 et seq.
 
92.21


136-143
 
92.21


143-129
 
34.16, 34.19


143-131
 
34.16, 34.18


143-138(e)
 
150.015


143-213(18)
 
51.002


143-215.1
 
51.002, 51.056


143-215.1(b)
 
51.056


143-215.1(d)
 
51.002


143-215.3(a)(14 )
 
51.002


143-215.6B
 
51.146


143-215.6B(f)
 
51.146


143-215.6B(g)
 
51.146


143-215.6B(h)
 
51.146


143-215.6B(i)
 
51.146


153A-275
 
51.001


160-303
 
92.01


160-303.2
 
92.01


Ch. 160A, Art. 10
 
150.090


Ch. 160A, Art. 19
 
150.003, 150.024


Ch. 160A, Art. 19, part 6
 
150.066, 150.093


Ch. 160A, Art. 20
 
150.004


160A-71
 
30.01


160A-77
 
10.01


160A-79
 
10.01


160A-148
 
31.25


160A-174(a)
 
96.02


160A-175
 
10.99


160A-175(d)
 
110.12


160A-178
 
118.01


160A-182
 
93.04


160A-186
 
93.01


160A-187
 
93.02


160A-188
 
93.05


160A-189
 
130.01


160A-190
 
130.01


160A-193
 
54.10, 55.05, 92.01


160A-194
 
110.02, Ch. 114


160A-207
 
110.12


160A-208.1
 
34.05


160A-211
 
34.05, 110.02


160A-215.1(b), (d), (e)(1), (e)(2)
 
34.05


160A-215.1(f)
 
34.99


160A-281
 
32.01


160A-300.6
 
78.01


160A-303
 
92.02


160A-303.2
 
92.02


160A-312
 
51.001


160A-347
 
56.09


160A-427
 
150.109


160A-430
 
150.113


160A-431
 
150.112


160A-441
 
150.066


160A-443
 
150.066, 150.072, 150.088, 150.090


160A-444
 
150.066, 150.087


160A-445
 
150.093


160A-446
 
150.090


160A-448
 
150.072


160A-466
 
150.091, 150.092


162A-88
 
52.36


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1975 CODE OF ORDINANCES



 

1975 Code Section
 
1996 Code Section




1-1
 
10.01


1-3
 
10.05


1-4
 
10.06


1-5
 
10.09


1-6
 
10.99


1-8
 
11.01


1-9
 
10.02


2-1
 
31.01


2-3
 
31.02


2-4
 
34.01


2-8
 
34.02


2-9
 
34.03


2-10
 
31.04


2-11
 
30.01


2-12
 
30.02


2-13
 
30.03


2-14
 
30.04


2-15
 
31.20


2-16
 
31.21


2-17
 
31.22


2-18
 
31.23


2-19
 
31.24


2-20
 
31.25


2-21
 
31.26


2-22
 
31.27


2-23
 
31.28


2-24
 
31.29


3-1
 
93.02


3-2
 
93.03


3-4
 
93.04


3-6
 
93.05


5-1
 
35.01


5-2
 
35.02


5-3
 
35.03


5-4
 
35.04


5-5
 
35.05


5-6
 
35.06


5-7
 
35.99


6-1
 
131.02


6-2
 
131.01


6-3
 
131.03


6-4
 
131.04


6-5
 
131.04


6-6
 
131.05


6-7
 
130.06


6-8
 
131.07


6-10
 
131.08


6-12
 
131.09


6-13
 
131.10


7-1
 
91.01


7-2
 
91.02


7-3
 
91.02


7-5
 
91.41


7-6
 
91.42


7-7
 
91.03


7-8
 
91.55


7-9
 
91.56


7-12
 
91.57


7-13
 
91.57


7-14
 
91.58


7-15
 
91.04


7-29
 
91.70


7-30
 
91.71, 91.72


7-31
 
91.73


7-32
 
91.74


7-33
 
91.75


7-34
 
91.76


7-35
 
91.77


7-36
 
91.77


9.1-1
 
151.01


9.1-2
 
151.04


9.1-3
 
151.05


9.1-4
 
151.99


9.1-5
 
151.20


9.1-6
 
151.21


9.1-8
 
151.22


9.1-9
 
151.23


9.1-10
 
151.23


9.1-11
 
151.24


9.1-12
 
151.25


9.1-13
 
151.25


9.1-14
 
151.26


9.1-15
 
151.27


9.1-18
 
151.03


10-2
 
90.02


10-3
 
90.03


10-4
 
90.04


10-5
 
90.05


10-6
 
90.06


10-7
 
90.07


10-8
 
90.07


10-9
 
90.08


10-10
 
90.09


10.1
 
90.01


11-1
 
130.01


11-2
 
130.02


11-3
 
130.03, 130.99


11-3.1
 
56.10


11-4
 
130.04


11-5
 
130.04


11-6
 
130.04


11-7
 
130.05


11-8
 
130.05


11-9
 
130.05


11-11
 
130.06


11-12
 
130.08


11-12.1
 
130.07


11-12.2
 
130.07


11-12.3
 
130.07


11-12.4
 
130.07


12-1
 
32.01


12-2
 
32.02


12-3
 
32.03


12-4
 
32.04


13-1
 
55.01


13-2
 
55.02


13-3
 
55.03


13-4
 
55.04


13-5
 
55.05


13-6
 
55.06


13-8
 
55.20


13-9
 
55.20


13-10
 
55.21


13-11
 
55.21


13-13
 
55.22


13-14
 
55.35


13-15
 
55.35


13-16
 
55.36


13-17
 
55.37


13-18
 
55.38


15-1
 
114.01


15-2
 
114.02


15-3
 
114.03


15-4
 
114.04


15-5
 
114.05


15-6
 
114.10


15-7
 
114.11


15-8
 
114.12


15-9
 
114.13


15-10
 
114.14


15-11
 
114.15


15-12
 
114.16


15-13
 
114.17


15-14
 
114.25


15-15
 
114.26


15-16
 
114.27


15-17
 
114.28


15-18
 
114.29


15-19
 
114.30


15-20
 
114.31


15-21
 
114.32


15-22
 
114.33


15-23
 
114.34


15-24
 
114.35


15-25
 
114.36


17-1
 
70.01


17-2
 
70.02


17-3
 
70.02


17-5
 
70.04


17-6
 
70.04


17-8
 
70.06


17-9
 
70.07


17-10
 
70.09


17-11
 
70.08


17-12
 
70.10


17-13
 
70.11


17-14
 
70.12


17-15
 
70.13


17-16
 
70.14


17-17
 
70.13


17-18
 
70.15


17-19
 
70.16


17-20
 
71.01


17-21
 
71.02


17-22
 
71.03


17-23
 
71.03


17-24
 
71.04


17-30
 
72.01


17-31
 
72.02


17-32
 
72.03


17-33
 
72.04


17-34
 
72.05


17-35
 
72.06


17-36
 
72.07


17-37
 
72.08


17-39
 
72.10


17-39.1
 
73.01


17-39.2
 
73.01


17-39.3
 
73.02


17-40
 
73.03


17-41
 
73.03


17-42
 
73.04


17-43
 
73.04


17-44
 
73.04


17-44.1
 
73.04


17-45
 
73.04


17-46
 
73.04


17-47
 
73.04


17-48
 
73.05


17-49
 
73.06


17-49.1
 
74.02


17-49.5
 
73.07


17-50
 
73.08


17-50.1
 
73.09


17-51.1
 
73.99


18-3
 
52.02


18-4
 
52.03


18-5
 
52.04


18-6
 
52.05


18-7
 
52.07


18-8
 
52.08


18-9
 
52.09


18-10
 
52.10


18-11
 
52.11


18-12
 
52.12


18-13
 
52.13


18-14
 
52.14


18-15
 
52.01


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




—
 
8-8-94
 
150.095


—
 
10-12-09
 
118.01 - 118.04, 118.99


—
 
11-8-10
 
54.06


—
 
4-11-11
 
54.06, 54.07


—
 
5-9-11
 
55.50


—
 
9-12-11
 
54.21, 54.22, 54.24 - 54.28


—
 
11-14-11
 
50.06


—
 
12-12-11
 
53.03


—
 
5-14-12
 
116.01


—
 
7-9-12
 
54.06


—
 
7-9-12
 
110.14


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




1
 
-  -
 
130.07


38
 
9-4-39
 
55.01


55
 
6-3-46
 
130.03, 130.99


56
 
9-5-49
 
114.10 - 114.17, 114.25


3
 
9-19-49
 
72.10, 130.07


4
 
-  -
 
130.07


2
 
9-4-51
 
130.07


36
 
10-20-52
 
130.05


15
 
-  -
 
91.02, 91.70 - 91.72


16
 
10-15-53
 
32.04, 91.02


20
 
-  -
 
91.01


40
 
2-3-54
 
52.04, 52.12


46
 
-  -
 
71.02


50
 
-  -
 
55.03


57
 
-  -
 
114.05


66
 
-  -
 
52.14


6
 
4-15-54
 
93.05


70
 
10-21-54
 
52.01, 52.08 - 52.11


72
 
10-21-54
 
52.07


74
 
9-15-55
 
130.05


—
 
12-9-63
 
55.20, 55.21


—
 
7-16-64
 
52.13


—
 
12-14-65
 
72.01 - 72.10


—
 
3-24-66
 
30.02


—
 
9-10-67
 
30.02


—
 
4-10-68
 
35.01 - 35.06, 35.99


122
 
1-4-71
 
130.01


—
 
1-10-72
 
55.02


—
 
11-12-72
 
151.03, 151.04, 151.05, 151.20 - 151.27, 151.99


—
 
5-12-75
 
73.01 - 73.06, 73.99


—
 
6-9-75
 
56.10


—
 
11-13-78
 
56.10


—
 
1-8-79
 
73.07


—
 
7-11-83
 
31.22


—
 
9-12-83
 
70.03, Ch. 75, Sched. IV


—
 
5-14-84
 
56.01 - 56.08, Ch. 56, App. § 8


—
 
1-14-85
 
113.01 - 113.04, 113.99


—
 
4-  -85
 
52.05


—
 
4-15-85
 
30.02


—
 
5-13-85
 
Ch. 56, App. §§ 1 - 13


—
 
9-9-85
 
52.15


—
 
1-13-86
 
152.01 - 152.12


—
 
10-13-86
 
70.05


—
 
7-1-87
 
56.10


—
 
8-10-87
 
56.09


—
 
8-8-88
 
52.30 - 52.36


88-1
 
12-12-88
 
54.02


—
 
1-9-89
 
151.01


—
 
9-11-89
 
91.40, 91.99


—
 
12-11-89
 
31.03


—
 
1-8-90
 
92.01, 92.02, 92.10 - 92.21, 92.35


—
 
2-12-90
 
71.01


—
 
5-14-90
 
72.09, Ch. 75, Sched. V, 93.06


—
 
8-12-91
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I


—
 
2-10-92
 
54.01 - 54.10, 54.20 - 54.22, 54.24 - 54.28, 54.35, 54.36


—
 
3-1-92
 
111.01 - 111.10, 111.99


92-4-1
 
4-13-92
 
130.01


—
 
7-13-92
 
71.02, Ch. 75, Sched. I, III


92-12-1
 
12-14-92
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I


93-1-1
 
1-11-93
 
91.20 - 91.26, 91.99, Ch. 91, App. §§ 1 - 3


93-7-1
 
7-12-93
 
110.01 - 110.14


93-9-2
 
9-  -93
 
53.02, 53.03


93-9-6
 
9-13-93
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I


93-8-1
 
9-13-93
 
91.99


93-10-1
 
10-11-93
 
54.26


93-11-1
 
11-8-93
 
112.20


—
 
3-8-93
 
55.05, 55.07, 151.01


—
 
6-14-93
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
8-9-93
 
55.05, 55.07


94-6-1
 
6-13-94
 
91.24


94-6-3
 
6-13-94
 
90.99, 130.09


94-6-6
 
6-13-94
 
92.36, 92.98, 92.99


94-8-1
 
8-8-94
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


94-8-2
 
8-8-94
 
Ch. 76, Sched. I


94-8-3
 
8-8-94
 
53.02


94-8-4
 
8-8-94
 
150.001 - 150.004, 150.015 - 150.025, 150.035 - 150.039, 150.050 - 150.052,
150.065 - 150.094, 150.105 - 150.113, 150.125 - 150.127, 150.999


—
 
8-8-94
 
53.04, Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
8-9-94
 
56.10


94-9-1
 
9-12-94
 
34.04


94-9-2
 
9-12-94
 
10.99


94-9-3
 
9-12-94
 
54.25, 54.99


—
 
10-10-94
 
34.15 - 34.24


94-10-1
 
10-10-94
 
91.40, 91.99


—
 
11-15-94
 
110.13, 115.01, 115.02


—
 
12-12-94
 
56.11


94-12-1
 
12-12-94
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I


—
 
12-12-94
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


95-4-2
 
4-10-95
 
55.50 - 55.52


—
 
4-10-95
 
151.02


95-11-1
 
-  -95
 
112.01 - 112.04, 112.99


95-11-2
 
11-13-95
 
132.01, 132.02


—
 
11-13-95
 
Ch. 56, App. § 14


—
 
1-  -96
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I


—
 
4-8-96
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


96-1-1
 
1-8-96
 
53.02


96-7-1
 
7-8-96
 
Ch. 76, Sched. I


96-11-1
 
11-11-96
 
Ch. 116


—
 
11-11-96
 
131.08


96-12-1
 
12-9-96
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


97-1-1
 
1-13-97
 
Ch. 75, Sched. I, VI


97-3-1
 
3-10-97
 
Ch. 133


97-4-1
 
4- -97
 
54.25


97-5-1
 
- -97
 
110.02, 110.10, 110.14


97-5-2
 
5-12-97
 
Ch. 117


—
 
9-14-98
 
54.01, 54.03


—
 
1-10-00
 
56.05, 56.10, Ch. 56, App. §§ 4, 11


TC00-2
 
2-14-00
 
93.03


—
 
4-10-00
 
150.051 - 150.053, 150.999


—
 
7-10-00
 
34.05, 34.99


—
 
7-10-00
 
Ch. 56, App. § 14


—
 
7-10-00
 
Ch. 56, App. § 15


TC00-5
 
10-9-00
 
150.087, 150.999


TC00-7
 
1-8-01
 
150.112


TC00-8
 
1-8-01
 
150.002


—
 
3-14-01
 
Ch. 56, App. §§ 13, 14


—
 
5-14-01
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
6-11-01
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


TC01-04
 
1-14-02
 
150.999


TC01-05
 
11-12-01
 
77.01, 77.99


—
 
11-12-01
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
5-13-02
 
Ch. 56, App. § 2


—
 
7-8-02
 
54.27


—
 
11-11-02
 
95.01 - 95.03, 95.99


—
 
7-14-03
 
93.03


—
 
10-20-03
 
150.079, 150.082 - 150.086, 150.088, 150.093


—
 
2-9-04
 
53.02, 53.03


—
 
3-14-05
 
130.99


—
 
7-9-07
 
116.01 - 116.07


—
 
8-13-07
 
153.01, 154.01, 155.01


—
 
12-10-07
 
34.20


—
 
1-14-08
 
52.36


—
 
12-8-08
 
91.05


—
 
3-9-09
 
150.093


—
 
5-11-09
 
93.01 - 93.10, 93.99


—
 
1-12-11
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
8-8-11
 
Ch. 76, Sched. I


—
 
12-12-11
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
1-9-12
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
4-9-12
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
4-9-12
 
113.20


—
 
4-9-12
 
150.069, 150.079, 150.082, 150.085.1


—
 
12-10-12
 
Ch. 75, Sched. II


—
 
8-12-13
 
78.01 - 78.06, 78.99


—
 
8-12-13
 
119.01 - 119.09


13-08-09
 
9-9-13
 
51.001 - 51.003, 51.015 - 51.028, 51.040 - 51.043, 51.055, 51.056, 51.070 -
51.083, 51.095 - 51.097, 51.105, 51.115, 51.125, 51.135 - 51.137, 51.145 -
51.147, 51.999


—
 
10-14-13
 
91.40


—
 
3-10-14
 
93.01 - 93.11, 93.99


—
 
5-12-14
 
94.01 - 94.07, 94.99


—
 
6-9-14
 
Ch. 56, App. § 12


—
 
2-9-15
 
Charter § 2.12


—
 
8-8-16
 
96.01 - 96.08


—
 
4-10-17
 
93.12, 93.99


—
 
5-14-18
 
52.31 - 52.36


—
 
5-14-18
 
96.01 - 96.08


—
 
6-11-18
 
112.15


HB 993
 
6-13-18
 
Charter 3.42


 
 
 
 
 




 



 


Bessemer City Unified Development Ordinance


BESSEMER CITY UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE



Current through August 2018



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CHAPTER 1.
PURPOSE



1.1   Title



1.2   Authority



1.3   Purpose



1.4   Jurisdiction



1.5   Severability



1.6   Reenactment and Repeal of Existing Ordinance(s)



1.7   Effective Date



1.8   Adoption Date



Section 1.1   Title



   This Ordinance shall be known as the "Unified Development Ordinance of
Bessemer City, North Carolina" and may be referred to herein as the "Unified
Development Ordinance", the “UDO”, or “this Ordinance.”



Section 1.2   Authority



   This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to Bessemer
City by Chapter 160A, Article 19 of the General Statutes of North Carolina
and by any special local Acts enacted by the North Carolina General Assembly
for Bessemer City in order to carry out the purposes stated therein.  The
standards, districts, and maps identified in this Ordinance shall be in
accordance with the objectives and policies of locally adopted comprehensive
plans and other such plans as may have been adopted for the physical
development of Bessemer City.



Section 1.3   Purpose



   A.   The Ordinance enables Bessemer City to respond uniformly and
consistently to development proposals and to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of its residents. The UDO seeks to provide uniformity,
certainty, and predictability regarding land use and development issues to
the greatest degree feasible for properties located within the jurisdiction
of this Ordinance. Notwithstanding, this Ordinance also attempts to provide
flexibility in dealing with situations that may fall outside typical
processes and requirements.  The elements that make up the Ordinance are
interrelated and cannot be taken in isolation; they must be taken within the
context and intent of the entire Ordinance.



   B.   Other goals that this UDO is anticipated to serve include:



      1.   Lessen congestion on streets;



      2.   Secure safety from fire, panic and dangers;



      3.   Avoid undue concentration of population;



      4.   Facilitate the efficient and adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements.



      5.   Provide a guide for the orderly growth and development of
the City;



      6.   Regulate the use of buildings, structures and land;



      7.   Control the bulk, scale and design of buildings and
structures;



      8.   Ensure adequate privacy and access to property;



      9.   Maintain orderly and compatible land use and development
patterns;



      10.   Protect the integrity of water supply watersheds;



      11.   Encourage environmentally responsible development
practices;



      12.   Maintain and develop economically vibrant commercial and
industrial areas;



      13.   Retain and expand the City’s employment base;



      14.   Provide attractive and effective signage that is
compatible with the surrounding environment;



      15.   Accommodate and promote pedestrians and pedestrian use
to the greatest degree feasible and practical;



      16.   Allow a range of housing choices and options; 



      17.   Establish clear and effective development review
procedures;



      18.   Coordinate transportation networks and utilities within
proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and highways and with
other public facilities;



      19.   Dedicate or reserve recreation areas serving residents
of the immediate neighborhood within a subdivision or, alternatively, for
provision of funds to be used to acquire recreation areas serving residents
of a development or subdivision or nearby developments or subdivisions;



      20.   Ensure that rights-of-way or easements for street and
utility purposes are secured;



      21.   Distribute population and traffic in a manner that will
avoid congestion and overcrowding and create conditions that substantially
promote the public health, welfare and safety.



      22.   Implement and ensure consistency with officially adopted
plans;



      23.   Provide appropriate and effective enforcement mechanisms.



Section 1.4   Jurisdiction



   A.   These regulations govern the development and use of all land
and structures only within the planning jurisdiction of Bessemer City as now
fixed and as may be amended in the future, said territory being indicated in
the Official Zoning Map of Bessemer City (hereafter referred to as "Zoning
Map", "Official Zoning Map" or "Bessemer City Zoning Map") as is on file at
the office of the Administrator.  This map and its boundaries shall be
incorporated and made part of this Ordinance.



   B.   No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and
no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered, unless in conformity
with all the provisions of this Ordinance for the district in which it is
located and other applicable regulations, except as otherwise provided by
this Ordinance.



   C.   Except as herein provided, the provisions of this ordinance
shall apply to all land, buildings, structures and uses thereof located
within the planning jurisdiction of this ordinance, including land owed by
municipal units of government.  To the extent allowed by law, this Ordinance
shall also apply to all land, buildings, structures and uses owned by City or
federal agencies located within the planning jurisdiction of Bessemer City. 
Where the provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to such structures and
land, such agencies are encouraged to meet the provisions of this
Ordinance.  The provisions of this Ordinance shall also be applicable to the
erection, construction and use of buildings owned by the State of North
Carolina per NCGS 160A-392; however, no land owned by the State may be
included within an overlay district or special use or conditional district
without the approval of the Council of State.



Section 1.5   Severability



   If any section or specific provision or standard of this Ordinance or
any zoning district boundary that may exist in the future is found by a court
to be invalid for any reason, the decision of the court shall not affect the
validity of any other section, provision, standard, or district boundary of
these regulations except the provision in question.  The other portions of
these regulations not affected by the decision of the court shall remain in
full force and effect.



Section 1.6   Reenactment and Repeal of Existing Ordinance (s)



   A.   This Ordinance is in part carried forward by re-enactment of
some of the provisions of the City of Bessemer City Zoning Ordinance adopted
by the City Council on June 30, 1981, as amended and the City of Bessemer
City Subdivision Ordinance, adopted by the City Council on April 11, 1988, as
amended and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue in force such existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities
that have accrued thereunder are preserved and may be enforced.  All
provisions of the City of Bessemer City Zoning Ordinance), as amended, and
the City of Bessemer City Subdivision Ordinance, as amended, which are not
re-enacted herein are hereby repealed.  All suits at law or in equity and/or
all prosecutions resulting from the violation of said Zoning Ordinance or
Subdivision Ordinance heretofore in effect, which are as of the adoption date
pending in any of the courts of this State or of the United States, shall not
be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this Ordinance but shall
be prosecuted to their finality, the same as if this Ordinance had not been
adopted, and any and all violations of the existing Bessemer City Zoning
Ordinance and/or Subdivision Ordinance, prosecutions or suits for which have
not yet been instituted, may be hereafter filed and prosecuted.  Nothing in
this Ordinance shall be construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss any
litigation or prosecution now pending, and/or which may heretofore have been
instituted or prosecuted.



Section 1.7   Effective Date



   This Ordinance shall become effective on August 13, 2007.



Section 1.8   Adoption Date



   The Bessemer City Council hereby adopts this Ordinance on the 13th day
of August, 2007.



CHAPTER 2.
INTERPRETATIONS; RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; DEFINITIONS



2.1   Official Zoning Map



2.2   Interpretation of Zoning Map



2.3   Fractional Requirements



2.4   Text Controls Over Graphics



2.5   Conflicting Provisions



2.6   Interpretations of Terms and Words



2.7   Terms Defined in this Ordinance



Section 2.1   Official Zoning Map



   A.   Each lot and tract located within the territorial jurisdiction
of this Ordinance shall be located in one or more zoning districts contained
in this Ordinance.  The map identifying the location of such zoning district
boundaries shall be identified as the “Official Zoning Map.”  If the
City Council enacts subsequent zoning map changes, such changes shall be made
upon the Official Zoning Map.  No changes to any zoning district boundaries
shall be made on the Official Zoning Map except in conformance with the
procedures set forth in this Ordinance. 



   B.   The Official Zoning Map may be comprised of one or more sheets
or digital maps, properly identified as such, which shall be on file with the
Administrator.  Land within zoning districts on the Official Zoning Map
shall be classified with a zoning district designation, which shall supersede
any contrary designation on a former Official Zoning Map.  Regardless of the
existence of any alleged copy of the Official Zoning Map, the Official Zoning
Map in the UDO Administrator’s office shall be the final authority as to
the current zoning status of a piece of property.  A copy of the Official
Zoning Map shall be located with the Administrator. 



Section 2.2   Interpretation of Zoning Map



   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the zoning
districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall be used to
interpret the maps:



   A.   Where a map shows a boundary line located within a street or
alley right-of-way, railroad or utility line right-of-way, easement, or
navigable or non-navigable waterway, it shall be considered to be in the
center of the right-of-way, easement, or waterway. If the actual location of
such right-of-way, easement, or waterway varies slightly from the location as
shown on a map, then the actual location shall control.



   B.   Where a map shows a boundary line as being located a specific
distance from a street line or other physical feature, that distance shall
control.



   C.   Where a map shows a district boundary to approximately coincide
with a property line or city, town, or county border, the property line or
city, town, or county border shall be considered to be the district boundary,
unless otherwise indicated.



   D.   Where a map shows a district boundary not coinciding or
approximately coinciding with any street, alley, railroad, waterway, or
property line, and no dimensions are shown, the location of the boundary
shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.



   E.   In instances when a zoning case file contains detailed
information regarding the boundary, that information will be used as the
correct boundary location.



   F.   If it is alleged by any party that an error exists on the
zoning maps with respect to any zoning district designation, zoning district
boundary, special use permit or conditional district boundary, historical
district boundary, the lines showing the effective dates of zoning enactment
or any other matter with respect to the provisions of this ordinance relating
to zoning information, the party may request a review of the alleged error by
the Board of Adjustment, per Section 4.5.1(A)(4).



   H.   Whenever a single lot is located within two or more different
zoning districts, each portion of that lot shall be subject to the
regulations applicable to the district in which it is located.



   Additional provisions for determining the location of boundaries of the
Water Supply Watershed Overlay District are found in Section 6.6.2.2(Q).



Section 2.3   Fractional Requirements



   Whenever any requirement of this Ordinance results in a fraction of a
unit, the fraction will be rounded up to the next whole unit.  Whenever a
density calculation for a lot of record existing prior to June 30, 1981,
results in less than one dwelling unit being permitted, the fractional
requirement will be disregarded and one dwelling unit will be permitted. 



Section 2.4   Text Controls Over Graphics



   This Ordinance contains numerous graphics, pictures, illustrations and
drawings.  However, in case of conflict between the text and a graphic,
picture, illustration or drawing or any other depiction, the text shall
control. 



Section 2.5   Conflicting Provisions



   A.   Where the provisions of this Ordinance are inconsistent with
those of the state or federal government, the more restrictive provisions
shall apply and shall be governed by the designated regulatory agency.  The
more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions or
more stringent controls.



   B.   Where the provisions of this Ordinance are inconsistent with
one another, or are in conflict with provisions found in other adopted
ordinances or regulations adopted by Bessemer City, the more restrictive
provisions shall govern and shall be enforced by those County agency (ies). 
The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes greater restrictions
or more stringent controls



   C.   This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. 
Bessemer City and its staff shall not enforce any such private agreements.



Section 2.6   Interpretations of Terms and Words



   A.   The following rules shall be followed in interpreting words and
terms used in this Ordinance.



      1.   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.



      2.   Words used in the singular number include the plural, and
words used in the plural number include the singular.



      3.   The word "person" includes a firm, association,
organization, partnership, corporation, trust and company as well as an
individual.



      4.   The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel”



      5.   The words “must” or "shall" are always mandatory and
not merely directory.



      6.   The word "may" is permissive in nature, except when the
context of the particular use is negative.  In such case it is mandatory.



      7.   Words used in the singular number include the plural
number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context
of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.



      8.   The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or
building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or
designed to be used or occupied".



      9.   The word "Zoning Map", or "Bessemer City Zoning Map",
“Zoning Map”, or "Official Zoning Map" shall mean the Official Zoning Map
of Bessemer City, North Carolina.



      10.   Any word denoting gender includes the female and the
male.



      11.   The term "City Council" shall mean the "City Council of
Bessemer City, North Carolina".



      12.   The term "Planning Board" shall mean the "Planning Board
of Bessemer City, North Carolina.”



      13.   The term "Board of Adjustment" shall mean the "Board of
Adjustment of Bessemer City, North Carolina.”



      14.   The terms "Zoning Administrator", “UDO
Administrator”, “Subdivision Administrator” or “Administrator”,
shall refer the person(s) administrating said Ordinance.



      15.   The term "Street" shall mean "Road".



      16.   The term “zoning jurisdiction” shall mean
“planning jurisdiction” and shall refer to the geographical area in which
this Ordinance has applicability.



      17.   The term “City” shall refer to “Bessemer City,
North Carolina.”



      18.   The term “Bessemer City Planning Department” or
“Planning Department” shall mean the “Bessemer City Planning and
Development Services Department.”



Section 2.7   Terms Defined in This Ordinance



   A list of definitions of terms, phrases and words used in this
Ordinance follows.  Other terms that are found in this Ordinance are located
in Sections 6.6.2.1 (FH Flood Hazard Overlay District), 6.6.2.2, (WS Water
Supply Watershed Overlay District) and Section 5.10 (vested rights).  Words
used but not specifically defined in this Ordinance shall be defined by
reference to (1) the most recently adopted version of the State Building
Code; or, if not defined there, in (2) the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary.



   The list of terms defined in this Ordinance and shown in Table 2.7-1 is
as follows:



 



Abandoned


Abutting [Property (ies)]


Active Construction


Adjacent [Property (ies)]


Administrator


Administrator, Land Use Ordinance


Adult Establishment


Adult Hotel


Adult Video


Agricultural Use


Airport


Airstrip


Alley


Alteration


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Indoor


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Outdoor



Animal Hospital (indoor)


Animal Hospital (with outdoor kennel)


Animal Kennel


Animal Shelter


Antenna


Antenna, Amateur Radio


Apartment


Appeal


Art Gallery


Assisted Living Center


ATM


Auction House


Auditorium/Assembly Hall/Amphitheatre


Automated Teller Machine (ATM)


Automobile Body Shop


Automobile Detail Shop


Automobile Hobbyist


Automobile Repair Shop


Automobile Service Station


Automobile Towing and Wrecker Service


Automobile, Truck, Boat, Motorcycle, Manufactured Home and Recreational
Vehicle Sales and Rental


Awning


Bail Bond


Bank


Banner


Bay Window


Beacon


Bed and Breakfast Inn


Berm


Beverage Store


Billboard


Billiard Parlor


Body Piercing Establishment


Botanical Garden


Boundary Structure


Building


Building, Accessory


Building Elevation


Building Face


Building Footprint


Building Height


Building Materials and Lumber Sales


Building Setback Line


Building Permit


Building, Principal


Bulletin Board


Bus or Train Terminal, Passenger


Business Services


Caliper


Camping and Recreational Vehicle Park


Canopy


Car Wash, Automatic Class I


Car Wash, Automatic Class II


Car Wash, Self Service


Cemetery


Certificate of Compliance


Certificate of Occupancy


Changeable Copy


Charitable Service Facility


Check Cashing Establishment


Church/Place of Worship


Close


Club, Private (without adult entertainment)


College/University


Collector Street


Co-location


Commercial Message


Commercial Services


Commercial Vehicle and Truck Storage


Commercial Zoning District


Common Open Space


Common Open Space, Improved


Community Center


Comprehensive Plan


Conditional Use Permit


Construction


Construction Trailer (temporary use)


Contiguous [Property (ies)]


Continuing Care Facility


Convenience Store


Correctional Facility


Country Club


Crematorium


Cul-de-sac


Day Care Center, Accessory


Day Care Center, Class A


Day Care Center, Class B


Day Care Center, Class C


Deck


Density Credit


Density, Gross


Developer


Development, Multi-Family


Development, Planned Multi-tenant


Diameter at Breast Height


Display of Goods, Outdoors


Distribution/Wholesale/Storage Operations


Drive-in Window


Drive-through Facility


Driveway, Front-loaded


Dry Cleaner Service Outlet


Duplex


Dwelling, Attached


Dwelling, Detached


Dwelling Unit


Dwelling, Manufactured Home


Dwelling, Manufactured Home Class A


Porch offered by Gaston County- not discussed by other jurisdictions


Dwelling, Manufactured Home Class B


Dwelling, Manufactured Home Class C


Dwelling, Manufactured Home Class D


Dwelling, Mixed Use


Dwelling, Multi-family


Dwelling, Single-family


Dwelling, Two-family


Easement


Electronic Gaming Operation


Encroachment


Engineer


Entrance, Primary


Entrance, Secondary


Essential Services


Essential Services, Class 1


Essential Services, Class 2


Essential Services, Class 3


Essential Services, Class 4


Extraterritorial Jurisdiction


Façade


Family


Family Burial Ground


Family Care Home


Family Member


Farm, Bona Fide


Farm Supply Store


Farmers Market


Fence


Fence, Deer


Fenestration


Financial Institution


Flag


Flea Market


Flex Space


FloorArea Ratio


Food Catering Facility


Food Pantry


Fraternal and Service Organization Meeting Facility (Nonprofit and
Not-For-Profit)


Freeway


Freight and Flying Services


Fueling Pump


Funeral Home


Furniture Store


Gameroom


Garage, Private


Garage/Yard Sale (temporary use)


Golf Course


Grade, Finished


Grade, Street


Grocery Store


Grooming Services


Gross Floor Area


Ground Covers


Group Home


Handicapped Person


Health and Behavioral Care Facility


Heavy Equipment Sales and Service


Highway, Corridor


Highway, Special


Holiday Decorations


Home Occupation, Customary


Home Occupation, Rural


Hospital


House, Atrium


House, Lot Line


House, Patio


House, Twin


House, Village


Hotel


Hotel, Full service


HVAC Equipment


Impervious Surface


Impervious Surface Ratio


Industrial Zoning District


Infill Residential Development,


Junkyard and Salvage Yard


Land-disturbing Activity


Landfill, Land Clearing and Inert Debris (major)


Landfill, Land Clearing and Inert Debris (minor)


Landfill, Onsite


Landowner


Laundromat


Leasable Area, Gross


Library


Loading Space, Off-street


Logo


Lot


Lot Area


Lot Line


Lot line, Front


Lot line, Interior


Lot line, Rear


Lot line, Side


Lot of Record


Lot Width


Lot, Corner


Lot, Interior


Lot, Nonconforming


Lot, Through


Machine, Metal and Woodworking Shop


Manufactured Goods


Manufactured Goods, Class 1


Manufactured Goods, Class 2


Manufactured Goods, Class 3


Manufactured Home


Manufactured Home Park


Manufactured Home Space


Manufactured Home Stand


Marina, Accessory


Marina, Commercial


Maternity Home


Military Reserve Center


Mini-Warehouse


Mobile Home


Mobile Home Park


Model Sales Home


Modular Home


Motel


Multi-family Development


Motor Home


Museum 


Nonconformity


Noncommercial Copy


Nursery (garden)


Nursing Home


Office


Office, Medical Services


Office Zoning District


Outdoor Event (temporary use)


Outdoor Resale Business


Outdoor Storage Yard (Contractor)


Outparcel


Overflow Parking Facility


Package Treatment Plant


Paintball Facility


Parapet


Parent Tract


Park


Parking Bay


Parking Deck


Parking Facility, Overflow


Parking Lot (principal use)


Parking Space, Off-street


Pennant


Permit, Zoning


Pet Grooming Services


Petroleum Distribution Facility


Planned Residential Development (PRD)


Planned Unit Development (PUD)


Plat


Plaza


Playground


Porch


Portable Toilet Services


Post Office


Premises


Private Residential Quarters


Produce Stand


Property Owner


Public Safety Station


Quarry


Racetrack, Large


Racetrack, Small


Railroad Terminal and Yard


Recreational Vehicle


Recreation, Active


Recreation Center and Sports Center


Recycling Collection Facility


Recycling Deposit Station


Recycling Station, Accessory


Residential Development, Infill


Residential Zoning District


Restaurant


Restaurant, Fast Food


Restaurant with Drive Through


Retail, Light


Riding Stable


Right-of-Way


Road, Frontage


Road, Private


Road, Public


Rodeo


Rooming House


Satellite Dish


School, Elementary and Middle (Public and Private)


School, Senior High (Public and Private)


School, Vocational


Schools for the Arts, Etc.


Setback


Setback Line


Setback, Front


Setback, Rear


Setback, Side


Sewer, Community


Shopping Center


Shrub


Sight Triangle


Sign


Sign Face


Sign, Awning


Sign, Building Marker


Sign, Changeable Copy


Sign Copy


Sign, Directional


Sign, Directory


Sign, Flashing


Sign, Government


Sign, Ground


Sign, Identification


Sign, Incidental


Sign, Light Emitting Diode (LED)


Sign, Mailbox


Sign, Menu Board


Sign, Monument


Sign, Non-commercial Copy


Sign, Nonconforming


Sign, Off-premise Advertising


Sign, Pole


Sign, Political


Sign, Portable


Sign, Projecting


Sign, Real Estate


Sign, Roof


Sign, Rotating


Sign, Sandwich Board


Sign, Subdivision Identification


Sign, Suspended


Sign, Wall


Signs, Vehicular


Site Plan


Site Plan, Minor


Site Specific Development Plan


Solid Waste Transfer Station


Special Event


Special Exception


Square


Stadium


Staging Space


Story, Building


Street, Center-line


Street, Major Thoroughfare


Street, Marginal Access


Street, Minor Thoroughfare Structure


Structure, Accessory


Structure, Detached


Structure, Nonconforming


Structure, Permanent


Structure, Principal


Structure, Temporary


Swimming Pool Sales, Service and Supplies


Subdivision


Subdivision, Major


Subdivision, Minor


Subdivision Technical Review Committee


Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing Establishment


Taxidermist


Technical Review Committee


Telecommunications Equipment Buildings


Thoroughfare


Thoroughfare Plan


Tire Recap Facility


Tire Sales, New and/or Used


Tower, Lattice


Tower, Monopole


Tower, Stealth


Tower, Ham Radio


Tower, Radio and Television Broadcast


Tower, Telecommunication


Townhouse


Traditional Neighborhood Development  (TND)


Traffic Impact Analysis


Train Terminal


Transit Station


Tree, Canopy


Tree, Understory


Truck Stop


Truck Terminal


Truck Washing Facility


Use, Accessory


Use By Right


Use, Conditional


Use, Incidental


Use, Nonconforming


Use, Permitted


Use, Principal


Use, Temporary


Variance


Vehicle, Commercial


Vehicle, Emergency


Vehicle, Inoperable


Vehicle, Junked


Vehicle, Passenger


Vehicle, Recreational


Vehicle, Septic Tank


Vehicle, Solid Waste


Vested Right


Wall, Building


Wall, Shared


Warehouse


Water, Public


Wireless Communications


Wood Waste Grinding Operation


Working Days


Yard, Front


Yard, Rear

 


Yard Sale


Yard, Side


Zoning District, Commercial


Zoning District, Conditional


Zoning District, Parallel Conditional Use


Zoning District, General


Zoning District, Industrial


Zoning District, Office


Zoning District, Overlay


Zoning District, Residential


Zoning District, Urban Standards Overlay


Zoo




 



 



TABLE 2.7-1
DEFINED TERMS


Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition


Abandoned
 
 
A use shall be considered abandoned when: 


 
1.  The use is discontinued for a continuous period of at least 180 days,
other than in association with the settlement of an estate or for any cause
that is seasonal in nature); or,


 
(2) The premises are devoted to another use; or,


 
(3) Failure to take all positive action to resume the nonconforming use with
reasonable dispatch, including the failure to advertise the property for sale
or for lease for a period of at least two years.


Abutting [Property (ies)]
 
 
See “Adjacent Property”


Active Construction
 
 
On-site activities such as installation, erection, fabrication, alteration,
demolition or removal of structures, facilities, or additions that contribute
directly to the completion of improvements contemplated or shown on
construction plans.


Adjacent [Property (ies)]
 
 
One or more lots or tracts that abut or touch and having a boundary, or
portion thereof, which is contiguous to the lot in question.  Such
determination shall be made by extending the exterior lot lines of the lot in
question to adjacent lots and/or adjacent roads, streams, easements or
rights-of-way.  The term “adjacent” or “adjacent property” shall
also mean "contiguous” or “contiguous property",  "abutting" or
“abutting property”, "adjacent or adjacent property”.  An example of
how this definition is to be applied is shown below:







Adjoining [Property (ies)]
 
 
See “Adjacent Property”


Administrator
 
 
See “Administrator, Land Use Ordinance”


Administrator, Land Use Ordinance
 
 
A person (or his designee) and any other officials designated by the
governing board for the administration of this Ordinance.  Such person(s)
may also be referred to as the "Administrator."


Adult Establishment
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
Any structure or use of land that meets the definition of “Adult
Establishment” as outlined in NCGS 14-202.10 and includes, but is not
limited to adult video stores and adult hotels.


Adult Hotel
 
 
A hotel, motel, or similar establishment that:


 
(1) Provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
that depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" as one of its principal business purposes; or,


 
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
ten (10) hours; or,


 
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent a sleeping
room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.


Adult Video
 
 
Any store which predominantly displays or which receives a preponderance of
its gross income during any calendar month from sale or rental of films,
motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, computer
media, or other visual or audio representations that depict or describe
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” as
defined in NCGS 14-202.10.


Agricultural Use
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
The commercial production of plants and animals useful to man, including but
not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals
and dairy products, poultry and poultry products; rheas, ostrich, emu,
livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, llamas, horses, ponies,
[NOTE: Horses and ponies must be raised commercially on a horse farm for the
purpose of sale to qualify as an “agricultural use” and are distinct from
riding stables or boarding facilities, which do not quality as an
“agricultural use”], mules, or goats or any mutations or hybrids thereof,
including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals; bees and
apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds,
including nuts; vegetables; nursery, floral and ornamental products; or lands
devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program.  In addition,
an “agricultural use” shall also include land used as pasture or in the
commercial production of fish hatcheries or aquaculture.An “agricultural
use” shall also include the keeping of livestock for commercial or
noncommercial purposes.  Livestock includes but is not limited to: poultry
and hoofed animals such as cattle, horses, swine, goats, and sheep. Also
included in this definition of agricultural uses are agricultural accessory
buildings, and sales of agricultural products grown or raised on the
premises.  Not included in this definition are the commercial slaughtering
of animals for marketing and farm tenant dwellings.  Other uses which shall
not be deemed as “agricultural uses” include (I) zoos and (ii) kennels. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, “agricultural uses” are divided into
three classes:
·   Agricultural Uses, Class I. The growing of all agricultural and
horticultural products (e.g., corn, soybeans, cotton) except nurseries and
commercial greenhouses
·   Agricultural Uses, Class II.  Riding academies, riding corrals and
tracks, and boarding stables; any other animal husbandry except that listed
herein as a Class III use. Hog parlors, however, shall not be considered a
Class II use.
·   Agricultural Uses, Class III.  Dairy barns; high-density cattle
pens; stock yards; poultry houses; manure storage, hog and rabbit meat
production centers on ten (10) acre minimum tracts.


Airport
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility where aircraft can land and take off on a recurring basis and
which is equipped with hangers, refueling facilities and/or repair facilities.


Airstrip
 
Civic/ Institutional Principal Uses
 
An area of land or water that is designed or used on a recurring basis for
the landing and takeoff of aircraft, ultra lights, model airplanes or other
flying apparatus excluding hot air balloons and which does not contain
hangers, refueling facilities or repair facilities.


Alley
 
 
A travel way that affords only a secondary means of access to an abutting
property and is not intended for general traffic circulation.


Alteration
 
 
A change in the size, configuration, or location of a structure; or a change
in the use of a structure or lot from a previously approved or legally
existing size, configuration, location, or use.


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Indoor
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A for-profit commercial facility providing entertainment or games of skill
activities to the general public for a fee and that is wholly enclosed in a
building.  This shall include, but not be limited to: a bowling alley,
indoor paintball facility and movie theatre.  This definition does not
include game rooms. 


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Outdoor
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A for-profit commercial facility providing recreational activities outside of
an enclosed building.  Typical uses include: miniature golf, golf driving
range, skeet shooting, etc… but does not include a stadium.


Animal Hospital (indoor)
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and the
boarding of animals is incidental to the hospital use. All facilities
associated with an animal hospital shall be located indoors.


Animal Hospital (with outdoor kennel)
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A place where animals are given medical or surgical treatment and the
boarding of animals is incidental to the hospital use.  Facilities may be
located outdoors and may include but not be limited to: kennels and training/
exercise areas. 


Animal Kennel
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A place where more than six (6) dogs or other domesticated animals are
groomed, bred, boarded, trained, kept or sold either as a principal use or
accessory to a residential use.


Animal Shelter
 
 
See “Animal Kennel”


Antenna
 
 
Any system of wires, poles, rods, or similar devices used for the
transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves external to or attached to
the exterior of any building.


Antenna, Amateur Radio
 
 
An antenna owned and utilized by a FCC-licensed amateur radio operator.


Apartment
 
 
A room or suite of rooms, with toilet and culinary accommodations, used or
designed for use as a residence by a family and is located in a building that
contains two (2) or more such rooms or suites.


Appeal
 
 
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment where it is alleged that there is error
in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Administrator in the enforcement of this Ordinance.


Art Gallery
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial establishment where individual pieces of art are sold to the
general public on a retail basis. Works of art may also occasionally be sold
on an auction basis at such an establishment.


Arterial, Minor
 
 
A road so designated on the most recently adopted version of the Gaston Urban
Area Thoroughfare Plan.  Roads designated as “minor thoroughfares” shall
also be classified as “minor arterials” for purposes of this Ordinance.


Arterial, Principal
 
 
A road so designated on the most recently adopted version of the Gaston Urban
Area Thoroughfare Plan.  Roads designated on the Cherryville Thoroughfare
Plan as “major thoroughfares” shall also be classified as “principal
arterials” for purposes of this Ordinance.


Assisted Living Center
 
Residential/Agricultural Principal Uses
 
An institution licensed by the state as an "assisted living residence" and
which provides, at a minimum, one meal a day, housekeeping service and
personal care services to seven (7) or more aged or disabled residents.


ATM
 
 
See “Automatic Teller Machine”


Auction House
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility that is used for the purpose of having auctions on a regularly
established basis.  Auctions may be held indoors or outdoors.


Auditorium/Assembly Hall/Amphitheatre
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A structure or facility designed, intended, or used primarily for outside
and/or inside performing art events or other spectator events and contains
seating for spectators of those events. The sale of beverages, snack foods,
and sundries geared to on-premise consumption or usage by spectators shall be
permitted.


Automated Teller Machine (ATM)
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An automated device that performs banking or financial functions at a
location outside of or remote from the controlling financial institution. 
Such facility may also be referred to as an “ATM”.


Automobile Body Shop
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
Any building, premises and land in which or upon which a business is
conducted that primarily involves the painting of vehicles or external
repairing of damaged vehicles.


Automobile Detail Shop
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An establishment primarily engaged in the hand cleaning and waxing of
automobiles. Such activities may take place indoors and outdoors. Such
establishments are distinguished from “car washes” in that there is no
automated equipment involved with the cleaning or waxing the vehicles.


Automobile Hobbyist
 
 
The use of a structure or building for storing and restoring automobiles for
hobby purposes, with no automobile-related commercial or sales activity
taking place. All vehicles shall be titled to the tenant of the building and
all automobile restoration and repair shall be done indoors.


Automobile Repair Shop
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial establishment whose primary purpose involves the maintenance and
servicing of vehicles. "Auto body work" (i.e., work normally associated with
an "automobile body shop,") may not be performed on premises unless the
zoning district in which the use is located allows an "automobile body shop."
The sale of automotive fuels and accessory automobile parts to the public may
be provided on an accessory basis. Notwithstanding, an "automobile repair
shop" is differentiated from an "auto parts store" in that the sale of
automotive parts is not the primary service being offered.


Automobile Service Station
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A use where vehicular fuels are sold at the retail level and where the
installation of automotive items such as lubricants, tubes, batteries and
similar accessories takes place and where minor automobile repair and
maintenance work is conducted. Vehicle repair services (except for paint and
body work) may be conducted on premises. Not more than one (1) automatic car
wash may be provided on site so long as the car wash meets all of the
criteria in that zoning district for an "Automatic Car Wash".  Such use
shall be distinguished from a "convenience store" given that the primary
product for sale is automotive fuel and not food and sundry items.


Automobile Towing and Wrecker Service
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An establishment primarily engaged in the towing of motor vehicles and
vehicular storage associated with vehicle accidents and violations. This
shall not include vehicular salvaging operations or the sale of salvaged
vehicular parts. This use is not to be construed as a junkyard and salvage
yard.  An "Automobile Towing and Wrecker Service" may be part of an
"Automobile Body Shop" in zoning districts where an "Automobile Body Shop" is
allowed.


Automobile, Truck, Boat, Motorcycle, Manufactured Home and Recreational
Vehicle Sales and Rental
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
Any building, premises, and land, in which or upon the primary use of land is
a business that involves the maintenance, servicing or sale of new or used
automobiles, boats, heavy equipment and/or manufactured homes.  This may
also include light trucks [i.e. trucks weighing less than two and one-half
(2.5) tons] or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles.  Also included in
this definition is vehicle leasing, rental, parking service, preparation or
repair work conducted as an accessory use. Notwithstanding the above, any
premise upon which there is a regular sale of three (3) or more boats,
vehicles, etc. shall be considered an "Automobile, Truck, Boat, Motorcycle,
Manufactured Home and Recreational Vehicle Sales and Rental" establishment. 


Awning
 
 
A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building in
such a manner that the structure may be raised or retracted from a building
to a flat position against the building, but not to include a canopy.


 
 





 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Bail Bond
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An office that engages in the sale or issuance of bail bonds or other
financial transfers for the purpose of securing the release from jail of an
accused defendant pending trial.


Bank
 
 
See “Financial Institution”


Banner
 
 
A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing
characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to plastic or
fabric of any kind, excluding flags and emblems of political, professional,
religious, educational, or corporate organizations.


Bay Window
 
 
A window or series of windows forming a bay or recess in a room and
projecting outward from the wall.


Beacon
 
 
Any light with one (1) or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed
at one (1) or more points not on the same site as the light source; also, any
light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or move.


Bed and Breakfast Inn
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A use that (i) takes place within a building that prior to such
establishment, was designed and used as a single-family residence, (ii) that
consists of renting one (1) or more dwelling rooms on a daily basis to
tourist, vacationers and similar transients, (iii) where the provision of
meals, if provision of meals is made, is limited to the breakfast meal, and
is available only to guests, and (iv) where the bed and breakfast operation
is conducted primarily by persons who reside in the dwelling unit, with the
assistance of not more than the equivalent of one (1) full-time employee. 
The maximum number of rooms available for rent shall be five (5); the maximum
length of stay shall be fourteen (14) consecutive days.


Berm
 
 
Any elongated earthen mound designed or constructed on a site to separate,
screen or buffer adjacent land uses.


Beverage Store
 
 
An establishment that is primarily in the business of selling beverages
(including beer and wine) to the public.


Billboard
 
 
See “Sign, Off-premise Advertising”


Billiard Parlor
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A business establishment open to the public whose primary source of income is
from billiards.


Body Piercing Establishment
 
 
See “Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing Establishment”


Botanical Garden
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility owned by a public or private nonprofit entity containing at least
ten (10) acres of land that is primarily used for the public display and
conservation of plants and related botanical education and research
purposes.  Such facility may also include the following facilities:
conservatories; greenhouses; plant maintenance and propagation facilities;
visitor centers; museums; education and research facilities; trails; boat
touring and mooring facilities; bird, insect and waterlife observation
facilities; living farm museums; petting zoos; concession facilities
including meeting rooms, eating establishments, lodging and gift shops; and
permanent housing for caretakers and other on-site employees.


Boundary Structure
 
 
A brick, stone, stucco or other decorative masonry, wooden, iron or vinyl
clad metal fence, excluding chain link and wire fences, constructed entirely
or partially around a single-family subdivision, a multifamily or
multi-tenant development.  Such walls or fences, regardless of their length,
also include structures constructed as a signature entrance to a
single-family subdivision, a multifamily complex or an office, business or
retail complex.


Building
 
 
Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment,
goods or materials of any kind or nature.


Building, Accessory
 
 
See “Structure, Accessory”


Building Elevation
 
 
The view of any building or other structure from any one of four (4) sides
showing features such as construction materials, design, height, dimensions,
windows, doors, other architectural features, and the relationship of grade
to floor level.


Building Face
 
 
The dominant structural feature of the elevation of any side of a building. 
For example, the building face of a two-story dwelling unit with a one-story
porch is the two-story elevation of the structure.


 





Building Footprint
 
 
The outline of the total area of a lot or site that is surrounded by the
exterior walls of a building or portion of a building, exclusive of
courtyards. In the absence of surrounding exterior walls, the building
footprint shall be the area under the horizontal projection of the roof.


 





Building Height
 
 
The vertical distance from the mean elevation of the finished grade along the
front of the building to the highest point of a flat roof, a mansard roof, or
a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Roof appurtenances such as skylights; roof
structures for elevators; stairways; tanks; heating, ventilating and air
conditioning equipment; or similar operating and/or maintenance equipment
shall be excluded from this measurement. In computing the height of a
building, the height of a basement, if below the grade from which the height
is measured, shall not be included. The height of telecommunication towers
shall be as provided in Section 9.15(H)(1)(e).


Building Materials and Lumber Sales
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An establishment where lumber and building materials goods are the primary
products sold.


Building Setback Line
 
 
A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest
portion of any building (or any attached appurtenance thereof), and the
nearest edge of the street right-of-way when measured perpendicular thereto.


 


 





Building Permit
 
 
An official document issued by Gaston County pursuant to this Ordinance and
the State building code that authorizes the erection, construction,
reconstruction, restoration, alteration, enlargement, conversion, remodeling,
demolition, moving, or repair of a building or structure.


Building, Principal
 
 
A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
situated. A multi-occupant property may have more than one principal building.


Bulletin Board
 
 
A board for posting notices that are designed to be read by pedestrians.


 


 





Bus or Train Terminal, Passenger
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
Any premises for the transient housing or parking of inter-city motor-driven
buses (e.g., Greyhound, Trailways) and the loading and unloading of
passengers going on such bus trips.  Refer to “transit station” for
facilities designed to accommodate intra-city transit services.


Business Services
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
The provision of services required for the day-to-day operation of a business
such as, but not limited to, consulting service, photocopy or office
supply.  Examples of such uses include: "Kinkos", "UPS Store",
"Mailboxes".  Such stores may have extended operating hours.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Caliper
 
 
A horticultural method of measuring the diameter of a tree trunk for the
purpose of size grading. The caliper of the trunk is measured six (6) inches
above the ground for trees up to and including four (4) inches in diameter,
twelve (12) inches above the ground for trees greater than four (4) inches up
to twelve (12) inches in diameter, and at breast height (4.5 feet) for trees
greater than twelve (12) inches in diameter.


Camping and Recreational Vehicle Park
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
Land containing two (2) or more campsites which are located, established, or
maintained for occupancy by people in temporary living quarters, such as
tents, recreation vehicles, or travel trailers which are used for recreation,
vacation purposes or temporary housing for construction or farm workers. 
Occupancy for recreation or vacation purposes shall be limited to individual
stays of no greater than thirty (30) days and occupancy for temporary housing
shall be limited to individual stays of no greater than one-hundred eighty
(180) days.


Canopy
 
 
A permanent structure other than an awning made of cloth, metal or other
material attached or unattached to a building for the purpose of providing
shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building
wall. A canopy shall not be considered as being a completely enclosed
structure.


 
 





Car Wash, Automatic Class I
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A parcel of land whose principal use is a facility for washing automobiles
using a chain conveyor or other method of moving cars along, or moving an
automatic washing device along, and automatic application of cleaner,
brushes, rinse-water and heat for drying.  Accessory self-vacuuming
facilities shall be allowed.  The retail sale of fuels may also be provided
in an accessory capacity. 


Car Wash, Automatic Class II
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial establishment primarily engaged in the washing of automobiles,
motorcycles, and pick-up and panel trucks.  Such washing shall be done using
a combination of automatic washing devices and manual labor provided by the
commercial establishment.


Car Wash, Self Service
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial establishment primarily engaged in the washing of automobiles,
motorcycles, and pick-up and panel trucks. Such washing shall be done
manually by the customer (i.e., the use of fully automated devices which move
the vehicle through a washing device shall not be permitted). Accessory
self-vacuuming facilities shall be allowed.


Cemetery
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
Property used for the interment of the dead, which use may include the
commercial sale and location of burial lots, crypts, or vaults for use
exclusively on the subject property. A cemetery shall not be used for the
preparation or embalming of bodies or the cremation of bodies. This
definition shall be construed to include bona fide pet cemeteries.


Certificate of Compliance
 
 
A statement, signed by the Administrator, setting forth that a building,
structure or use complies with this Ordinance.


Certificate of Occupancy
 
 
A document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a
building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or
will be used in compliance with all applicable building codes and regulations.


Changeable Copy
 
 
The display area of a sign where characters, letters, or illustrations can be
changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign.


 





Charitable Service Facility
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility, other than a food pantry (see definition), operated by a public
or private entity that directly distributes charity or relief services
directly to the public.  Examples of such a facility include soup kitchens
and homeless shelters.  Public office facilities (e.g., Department of Social
Service facilities) and a church/place of worship shall not be deemed a
charitable service facility.


Check Cashing Establishment
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A business engaged in cashing checks for the general public as an element of
its operation that exceeds fifty (50) percent of its gross revenue and is not
licensed by the appropriate state or federal agencies as a bank, savings and
loan, or credit union.  Primary signage associated with a business that
includes the phrase "check cashing" will be considered prima facie evidence
that the business is a check cashing business.


Church/Place of Worship
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, which by design
and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious
services whose site may include an accessory area for the interment of the
dead.  Certain customary accessory uses shall be allowed to take place on
church premises. These include bookshops, recreation centers, outdoor playing
fields, youth facilities, parsonage, cemetery, food pantry, and certain types
of day care centers and schools. The overnight lodging of transient persons
shall not be considered as a customary accessory use. Such accessory uses
shall be subject to any applicable supplemental regulations located elsewhere
in this Ordinance.


Close
 
 
As used for transportation/land use purposes, a small square or rectangular
space providing road access to several adjacent lots.  Such area is
landscaped with grass and may contain benches.


Club, Private (without adult entertainment)
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A for-profit establishment that (1) is organized and operated solely for a
social and recreational purposes; (2) and which may include the sale of
alcoholic beverages; (3) and that is not open to the general public, but open
only to the members of the organization and their bona fide guests. Excluded
from this definition are facilities used by nonprofit fraternal and service
organizations.


College/University
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A private or public educational institution where students attend to earn
associates, baccalaureate, masters or doctoral degrees. A college/university
shall not be considered a "vocational school" or a "school for the arts."


Co-location
 
 
The location of wireless telecommunication antennae or equipment from more
than one (1) provider on one (1) common tower, building or cabinet


Commercial Message
 
 
Any sign, wording, logo or other representation, that, directly or
indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product,
service or other commercial activity.


Commercial Services
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A business offering personal retail services including but not limited to dry
cleaning (outlets), shoe repair, key making, tailoring and alterations. 


Commercial Vehicle and Truck Storage
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A piece of property that is used primarily for the outdoor storage, on a
regular basis, of trucks and other commercial vehicles, excluding septic tank
and solid waste vehicles.


Commercial Zoning District
 
 
Refer to “Zoning District, Commercial”


Common Open Space
 
 
Land and/or water areas within the site designated for a particular
development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which are
designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the
development but not including any lands occupied by streets, street
rights-of-way, or off-street parking.


Common Open Space, Improved
 
 
Common open space which has been improved with recreational areas and
amenities such as, but not limited to, ballfields, tennis courts, swimming
pools, nature trails, clubhouses, etc.


Community Center
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A building used for recreational, social, educational and cultural activities
owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency.


Comprehensive Plan
 
 
A plan, formally adopted by the local governing board, that includes policy
statements, goals and objectives, maps and statistical data for the physical
and economic development of the community.


Conditional Use Permit
 
 
An authorization issued by the City Councilfor a conditional use or for the
rezoning of one or more properties to a conditional use district (CUD) and
which may be subject to any specific restrictions or conditions on its size,
location, construction, hours of operation, character of use, and other fair
and reasonable conditions as specified by such approval body that are
mutually approved by said approval body and the applicant.


Construction
 
 
The act of adding an addition to an existing building or structure, or the
erection of a new principal or accessory building or structure on a lot; or
the addition of walls, driveways, or parking lots, or the addition of
appurtenances to a building or structure.


Construction Trailer (temporary use)
 
 
A structure standing on wheels towed or hauled by another vehicle and used
for neither overnight nor year-round occupancy at a construction site on a
temporary basis for office and/or storage purposes.


Contiguous [Property (ies)]
 
 
See “Adjacent Property”


Continuing Care Facility
 
Residential/Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A residential complex that contains a variety of living facilities that may
include independent living units (i.e., apartments, condominiums, cottages),
assisted living (domiciliary care) facilities and/or nursing home beds.
Residents of such a facility may either pay rent or purchase their living
quarters. If the unit is occupant-owned, the unit normally reverts to the
development owner upon the death of the resident or to a surviving spouse.


Convenience Store
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A one (1) story, retail store containing less than three-thousand (3,000)
square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell
primarily fuel, food (packaged and/or prepared), beverages, and other
household supplies to customers who purchase relatively few items (in
contrast to a "grocery store"). A “convenience store” is designed to
attract and depends upon a large volume of stop-and-go traffic.


Correctional Facility
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility operated by a governmental entity (or a private contractor
thereof) used primarily for the incarceration or housing of persons serving
criminal sentences.  State prisons, prison camps, and penitentiaries are
examples of such a facility.


Country Club
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A land area and buildings containing recreational facilities, clubhouses and
usual accessory uses, open to members and their guests that is privately
operated. Uses at a country club frequently include golf courses, swimming
pools (outdoors), and clubhouses. Meal service may be available, but is
generally limited to members and their guests. A country club may be
developed as a freestanding entity or as part of a residential community or
planned residential development.


Crematorium
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A facility whose primary function is for the cremation of human bodies or
animals.


Cul-de-sac
 
 
Any street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Day Care Center, Accessory
 
 
A day care center facility located on the premises or adjacent to the
premises of an office use, institutional use, commercial use, industrial use
or group development for the primary purpose of care for the dependents of
employees of such commercial, office, institutional or industrial use. At
least sixty-six (66) percent of the clients enrolled shall be dependents of
employees of the establishment or group development sponsoring such facility.


Day Care Center, Class A
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A place where daytime care is provided to not more than (6) pre-school
children, handicapped persons, or senior citizens, and not more than three
(3) school aged children unrelated by blood or marriage to, and not the legal
wards or foster children of the attendant adult, within an occupied
residence. Persons who are related by blood or marriage to the attendant
adult shall not be counted as patrons of the day care center.


Day Care Center, Class B
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A place where daytime care is provided to more than six (6) but less than
fifty (50) pre-school children, after school care children, handicapped
persons or senior citizens unrelated by blood or marriage, and not the legal
wards or foster children of the attendant adult. Persons who are related by
blood or marriage to the attendant adult shall not be counted as patrons of
the day care center.


Day Care Center, Class C
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A place where daytime care is provided to fifty (50) or more pre-school
children, after school care children, handicapped persons or senior citizens
unrelated by blood or marriage, and not the legal wards or foster children of
the attendant adult. Persons who are related by blood or marriage to the
attendant adult shall not be counted as patrons of the day care center.


Deck
 
 
A structure without a roof, either freestanding or attached to a building,
which is supported by posts or pillars.


 





Density Credit
 
 
The potential for the improvement or subdivision of part or all of a parcel
of real property, to an intensity or degree that otherwise is not allowed in
the underlying zoning district.  Such ability to improve or develop the
property is based on the dedication of land for transportation improvement
purposes in exchange for the ability to develop the property to this greater
standard.


Density, Gross
 
 
A ratio expressed as the number of dwelling units per gross acre. The ratio
is derived by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the total land
area of the parcel(s) to be developed.


Developer
 
 
That person or entity improving or developing land that may or may not be the
owner of the property.


Development, Multi-Family
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A tract of land under individual, corporate, firm, partnership or association
ownership, or under common control evidenced by duly recorded contracts or
agreements that is planned and developed as an integral unit in a single
development operation or in a definitely programmed series of development
operations. Such development shall consist of two (2) or more duplex
buildings, or three (3) or more dwelling units sharing one or more common
walls. The development shall have a unified or coordinated design of
buildings and a coordinated organization of service areas and common open
space area.


Development, Planned Multi-tenant
 
 
A development containing more than one (1) principal nonresidential use that
is planned as a single entity in one or more phases. Such development may
have an internal network of public or private streets linking the various
uses. Such uses may be located in one (1) or more lots. Some lots (commonly
referred to as "outparcels") need not have direct access onto a public
street. Such developments shall also include any individual lots (including
outparcels) located therein.


Diameter at Breast Height
 
 
The measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk over twelve (12) inches in
diameter taken at a height of four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground.


Display of Goods, Outdoors
 
 
The display and sale of products outside of a building or structure including
garden supplies, clothing, toys, play equipment, agricultural products,
building and landscape materials, food and beverages.


Distribution/Wholesale/ Storage Operations
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A facility where goods are received and/or stored for delivery to wholesale
customers in remote locations.


Drive-in Window
 
 
A window or other opening in the wall of a principal or accessory building
through which goods or services are provided directly to customers in motor
vehicles by means that eliminate the need for such customers to exit their
motor vehicles.


 





Drive-through Facility
 
 
A business or facility which is designed or intended to enable a customer to
transact business without exiting a motor vehicle parked on or moving through
the premises.


Driveway, Front-loaded
 
 
A driveway that begins at, or abuts, the front yard line of the lot.


 
 





Dry Cleaning Outlet
 
 
An establishment engaged in providing laundry, dry cleaning and other related
services on a pick up and drop off basis to individual customers.


Duplex
 
 
See “Dwelling, Two-family”


Dwelling, Attached
 
 
A dwelling unit attached side-by-side to two (2) or more other dwelling units
by common vertical walls. Each dwelling unit shall be located on a separately
deeded lot.


Dwelling, Detached
 
 
A dwelling unit not attached to another dwelling unit that is developed with
open yards on at least three (3) sides.


Dwelling Unit
 
 
A room or combination of rooms designed for year-round habitation, containing
self-sufficient bathroom and kitchen facilities, connected to all required
utilities, and designed for or used as a residence by one (1) family. Units
located within motels or hotels or travel trailers shall not be included as
"dwelling units."


Dwelling, Manufactured Home
 
 
A residential dwelling unit that: 1. Is not constructed in accordance with
the standards set forth in the North Carolina State Building Code; 2. Is
composed of one (1) or more components, each of which was substantially
assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home
site on its own chassis, and 3. Is at least forty (40) feet in length and
eight (8)feet in width. A manufactured home may also be referred to as a
"mobile home".


Dwelling, Manufactured Home Class A
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A manufactured home constructed after  July 1, 1976 that meets or exceeds
the construction standards promulgated by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development that were in effect at the time of construction and that
satisfies each of the following additional criteria: (a) The minimum width
(the width being the narrower of the two overall dimensions) of the main body
of the manufactured home as assembled on the site shall be at least
twenty-two (22) feet for a distance extending along the length (the length
being the longer of the two overall dimensions) of at least twenty (20) feet.
(b) The pitch of the roof of the manufactured home has a minimum vertical
rise of two and two-tenths feet for each twelve feet of horizontal run; the
roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard
residential construction and which does not exceed the reflectivity of gloss
white paint; the roof has an overhang (eave) extending at least ten (10)
inches from each vertical exterior wall. A site-installed gutter may be
counted in the width of the eave. (c) The exterior siding consists of wood,
hardboard, vinyl, brick or aluminum and shall be comparable in composition,
appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard
residential construction, and which does not exceed the reflectivity of gloss
white paint. (d) A continuous, permanent masonry foundation or masonry
curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access, shall be
installed upon a poured concrete footer after placement on the lot, and
before occupancy. (e) The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable
towing apparatus are removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy.
(f) The manufactured home is set up on the site in accordance with the
standards set by the N.C. Department of Insurance. (g) Stairs, porches,
entrance platforms and other means of entrance and exit to the manufactured
home shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the standards set
by the N.C. Department of Insurance.(h) A front porch, a minimum of eight (8)
feet in width and eight (8) feet in depth.


Dwelling, Manufactured Home Class B
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A manufactured home that meets all of the criteria of a Class A Manufactured
Home, except criteria (a), (b), (c), and (e).


Dwelling, Manufactured Home Class C
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A manufactured home that meets all of the requirements of a Class A
Manufactured Home, except criteria (a), (b), (c), (d), (and e); provided
however, said manufactured home shall be installed with permanent type
non-reflective skirting specifically manufactured for manufactured homes,
pressure treated wood (except plain standard-surface, pressure treated
plywood shall not be considered acceptable), or masonry underpinning. Such
underpinning or skirting shall be installed under all elements of the
manufactured home and be unpierced except for required ventilation and an
access door.


Dwelling, Manufactured Home Class D
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A manufactured home that does not meet the requirements of a Class A, Class
B, or Class C Manufactured Home.


Dwelling, Mixed Use
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A structure that contains both a principal residential and nonresidential
(i.e., office or retail) use.


Dwelling, Multi-family
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A building or portion thereof designed or occupied as two (2) or more duplex
buildings or three (3) or more dwelling units sharing common walls.


Dwelling, Single-family
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family,
but not to include manufactured homes as defined by this Ordinance.


Dwelling, Two-family
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
Two (2) dwelling units, including modular homes, attached along and sharing
one (1) or more common walls and located on a single lot.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Easement
 
 
A grant by a property owner to the public, a corporation, or other person or
persons of the right to use an identifiable piece of land for specified
purposes, such as for access or utilities, and which has been recorded in the
Gaston County Register of Deeds Office.


Electronic Gaming Operation
 
 
Any business enterprise, whether as a principal or accessory use, where
persons utilize three (3) or more electronic machines, including, but not
limited to computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games including but not
limited to sweepstakes, lotteries, games, and/or games of chance, and where
cash, merchandise, or other items of value are redeemed or otherwise
distributed, whether or not the value of such distribution is determined by
electronic games played or by predetermined odds, which have a finite pool of
winners. The term includes, but is not limited to internet sweepstakes, video
sweepstakes, or cybercafes. This definition does not include any lottery
endorsed, approved or sponsored by the State of North Carolina, or arcade
games of skill.


Encroachment
 
 
The projection or intrusion of a building, structure, or other
land-disturbing activity into an area where such projections are typically
prohibited.


Engineer
 
 
A professional engineer licensed by the State of North Carolina.


Entrance, Primary
 
 
An entrance or entrances leading from collector streets, major thoroughfares,
arterials, or highways to subdivisions, multi-family uses, planned
developments, industrial, commercial, or office and institutional
subdivisions and developments.


Entrance, Secondary
 
 
An entrance, or entrances, other than the primary entrance, leading from
collector or local streets to subdivisions, multi-family uses, planned
developments, industrial, commercial, or office and institutional
subdivisions.


Essential Services
 
 
Publicly or privately owned facilities or systems for the distribution of
gas, electricity, steam, or water, the collection and disposal of sewage or
refuse; the transmission of communications; or similar functions necessary
for the provision of public services. The provision of public safety services
(i.e. law enforcement, emergency medical services, rescue services, fire
protection), governmental uses, and related services shall be included as an
essential service as described in Essential Service, Class 4. Essential
Services are divided into the following four classes as defined below.


Essential Services, Class 1
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
Transmission lines (whether, subterranean or overhead) including electrical,
natural gas, and water distribution lines; sewer gravity lines and pressure
mains; underground septic tanks and drain fields, cable television and
telephone transmission lines; or similar utility lines; pumping stations;
lift stations; telephone switching facilities [up to one-hundred (100) square
feet gross floor area].


Essential Services, Class 2
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
Elevated water storage tanks; booster stations, package treatment plants,
telephone switching facilities [over one-hundred (100) square feet gross
floor area], substations, or other similarly required facilities in
connection with telephone, electric, steam, water, sewer, or other similar
utilities.


Essential Services, Class 3
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
Generation facilities such as power plants; sanitary landfills; septic tank
waste disposal facilities.


Essential Services, Class 4
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A use or facility owned or operated by the City or its designee, serving in
one of the following capacities, including, but not limited to: an agency
office, rescue services (including volunteer rescue services), emergency
medical services, public safety station, fire station (including volunteer
fire station), public safety services and dispatch, or personnel training and
development center.  A public safety station may contain living quarters for
on-duty personnel. Facilities for the maintenance of equipment housed at the
operation site are also permitted. The following uses and/or activities shall
not be classified as a Class 4 Essential Service: vehicle storage yard;
outdoor/indoor firing range; jail; prison; sanitary landfill; solid waste
transfer or disposal facility; wastewater treatment facility; educational or
health institution; university; group home; half- way house or housing for
persons who are participating in work release programs or who have previously
served and completed terms of imprisonment for violations of criminal laws.


Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
 
 
The area adjacent to and beyond the municipal limits over which the
municipality has been granted an exercise of municipal governmental powers,
including but not limited to the power to regulate development, in accordance
with North Carolina General Statutes, Section 160A-360.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Façade
 
 
The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by
persons who are not in such building.


 





Family
 
 
An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of
household servants; or a group of not more than six (6) persons who need not
be related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together as a single
housekeeping unit.


Family Burial Ground
 
 
A privately owned, noncommercial graveyard created and maintained for the
interment of family members of the property owner and restricted to such use.


Family Care Home
 
Residential/ Agricultural Primary Uses
 
A home with support and supervisory personnel that provides room and board,
personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for not more
than six (6) resident handicapped persons, six (6) unwed mothers and their
neonates, or six (6) battered persons with their children.


Family Member
 
 
Direct lineal descendants (children, grandchildren, and great grandchildren)
and direct lineal ascendants (father, mother, grandfather and grandmother);
and brothers, sisters.


Farm, Bona Fide
 
 
The production and activities relating or incidental to the production of
crops, fruits, vegetables, sod, or ornamental and flowering plants, dairy,
livestock, poultry, and all other forms of agricultural products having a
domestic or foreign market meeting one of the present use value criteria:
1)  Agricultural land, consisting of at least 10 acres, or horticultural
land, consisting of at least 5 acres, both of which may be in one or more
tracts that are in actual production; 2)   A minimum of twenty (20) acres
of forestland for which a woodland management plan has been prepared by the
U.S. Forest Service.


Farm Supply Store
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
An establishment where feed, seed, animal and agricultural supplies are
primarily sold in bulk quantities.


Farmers Market
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
An outdoor market at which fruits and vegetables are regularly sold to the
general public on a retail basis. Vehicles used to transport the products to
be sold shall be limited to cars, vans and trucks.  Other food items may
also be sold at such establishments.


Fence
 
 
An exterior structure serving as an enclosure, barrier, or boundary made of
materials commonly considered to be fence materials.


Fence, Deer
 
 
A fence specifically designed to thwart the movement of deer and similar
animals.  Such fences are typically eight (8) to ten (10) feet in height and
have an electrically charged wire on top.


Fenestration
 
 
Architectural treatment over, around, or near a window, door, or other
feature of relief on the elevation of a building.


Financial Institution
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial bank, a mortgage bank, a savings bank, a saving and loan
association, or a credit union any of which are licensed, insured or
chartered by the United States of America or the State of North Carolina.
Manned drive-through services are provided on site. Outdoor automatic teller
machines (ATMs) may or may not be provided.


Flag
 
 
A piece of durable fabric of distinctive design attached to a permanent pole
that is used as a symbol or decorative feature.


Flea Market
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure where
goods are offered for sale to the general public by individual sellers from
open or semi-open facilities, booths, or temporary structures.


Flex Space
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A building or portion thereof that can be used and/or easily converted to use
for office, wholesale sales, distribution or storage use


FloorArea Ratio
 
 
The gross floor area of all buildings and structures on a lot divided by the
lot area. When computing this figure, the gross floor area of all enclosed
parking deck buildings shall be excluded.


 





Food Catering Facility
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility at which a prearranged amount and type of food is prepared for
consumption off-premises or in a meeting room on premises. A food catering
facility differs from a restaurant in that food is not offered for sale to
the general public on a retail basis.


Food Pantry
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility operated by a public or non-profit entity that directly
distributes unprepared packaged food items to the public on a charitable
basis.  Such facilities may also distribute clothing to the general public
in such manner.


Fraternal and Service Organization Meeting Facility (Nonprofit and
Not-For-Profit)
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility operated by an association of persons for activities which
include, but are not limited to social, literary, political, educational,
fraternal, charitable, or labor activities, with regular meetings and
membership requirements.  The facility is not operated for profit or to
render a service that is customarily conducted as a business.


Freeway
 
 
A major thoroughfare providing for high-speed mobility and having no at-grade
crossings.


Freight and Flying Services
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility operated for the transport of goods, merchandise, materials and
commodities of any kind that may be transported from one place to another by
air.


Fueling Pump
 
 
A fuel-dispensing pump, which may contain more than one (1) fuel nozzle,
designed to accommodate one (1) or two (2) vehicles at a time. If two
vehicles are accommodated at the same time, fuel nozzles serving the two
vehicles shall be located on opposite sides of the fuel pump.


Funeral Home
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the
display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith.  Such facility
may also sell caskets and other items associated with a funeral service.


Furniture Store
 
 
A retail establishment that is primarily engaged in the sale of home of
office furniture and related goods.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Gameroom
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A building or a part of a building containing eight (8) or more video,
pinball, or similar player operated amusement devices, in any combination,
for commercial use.  An establishment containing a gameroom may have more
than one principal use. 


Garage, Private
 
 
A building or portion thereof that is accessory to a principal structure and
providing for the storage of automobiles, and in which there is no occupation
or business for profit carried on.  Such garage shall be enclosed on all
four (4) sides, and may be attached to or detached from the principal
dwelling unit. 


Garage/Yard Sale (temporary use)
 
 
See “Yard Sale”


Golf Course
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees, fairways, hazards and
which may include clubhouses and shelters.  Such definition shall not
include "miniature golf" or "golf driving range" establishments.


Grade, Finished
 
 
A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining
the building at all exterior walls.  When the finished ground level slopes
away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the
lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or
between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building and the lot
line or between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building,
whichever is closer to the building.


 





Grade, Street
 
 
The height of the top of the curb, or if no curb exists, the height of the
edge of pavement in the lane of travel adjacent to the side of the street at
which the grade is being measured.


Greenhouse, Commercial
 
 
See “Nursery (garden)”


Grocery Store
 
 
An establishment, over three thousand (3,000) square feet in area, which may
sell a wide variety of fresh produce, canned and packaged food items, small
household goods and similar items which are consumed and used off premises.
In addition, the store may contain a delicatessen section in which prepared
foods are sold and may be consumed on premises in a specially designed
sit-down area. Such stores may also contain manned internal bank branches. 
Sales of grocery items are highly dependent on comparison shopping.


Grooming Services
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
Establishments engaged primarily in providing services to a person's grooming
needs.  Such services include, but are not limited to: barbershops, beauty
shops, tanning salons and nail salons.  Tattoo parlors shall NOT be included
under this definition.


Gross Floor Area
 
 
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of each floor of a principal building,
and any accessory building or structures measured from outside of the
exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls. The term does not
include any area used exclusively for the surface parking of motor vehicles
or for building or equipment access, such as stairs, elevator shafts, and
maintenance crawlspace. This term also excludes pedestrian walkways and
common areas within enclosed shopping facilities.


 





Ground Covers
 
 
Low growing plants such as grasses, ivies, creeping bushes and similar
decorative plantings. Where required by this Ordinance, ground covers shall
have the capability of soil stabilization and erosion control.


Group Home
 
Residential/ Agricultural Primary Uses
 
A facility, other than a family care home, that is licensed by the State of
North Carolina, that has support and supervisory personnel and provides room
and board, personal care, or habilitation services in a family environment
for more than six (6) but not more than thirty (30) handicapped persons,
unwed mothers with their neonates, and battered spouses with their children. 




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Handicapped Person
 
 
A person with a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
(1) or more of such person's major life activities; a person with a record of
having such an impairment; or a person who is regarded as having such an
impairment. This term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction
to a controlled substance as defined in 21 U.S.C. § 802.


Health and Behavioral Care Facility
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility designed to offer two (2) or more health and behavioral services
to clients.  Such services may include limited medical care and health
education, parenting program, adoption agency, and counseling center.


Heavy Equipment Sales and Service
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A facility where vehicles or other apparatus commonly used in commercial,
industrial or construction enterprises are sold and serviced.  This
includes, but is not be limited to: trucks, trailers, bulldozers, cranes,
backhoes, rollers, loaders, and lifts, each having a gross weight of two and
one-half (2.5) tons or more.


Heliport/Helistop
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
An area designated to be used for the landing or takeoff of helicopters
including operations facilities such as maintenance, loading, storage,
fueling and terminal facilities.


Highway, Corridor
 
 
A highway, or portion thereof, which is designated by the City Council for
the placement of a CH Corridor Highway Overlay District.


Highway, Special
 
 
A highway, or portion thereof, which is designated by the City Council for
the placement of a (SH) Special Highway Overlay District.


Holiday Decorations
 
 
Displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance of religious, national, or
state holidays which are not intended to be permanent in nature and which
contain no advertising material.


Home Occupation, Customary
 
 
A nonresidential use conducted within a dwelling unit which is clearly
incidental and subordinate to the residential use and, when observed from
beyond the lot on which it is located, does not give visual, audible, sensory
or physical evidence (except as otherwise allowed per Section 9.1 of this
Ordinance) that the property is used for any nonresidential purpose.


Home Occupation, Rural
 
 
A nonresidential use conducted in an accessory structure by the occupants of
the lot upon which it is located.


Hospital
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
An institution providing physical and mental health services primarily for
human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, including
related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient services, training
facilities, central service facilities, emergency services, and staff
offices.  A hospital shall provide facilities for the overnight and extended
stay of persons in need of medical treatment and may have accessory uses such
as a prayer chapel, gift shop, cafeteria, etc. that serves the needs of
staff, patients and visitors.


House, Atrium
 
 
An attached or semi-attached one-story house on a small lot, said lot having
a small yard space that is surrounded by the house and its privacy walls. As
distinguished from a "patio house," an atrium house usually has a smaller lot
size and it is always attached (to another unit) in some fashion.


House, Lot Line
 
 
A single-family detached dwelling unit that is placed against one (1) of the
side lot lines. Such dwelling unit has a front and rear yard but only one
side yard.


House, Patio
 
 
A single-family dwelling on a separate lot with open space on three sides on
that lot.


House, Twin
 
 
Two (2) dwelling units on separate lots joined by a common building wall
along the property line.


House, Village
 
 
A single-family detached dwelling built on a small lot (typically smaller
than the minimum lot size for the zoning district). Land saved by use of
smaller lots is dedicated for common use. Houses may be placed close to the
street to maximize rear yards. Shared driveways with separate parking areas
may be utilized.


Hotel
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility containing six (6) or more rooms and offering transient lodging
accommodations to the general public and which may provide additional
services such as restaurants, lounges, meeting rooms and recreation
facilities.  Less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the rooms for rent shall
have direct access to the outside.  An "adult hotel or motel" shall not be
considered a "hotel" and shall be governed as an "adult establishment."


Hotel, Full service
 
 
An establishment providing a minimum of one-hundred (100) sleeping rooms (a
suite shall be counted as two sleeping rooms) that have interior access.  A
“hotel” also has a restaurant with full table service, lounge, meeting
facilities consisting of a minimum of five-thousand (5,000) square feet in
one room (said room may be divided by flexible partitions) and may include
other hotel-related amenities and guest services.


HVAC Equipment
 
 
External heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and other mechanical and
utility equipment, including but not limited to, hoses, pipes, vents, fans,
compressors, pumps, and heating and cooling units associated with buildings
and accessory structures.


 







 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition


Impervious Surface
 
 
Any material that reduces and prevents absorption of storm water into
previously undeveloped land. This includes but is not limited to, buildings,
roads, pavement, gravel surfaces, etc. Items not considered to be
"impervious" include the water area of a swimming pool and wooden slatted
decks.


Impervious Surface Ratio
 
 
The gross area of all impervious surfaces on a lot divided by the lot area.


Industrial Zoning District
 
 
See “Zoning District, Industrial”


Infill Residential Development,
 
 
See “Residential Development, Infill”



 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition


Junkyard and Salvage Yard
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
The use of more than five hundred (500) square feet of the area of any lot
for the outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap
metals or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or
abandonment of three (3) or more automobiles, vehicles or machinery or parts
thereof.



 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Land-disturbing Activity
 
 
Any use of the land by any person for residential, industrial, educational,
institutional, or commercial development, or for highway and road
construction and maintenance, that results in a change in the natural cover
or topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation. Within
watershed management areas, land-disturbing activity shall include the clear
cutting of trees unless specifically exempted by this Ordinance.


Landfill, Land Clearing and Inert Debris (major)
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
An off-premise commercial disposal site other than a Minor Land Clearing and
Inert Debris Landfill (as herein defined) for stumps, limbs, leaves,
concrete, brick, wood and uncontaminated earth. The North Carolina Division
of Solid Waste Management must approve the disposal of any other types of
wastes.


Landfill, Land Clearing and Inert Debris (minor)
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
An off-premise commercial disposal site that meets each of the following
conditions: 1. The fill material shall consist of debris strictly limited to
concrete, brick, concrete block, uncontaminated soil, rock, gravel, limbs,
leaves, and stumps. 2.  The North Carolina Division of Solid Waste
Management must approve disposal of any other types of wastes. 3. The fill
activity will cover two (2) acres or less, and be in operation for three (3)
years or less. 


Landfill, Onsite
 
 
A landfill which is located within the confines of property being developed
or in use, and used only for the disposal of acceptable on-site natural
materials (e.g., stumps, tree limbs, etc.) which are generated on the
property being developed.


Landowner
 
 
Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, including the
heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and agent or personal representative of
the owner. The person shown on the records of the Gaston County Register of
Deeds shall be presumed to be the person in control of the property.


Laundromat
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial facility open to the general public where coin-operated washing
and drying machines are available for use.


Leasable Area, Gross
 
 
The total floor area for which a tenant pays rent and which is designed for
the tenant's occupancy and exclusive use.


Library
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A public facility for the shared use, but not sale, of literary, musical,
artistic, or reference materials.


Loading Space, Off-street
 
 
An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or contiguous to
a group of buildings for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.


Logo
 
 
The graphic or pictorial presentation of a message, including, but not
limited to, the use of shapes, designs, decorations, emblems, trademarks,
symbols, or illustrations, or the superimposition of letters or numbers or
any other use of graphics or images other than the sequential use of letters
and numbers.


 
 



Lot
 
 
A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal
instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is recognized
as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.


 





Lot Area
 
 
The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that: (i)
when the legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot
extending into a public street right-of-way, then the lot boundary for
purposes of computing the lot area shall be the street right-of-way line, or
(ii) if the right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running parallel
to and thirty (30) feet from the center of the traveled portion of the street
shall be used to calculate the area.


Lot Line
 
 
A line of record bounding a lot that separates one lot from another lot or
separates that lot from a public or private street or any other public space.


 





Lot line, Front
 
 
The lot line that separates a lot from a street right-of-way.


Lot line, Interior
 
 
A lot line that does not have street frontage.


Lot line, Rear
 
 
The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.


Lot line, Side
 
 
Any lot line abutting another lot and which is not a front or rear lot line.


Lot of Record
 
 
A lot or combination of contiguous lots described pursuant to the most
current plat or metes and bounds description or descriptions recorded in the
office of the Gaston County Register of Deeds.


Lot Width
 
 
The horizontal distance between side lot lines at the front building line
measured parallel with the front lot line.


 





Lot, Corner
 
 
A lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of two (2) street
lines which make an angle of more than forty-five (45) degrees and less than
one-hundred thirty-five (135) degrees with each other. The street line
forming the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot. 


Lot, Interior
 
 
A lot other than a corner lot.


Lot, Nonconforming
 
 
Any lot of record which does not meet the minimum yard or area requirements
established in these regulations at the time of this Ordinance's adoption or
any amendment thereto.


Lot, Through
 
 
A lot that fronts upon two (2) parallel streets, or that fronts upon two (2)
streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the street.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Machine, Metal and Woodworking Shop
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A workshop in which work, including but not limited to metal and woodwork, is
machined, assembled or finished.


Manufactured Goods
 
 
Manufacturing, refining, processing, or assembly of goods or products subject
to the following limitations: The term "NAICS" shall refer to the North
American Industry Classification System as set forth in the NAICS Manual
published by the United States of America, Executive Office of the President,
Office of Management and Budget and unless a use is defined in this
Ordinance, the NAICS Manual shall be used to define, clarify or more
specifically identify the uses and groups of uses listed. While the NAICS
Manual uses the term "establishments primarily engaged in" in defining types
of manufacturing operations, this Ordinance shall be construed to mean that
if the activity is conducted at all within the use and that activity is
listed as being a “conditional use”, then the entire use shall be deemed
a "conditional use" as opposed to being a "permitted use".


Manufactured Goods, Class 1
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
All manufacturing industries except those listed as "Manufacturing Goods,
Class 2" or "Manufacturing Goods, Class 3". 


Manufactured Goods, Class 2
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
The following manufacturing industries as identified by their NAICS Category
and Code Number(s):


 
 
·   Pickled fruits and vegetables (NAICS 311421, 311941)


 
 
·   Flour and other grain mill products, sugar refining (NAICS 311211,
311311, 311313)


 
 
·   Animal feeds and pet foods (NAICS 311111, 311119, 311611)


 
 
·   Fats and oils (NAICS 31122)


 
 
·   Beer/malt beverages, wines, brandy, distilled and blended liquor;
roasted coffee (NAICS 311920, 311942, 312120, 312130, 312140)


 
 
·   The following manufacturing listed under NAICS 311212, 311340:


 
 

(1) Non-chocolate Confectionery Manufacturing
(2) Rice Milling



 
 
·   Tobacco products (NAICS 3122)


 
 
·   Dying and finishing textiles, except wool fabrics and knot goods
(NAICS 313210, 3133, 315192, 315191, 315111, 315119)


 
 
·   Coated fabrics, rubberized and not rubberized; canvas and related
products (NAICS 313320, 314912, 315299, 315999, 326192, 326299, 339113,
339932)


 
 
·   Sawmills and planing mills, general (NAICS 321113, 321912, 321918,
321999)


 
 
·   Wood building and mobile (manufactured) homes (NAICS 321991, 321992)


 
 
·   Wood preserving; reconstituted wood products; pulp mills; paper
mills; paperboard mills (NAICS 321114, 321219, 322110, 322121, 322122, 322130)


Manufactured Goods, Class 2 (cont'd)
 
 
·   Industrial inorganic chemicals; Plastic materials, synthetic resins
and rubber; cellulosic and other man-made fibers, except glass (NAICS 3252,
32518, 325120, 325131)


 
 
·   Soaps, detergents and cleaning preparations; perfumes, cosmetics, and
other toilet preparations (NAICS 3256)


 
 
·   Paints, varnishes, lacquers, enamels and allied products (NAICS 32551)


 
 
·   Industrial organic chemicals; agricultural chemicals (fertilizers,
pesticides, etc.) (NAICS 32531, 32532)


 
 
·   Miscellaneous chemical products (all products listed under NAICS
32552, 32592, 32591, 325182, 325199, 311942, 325998, 325510) (e.g.,
adhesives, sealants, explosives, printing ink, carbon black, and other
chemical and chemical preparations)


 
 
·   Lubricating oils and greases (NAICS 324191)


 
 
·   Products of petroleum and coal classified under NAICS 324199


 
 
·   Tires and inner tubes (NAICS 326211) ·   Plastic products found
under NAICS 325 991, 326113, 326121, 326122, 326130, 326140, 326160, 326191,
326199, 337215, 326122, when resins are made at the same facility


 
 
·   Leather tanning and finishing (NAICS 316110)


 
 
·   Flat glass; glass and glassware; (NAICS 327211, 327212)


 
 
·   Cement, hydraulic (NAICS 327310)


 
 
·   Structural clay products (NAICS 32712, 327331)


 
 
·   Pottery and related products (NAICS 32711) except handmade pottery
and arts and crafts operations involving no more than one-thousand (1,000)
cubic feet of kiln space


 
 
·   Concrete gypsum and plastic products; cut stone and stone products
(NAICS 32733, 32739, 32732, 327410, 327420, 327991)


 
 
·   Abrasive products; asbestos products; mineral wool; (NAICS 327910,
327993, 327999, 332999, 336340)


 
 
·   Minerals and earth, ground or otherwise treated (NAICS 212324,
212325, 212393, 212399, 327992)


 
 
·   Non-clay refractories (NAICS 327125)


 
 
·   Miscellaneous nonmetallic mineral products listed under NAICS 327112,
327999, 327420


 
 
·   Steel works, blast furnaces, and rolling and finishing mills; iron
and steel foundries; primary and secondary smelting and refining of
nonferrous metals; rolling, drawing and extruding of nonferrous metals;
nonferrous foundries; (NAICS 324199, 331111, 331112, 331221, 332618, 3312,
3315, 3314, 3313)


 
 
·   Metal heat treating; metal forging-iron, steel and nonferrous;
coating and engraving of metals and allied services (NAICS 3321, 33281,
339911, 339912, 339914)


 
 
·   Manufacture of other primary metal products listed under NAICS
331314, 331423, 331492, 332813, 331221, 332618


Manufactured Goods, Class 2 (cont’d)
 
 
·   Manufacture of ordnance (arms, ammunition, etc.) and accessories
except vehicles and guided missiles (NAICS 33299)


 
 
·   Power, distribution and specialty transformers (NAICS 335311)


 
 
·   Electrical industrial carbon and graphic products (NAICS 335991)


 
 
·   Storage batteries; primary batteries, dry and wet (NAICS 335911,
335912)


 
 
·   Motor vehicles; truck, bus and passenger car bodies; truck trailers;
motor homes; (NAICS 3361, 3362, 336510, 333911, 336991)


 
 
·   Aircraft; guided missiles and space vehicles and parts (NAICS 33641,
54171)


 
 
  ·   Under NAICS 336214 - camping trailers


 
 
·   (Military) tanks (and related armored vehicles) (NAICS 336992) but
not tank components


 
 
·   Under NAICS 325992, 333315 - all photographic supplies but not
photographic equipment


 
 
·   Under NAICS 325998, 339942 all inks, paints, oils, enamels, and
crayons


 
 
·   Carbon paper and inked ribbons (NAICS 339944)


 
 
·   Linoleum, asphalt - felt-base, and other hard surface floor covering
listed under NAICS 326192


Manufactured Goods, Class 3
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
The following manufacturing industries as identified by their NAICS Category
and Code Number(s):


 
 
·   Meat packing plants and poultry dressing plants (NAICS 311611,
311615, 311999)


 
 
·   Processing and packing of canned, cured, fresh, or frozen fish and
seafood (NAICS 311711, 311712)


 
 
·   Petroleum refining (NAICS 32411)


 
 
·   Asphalt paving and roofing materials (NAICS 32412)


 
 
·   Mining (NAICS 221, 212, 213)


Manufactured Home
 
 
See “Dwelling, Manufactured Home”


Manufactured Home Park
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
Any site or tract of land (except a subdivision developed pursuant to this
Ordinance) upon which two (2) or more manufactured home spaces are provided
for lease or rental.


Manufactured Home Space
 
 
A plot of land within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation
of a single manufactured home in accordance with the requirements contained
in this Ordinance.


Manufactured Home Stand
 
 
That portion of a manufactured home space designed for and used as the area
occupied by a manufactured home.


Marina, Accessory
 
 
A facility which is accessory to a residential development and which provides
boat slips for use by the residents of such development and their guests.


Marina, Commercial
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial facility containing moorings and boat slips available for use by
the general public and which may also offer supply and repair services.


Maternity Home
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A home licensed to provide care for pregnant females as well as provide space
for live-in house parents.


Military Reserve Center
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A place used for training reserve military personnel and where military arms
and military equipment may be stored.


Mini-Warehouse
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or
rented on an individual basis. No outdoor storage shall be allowed in
conjunction with the facility with the following exceptions: boats, cars;
motorcycles; trailers; motor homes, pickup trucks and similar-type and size
vehicles. All such areas devoted for outdoor storage shall be in areas so
designated for such storage.  Use of the leased storage spaces shall be for
storage purposes only.


Mobile Home
 
 
See " Dwelling, Manufactured Home "


Mobile Home Park
 
 
See “Manufactured Home Park”


Model Sales Home
 
 
A permanent building intended for ultimate use as a residential dwelling unit
that is typical of the dwellings in the residential development where it is
located and which is temporarily used by the builder for the purpose of
display and sales associated with residential property where the builder has
other homes for sale in the same development or subdivision.


Modular Home
 
 
A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the
North Carolina Building Code (uniform residential code for one and two-family
dwellings) and composed of components substantially assembled in a
manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly
on a permanent foundation. A “modular home”, as herein defined, shall be
deemed to be a single-family dwelling for purposes of this Ordinance.


Motel
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An establishment providing transient accommodations containing six (6) or
more rooms with at least twenty-five (25%) percent of all rooms having direct
access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby
of the building.


Multi-family Development
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A tract of land under individual, corporate, firm, partnership or association
ownership, or under common control evidenced by duly recorded contracts or
agreements; planned and developed as an integral unit in a single development
operation or in a definitely programmed series of development operations.
Such development shall consist of two (2) or more duplex buildings, or three
(3) or more dwelling units sharing one or more common walls. The development
shall have a unified or coordinated design of buildings and a coordinated
organization of service areas and common open space area.


Motor Home
 
 
See “Vehicle, Recreational”


Museum 
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A structure that serves as a repository for a collection of curiosities or
objects of interest or works of art intended to be viewed by members of the
public with or without admission costs. It may include an accessory use with
the sale of goods/gifts to the public and/or an eating establishment for
visitors and employees.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition


Nonconformity
 
 
Any use, building, structure, lot, or sign that was lawful at the time it was
constructed or established but which fails to comply with one or more of the
applicable regulations or standards of this Ordinance.


Noncommercial Copy
 
 
A sign message through pictures, illustrations, symbols and/or words, or any
combination thereof, which does not contain any reference to a business or
product but displays a substantive message, statement or expression that is
protected by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.


Nursery (garden)
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial enterprise conducted on land where flowers, shrubs and similar
horticultural products are raised and sold to general public. Nurseries may
include the use of greenhouses for growing purposes.  Goods may also be
grown and displayed outdoors.


Nursing Home
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A licensed facility that provides supportive service to six (6) or more
elderly or disabled in-house residents who need a wide range of health and
support services located on the site, such as medical and nursing care,
central dining, and transportation services.



 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Office
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A room or group of rooms used for the conduct of a business, profession,
service, industry or government where retail trade is not conducted.


Office, Medical Services
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An office (as herein defined) facility containing space for patient waiting
rooms, treatment areas and laboratory space for medical doctors (MDs),
osteopaths, chiropractors, dentists, podiatrists, acupuncturists,
psychologists, licensed nurse/midwifes, licensed physical therapists,
licensed nurse practitioners, licensed respiratory therapists or optometrists.


Office Zoning District
 
 
See “Zoning District, Office”


Organic Waste
 
 
Materials that are primarily composed of yard trimmings, wood waste, dead
trees and other dead vegetation, Christmas trees, wood pallets, land clearing
debris and other similar materials.


Outdoor Event (temporary use)
 
 
Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals and other types of outdoor events that
run on a temporary basis and are intended to or are likely to attract
substantial crowds.


Outdoor Resale Business
 
 
A business that sells used merchandise (other than automobiles, trucks,
boats, motorcycles, manufactured homes or recreational vehicles) and stores
or displays this merchandise outdoors on a regular basis.


Outdoor Storage Yard (Contractor)
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A place where construction equipment and goods used by building contractors
are externally stored on a regular basis.


Outparcel
 
 
A lot located within a planned multi-tenant development that does not have
direct access from a public road abutting the development. Said lot may
contain no more than one principal use and the outparcel lot may be exempt
from the yard and bulk requirements of the underlying zoning district.


 





Overflow Parking Facility
 
 
See “Parking Facility, Overflow”




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Package Treatment Plant
 
 
A small self-contained sewage treatment facility built to serve developed
areas that lie beyond the service area of sanitary sewers.


Paintball Game
 
 
A game in which players on one team seek to eliminate those on an opposing
team by marking them with a water-soluble dye shot in capsules from air guns.


Paintball Facility
 
 
A commercial facility providing either an indoor or outdoor enclosed area for
customers to participate in paintball games and related activities.


Parapet
 
 
That portion of a building wall or false front that extends above the
roofline.


 
 



Park
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility operated by a public entity that is open to the public for outdoor
active recreational uses, including, but not limited to: ballfields, swimming
facilities, camping facilities, and which contains improvements designed
specifically for such active recreational uses.  Such facilities may also
contain improvements designed for passive recreational uses.


Parking Bay
 
 
A parking module consisting of one (1) or more sets of one (1) or two (2)
rows of parking spaces and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter and
leave.


 





Parking Deck
 
 
A building designed and used for the storage of motor vehicles and which may
contain retail or office uses on its ground floor.


Parking Facility, Overflow
 
 
An off-street parking area intended for the storage of vehicles for special,
athletic or other occasional events.  Such a facility is not typically used
more than ten times a year.


Parking Lot (principal use)
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way, that is used
for the storage, for limited periods of time, of passenger vehicles and
commercial vehicles, and is available to the public, whether for
compensation, free, or as an accommodation to clients or customers. 
Off-street parking areas that are provided in association with a particular
use shall not be considered as being a "parking lot" as herein defined.


Parking Space, Off-street
 
 
An area located outside of any street right-of-way that is designed to
accommodate the parking of vehicles that meets all requirements contained in
Chapter 10 of this Ordinance.


Pennant
 
 
Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing
a message of any kind, which is suspended from a rope, wire, string, or pole,
usually in series, and which is designed to move in the wind.


 
 



Permit, Zoning
 
 
A document issued by the Administrator that is required before commencing any
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a
building or structure or before establishing, extending or changing any use
on any lot.


Pet Grooming Services
 
Office / Commercial Services / Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility for grooming (shampooed, clipped, etc.), boarding, retail sales,
or other services provided to small animals, typically considered as
household pets.  For the purpose of this definition, animals shall exclude
horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, geese, or fowl.  All animal activities
at this facility will be compliant with the North Carolina Animal Welfare Act.


Petroleum Distribution Facility
 
 
A business involved in the bulk sale of gasoline, methanol, liquid propane,
kerosene, aviation fuels, fuel oil, diesel oils, and similar petroleum
products. Such products are purchased from petroleum terminals and are sold
to customers or consumers at either the wholesale or retail level. In no
instance shall an "automobile service station," or “convenience store," or
"mini-mart" be considered a "petroleum distribution facility."


Planned Residential Development (PRD)
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A development planned and developed as an integral unit consisting of one or
more residential-unit types (as permitted in the underlying general zoning
district) and conforming to all applicable lot and bulk regulations.


Planned Unit Development (PUD)
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A development containing a minimum of ten (10) acres that is planned and
developed as an integral unit containing one or more commercial,
institutional or manufacturing uses. A planned unit development (PUD) differs
from a planned residential development (PRD) in that whereas a PRD always
contains residential dwelling units, a PUD may or may not contain dwelling
units.


Plat
 
 
A map or plan of a parcel of land that is to be or has been subdivided
showing such subdivision. A plat for a subdivision occurring after the
effective date of this Ordinance shall be recorded with the Gaston County
Register of Deeds office and shall contain all information herein required.


Plaza
 
 
A paved area surrounded by buildings or streets and located in such manner so
as to be accessible by pedestrians.  Such area is improved with benches,
ornamental and/or drinking fountains, works of art, etc.  Part of the plaza
may contain a grassed area.


Playground
 
 
A smaller-sized area developed with facilities primarily for children that
may include benches, slides, play equipment, walk trails, etc.  As opposed
to a “park”, a playground is usually smaller and does not contain
athletic fields.


Porch
 
 
A projection from an outside wall of a dwelling which is covered by a roof
and/or sidewalls (other than the sides of the building to which the porch is
attached) for the purpose of providing shade or shelter from the elements.


Portable Toilet Services
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A commercial establishment that leases, delivers and services portable
chemical toilets and which has a valid permit to discharge effluent into a
public sanitary sewer system.


Post Office
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A facility operated by the United States Postal Service for the delivery of
both domestic and international mail.


Premises
 
 
A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or designation
shown on a recorded plat, record of survey, parcel map or subdivision map.
When a lot is used together with one or more contiguous lots for a single use
or planned development, all of the lots so used, including any lots used for
off-street parking, shall be considered single premises for purposes of these
regulations.


Private Residential Quarters
 
 
An accessory dwelling either attached or part of the principal residential
use or separate from the principal use in the form of a guest house or garage
apartment provided that such dwelling is not rented or occupied for gain and
provided that no accessory building containing such use is constructed on a
lot until the construction of the principal dwelling has commenced. The
principal dwelling on the lot containing the private residential quarters
shall be owner-occupied.


Produce Stand, Temporary
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
The seasonal sale of any form of agricultural or horticultural products at a
retail stand on the property (or properties owned by same person) where
produced.


Property Owner
 
 
See “Landowner”


Public Safety Station
 
 
A facility operated by a public agency, a private contractor thereof, or by a
private nonprofit volunteer organization and used for the base of operations
and/or housing of equipment or personnel for the provision of dispatched
public safety services including law enforcement, fire protection, rescue
services, and/or emergency medical services.  Such a facility may contain
living quarters for on-duty personnel.  Facilities for the maintenance of
equipment housed at the operation site are also permitted.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition


Quarry
 
 
A tract of land used primarily for the extraction of minerals (e.g., rock,
stone, ores) from the earth.



 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Racetrack, Large
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility where full size vehicles and/or animals are raced for speed and/or
endurance.


Racetrack, Small
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility where model cars, model aircraft, go-karts and similar
reduced-scale objects are raced for speed and/or endurance.


Railroad Terminal and Yard
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
An area of land covered with tracks for switching, storing, moving,
repairing, and weighing of railroad cars, trains, or engines.


Recreational Vehicle
 
 
See “Vehicle, Recreational”


Recreation, Active
 
 
Recreation requiring some constructed facilities and organized activities.


Recreation Center and Sports Center
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
Public or non-profit health or exercise clubs, tennis or other racquetball
courts, swimming pools, YMCA's, YWCA's or similar uses which constitute
principal uses and are enclosed in buildings and are operated on a fee or
membership basis primarily for the use of persons who do not reside on the
same lot as that on which the facility is located. Accessory uses to such
facilities may include: snack bars, pro shops, and locker rooms, each of
which is designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons of the
recreation and sports center.


Recycling Collection Facility
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of
recyclable materials that have been deposited on-site by the public or
collected from various recycling deposit station sites.


Recycling Deposit Station
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A structure or closable bin at which newspapers, aluminum cans, plastics
products, glass, corrugated paper or backyard waste (i.e., grass cuttings,
tree limbs, etc.) are deposited for the purpose of being recycled. All such
goods shall be housed at all times within the structure. The outdoor storage
of all goods to be recycled shall be prohibited.


Recycling Station, Accessory
 
 
A recycling station facility which does not constitute the principal use on
the lot upon which it is located and at which household goods are deposited
for recycling purposes and which are later transferred to a recycling
processing facility or deposit station. Such facilities may or may not be
manned and may be located either outdoors or within a principal building. If
accessory to a principal residential use, it shall be available for use only
by the residents thereof.


Residential Development, Infill
 
Residential/ Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A residential development on a lot of 1-5 acres that allows for detached
single-family dwellings and twin homes to be developed in a manner more dense
than would otherwise be allowed by the underlying zoning district.


Residential Zoning District
 
 
See “Zoning District, Residential”


Restaurant
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial establishment where food and drink are prepared, and purchased
on premises (either outdoors or indoors).  The establishment may provide
indoor or outdoor eating facilities or may be geared partially or primarily
for take out food.  If food consumption facilities are provided, they shall
largely be within the building.  Such establishment shall not have manned
drive-through facilities.  Restaurants, if properly licensed, may also serve
alcoholic beverages.


Restaurant, Fast Food
 
 
A commercial establishment where most customers order and are served their
food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages prepared to leave the
premises, or able to be taken to a table or counter to be consumed.


Restaurant with Drive Through
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial establishment where food is prepared, and purchased within the
principal building or through a drive-through window.  The establishment may
provide indoor eating facility or may be geared partially or primarily for
take out food. 


Retail, Light
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A building, property, or activity the principal use or purpose of which is
the retail sale of goods, products, or merchandise directly to the
consumer.  Such a retail establishment shall not be classified as a "Retail,
Light" use, if listed elsewhere in the Table of Uses of this Ordinance.
Examples of excluded uses include: restaurants and convenience stores.


Riding Stable
 
 
A commercial facility where horses are sheltered and which may also contain
grounds for the riding of horses.  Horse racing shall not be allowed to take
place on the grounds.


Right-of-Way
 
 
An area owned or maintained by the City of Bessemer City or the State of
North Carolina, a public utility, a railroad, or a private concern for the
placement of such utilities and/or facilities for the passage of vehicles or
pedestrians, including roads, pedestrian walkways, utilities, or railroads.


Road, Frontage
 
 
A road that is in close proximity to and parallels a limited access road and
is designed to provide access to roads that abut said limited access road.


Road, Private
 
 
Any right-of-way used for purposes of motor vehicle travel that has not been
accepted for maintenance or ownership purposes by a public entity.


Road, Public
 
 
Any right-of-way not less than thirty (30) feet in width set aside for public
travel and either which has been accepted for maintenance by the State of
North Carolina or Bessemer City, has been established as a public road prior
to the date of adoption of this Ordinance, or which has been dedicated to the
State of North Carolina or Bessemer City for public travel by the recordation
of a plat of a subdivision with the Gaston County Register of Deeds Office.


Rodeo
 
 
A public performance featuring bronco riding, calf roping, steer wrestling,
bull riding and other similar activities.


Rodeo, Accessory
 
 
A public performance featuring bronco riding, calf roping, steer wrestling,
horse show, bull riding and other similar activities on a tract or parcel of
land where a bona fide farm or ranch is the principal use.


Rooming House
 
 
A single-family dwelling, a portion of which is provided by the resident
owner to no more than three (3) lodgers and where separate bathroom and
kitchen facilities are not provided for any lodger.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Satellite Dish
 
 
An apparatus capable of receiving a communications signal from a transmitter
relay located in planetary orbit.


School, Elementary and Middle (Public and Private)
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
Any public, private or parochial institution offering instruction at the
elementary or junior high school levels in the branches of learning and study
required to be taught in the public schools of North Carolina.


School, Senior High (Public and Private)
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
Any public, private or parochial institution offering instruction at the high
school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in
the public schools of North Carolina.


School, Vocational
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A secondary or higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills
that prepares students, who may be of all age groups, for jobs in a specific
trade or vocation upon graduation.  Examples of vocational schools include
schools that teach: auto mechanics, secretarial studies, machine repair,
computer technology, etc.


Schools for the Arts, Etc.
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A school where classes in the various arts (e.g., dance, painting, sculpting,
singing) are taught. As differentiated from a "vocational school", such
schools are usually attended by persons of all ages where professional
placement after graduation is not of significant importance.  Such classes
shall not be given by or to persons who are nude, or who otherwise are
clothed in such manner so as to classify the use as an "adult establishment"
as defined in NCGS 14-202.10.


Setback
 
 
A minimum distance specified for the various zoning districts measured inward
from a property line that shall remain unoccupied and unobstructed upward
except as may be permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance.


 



Setback Line
 
 
See "Building Setback Line."


Setback, Front
 
 
That portion of the front yard that shall remain unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as may be permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance.


Setback, Rear
 
 
That portion of the rear yard that shall remain unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as may be permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance.


Setback, Side
 
 
That portion of the side yard that shall remain unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as may be permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance.


Sewer, Community
 
 
Any package treatment plant or other sewage treatment facility serving two
(2) or more sources not connected to individual or public systems and having
a design capacity or greater than three-thousand (3,000) gallons daily and/or
a discharge to surface water, as permitted by the State of North Carolina. In
addition, this definition shall include all connections to such a system.


Shopping Center
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A group of two (2) of more retail establishments constructed and developed in
one (1) or more phases with customer and employee parking and merchandise and
other loading facilities provided on-site. A shopping center may be located
and developed on one (1) or more lots, may contain one or more outparcels,
and may include one (1) or more principal buildings.


Shrub
 
 
An ornamental plant that is at least two (2) feet tall above the highest root
at the time of planting.


Sight Triangle
 
 
The horizontal and vertical areas at the intersections of streets and/or
driveways which must remain unobstructed, in order to ensure that drivers can
see traffic and pedestrians around the corner of the intersection, entrance
or driveway.


Sign
 
 
Any object, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors, which
is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an
object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event
or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols,
fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images.


Sign Face
 
 
The portion of the sign used for display of sign copy including all
background area, pictures, and any other advertising devices shown in the
sign. Excluded from this definition are the sign frame and supports. 


Sign, Awning
 
 
A sign located on an awning.


 
 



Sign, Building Marker
 
 
Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental
information about its construction.  Such sign is typically cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.


Sign, Changeable Copy
 
 
Any sign designed so that letters or numbers attached to the sign can be
periodically changed to indicate a different message.


Sign Copy
 
 
Any combination of letters, numbers or other graphical representation that is
intended to inform, direct or otherwise transmit information.


Sign, Directional
 
 
A sign fronting on a road containing only the name of the principal use,
insignia, trademark, directional arrow and/or distance to the principal use.
Such use shall not be visible to the motorist at the location at which the
sign is placed.


 
 



Sign, Directory
 
 
A ground or building sign that lists tenants or occupants of a building or
project, with unit numbers, arrows or other directional information.


 
 



Sign, Flashing
 
 
A sign, the illumination of which is not constant in intensity when in use,
and that exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. 


Sign, Government
 
 
A sign, usually erected and maintained by a public agency, that provides the
public with information and in no way relates to a business, commercial
activity or specific use.  Examples include, but are not limited to: speed
limit signs, city limits signs, stop signs and street name signs.


Sign, Ground
 
 
Any sign which extends from the ground or which has supports which places the
bottom thereof less than two (2) feet from the ground directly beneath the
sign. A "monument" sign shall be considered to be a "ground sign."


 
 



Sign, Identification
 
 
A sign bearing the address of the premises or name of occupant, but
containing no logo or commercial message.


Sign, Incidental
 
 
A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of
the site on which it is located, such as “no parking,” “entrance,”
“loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar information and
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the
site on which the sign is located shall be considered an “incidental
sign.”


 
 



Sign, Light Emitting Diode (LED)
 
 
A sign using light emitting diode technology that is designed to project an
advertising display that is controlled via the use of a computer or similar
type equipment.  Such sign may emit messages that are either scrolled or
static.


Sign, Mailbox
 
 
The writing, text, representation, graphic, emblem or other display, together
with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the
display that is placed on or is in any way affixed to a mailbox used for the
purposes of official mail delivery to a lot.


Sign, Menu Board
 
 
An accessory sign providing items and prices associated with a drive-through
window.


Sign, Monument
 
 
See “Sign, Ground”


Sign, Non-commercial Copy
 
 
A sign, other than a "political sign" that contains a message through
pictures, illustrations, symbols and/or words, or any combination thereof,
which does not contain any reference to a business or product but displays a
substantive message, statement or expression that is protected by the First
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.


Sign, Nonconforming
 
 
A sign that, on the effective date of this Ordinance or the date of any
subsequent amendment thereto, does not conform to one or more of the
regulations set forth in this Ordinance.


Sign, Off-premise Advertising
 
 
A sign, other than a "directional sign", "real estate sign", "political
sign", "non-commercial copy sign" or other sign specially allowed by this
Ordinance to be placed off-premises, that draws attention to or communicates
information about a business, service, or commodity that exists or is
conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided at a location other than
the premises where the sign is located.  An “off-premise advertising
sign” may also be referred to as a “billboard.”


 
 





Sign, Pole
 
 
A detached sign erected and maintained on a freestanding frame, mast, or pole
and not attached to any building but not including ground-mounted or monument
signs. The bottom of such signs shall be greater than two (2) feet from the
ground directly beneath the sign.


 
 





Sign, Political
 
 
A temporary sign that consists of a poster, placard, board, banner or other
similar medium that contains a message related to a candidate running for
office or a ballot issue, and which contains no commercial message.


Sign, Portable
 
 
Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure,
nor specifically constructed for such attachment; or a sign designed to be
transported, including but not limited to the following: signs designed to be
transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; gas or hot
air filled balloons.


 
 





Sign, Projecting
 
 
Any sign other than a wall, awning, canopy, or marquee sign, which is affixed
to a building and is supported only by the wall on which the sign is mounted.


 
 





Sign, Real Estate
 
 
A sign that is used to offer for sale, lease, or rent the premises upon which
such sign is placed.


Sign, Roof
 
 
A sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon or over the roof or
parapet of a building.


 





Sign, Rotating
 
 
A sign that revolves or turns or has external sign elements that revolve or
turn.  Such signs may be power-driven or be propelled by the force of wind
or air.


Sign, Sandwich Board
 
 
A temporary A-frame sign, not secured or attached to the ground or any
building or structure, composed of a sign panel and supporting structure or
one or more panels that form both the structure and sign face, and that is
intended to be placed in a sidewalk or pedestrian way.


 
 





Sign, Subdivision Identification
 
 
A sign that gives the name of a residential or non-residential subdivision or
multi-family development.


Sign, Suspended
 
 
A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and
supported by such surface.


 
 



Sign, Wall
 
 
Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a building or dependent
upon a building for its support with its exposed face parallel or
approximately parallel to the plane of the building or structure on which the
sign is affixed. Signs directly painted on walls shall be considered wall
signs.


Signs, Vehicular
 
 
Signs on parked vehicles visible from the public right-of-way where the
primary purpose of the vehicle as parked is to advertise a product or to
direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby
property. Vehicular signs shall not include business logos, identification or
advertising on vehicles primarily used for other transportation purposes.


 
 



Site Plan
 
 
A plan depicting the proposed development of a property, in terms of the
location, scale and configuration of buildings and other features.


Site Specific Development Plan
 
 
A dimensioned presentation of the proposed development of a specified parcel
of land that reflects thereon the location of buildings, easements, parking
arrangements, public access, street pattern and other similar features.


Slope
 
 
Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal that is measured as a
numerical ratio or percent.  Expressed as a ratio, the first number is the
horizontal distance (run) and the second is the vertical distance (rise),
e.g., 2:1. Slope can also be expressed as the rise over the run when used in
building applications when referencing roof pitches, e.g., 6:12.


Solid Waste Transfer Station
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A fixed facility where non-hazardous solid waste materials are taken from a
collection vehicle, temporarily stored or stockpiled, and ultimately placed
in a transportation unit for movement to another facility.


Special Event
 
 
Any organized event, specifically including, but not limited to, a circus,
carnival, cultural event, fair, party, communal camping, or celebration,
which may reasonably be expected to increase the risk of: (1) Damage to
public or private property, beyond normal wear and tear; (2) Injury to
persons; (3) Public or private disturbances or nuisances;(4) Unsafe
impediments or distractions to, or congestion of, vehicular or pedestrian
travel; (5) Significant additional police, fire, trash removal, maintenance,
or other public services demands; or (6) Other significant adverse effects
upon the public health, safety, or welfare.  The term “special event”
shall not include any organized activities conducted at sites and facilities
that are legal uses and structures under this Ordinance and that are
typically intended and used for such activities. Examples of such activities
include, but are not necessarily limited to, sporting events such as 10K runs
not held on public rights-of way, golf, soccer, softball, and baseball
tournaments conducted on courses or fields intended and used for such
activities; wedding services conducted at reception halls; funeral services;
religious services; or noncommercial activities occurring within, or upon the
grounds of, a private residence or upon the common areas of a multi-family
residential development.


Special Exception
 
 
A permit, issued by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 5.12
of this Ordinance that would allow the property owner to develop or make use
of his/her property with prescribed minor deviations to the terms of this
Ordinance.  The Board of Adjustment shall only be able to issue a Special
Exception, after having held a quasi-judicial public hearing and having made
specific findings as prescribed in Section 5.12.


Square
 
 
An open space area that is surrounded by streets and/or buildings, that is
accessible by the pedestrian, and that includes walks, lawns and trees.  As
opposed to a “plaza”, a “square” consists primarily of landscaped and
natural areas.


Stadium
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A structure or facility designed, intended, or used primarily for outside
athletic events and containing seating for over one-hundred (100) spectators
of those events, but not including a racetrack. The sale of beverages, snack
foods, and sundries geared to on-premise consumption or usage by spectators
shall be permitted.


Staging Space
 
 
An area of temporary standing storage for one (1) automobile awaiting
drive-in service or commodity pickup.


Story, Building
 
 
That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that
portion of a building included between the surface of the top most floor and
the ceiling or roof above.


Street, Center-line
 
 
The line surveyed and monumented as the center line of the street; or, if
such center line has not been surveyed, it shall be the line running midway
between the curbs or ditches of such street.


Street, Collector
 
 
A roadway that, while providing access to abutting land parcels, enables
moderate volumes of traffic to move efficiently between local streets and the
major street network.


Street, Marginal Access
 
 
A street which is parallel to and adjacent to a principal or minor arterial
and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic.


Street, Residential
 
 
A street predominantly used to provide access to abutting residential
properties.


Street Right-of-Way
 
 
An area of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a public street, for
such purpose, areas claimed by a municipality or the State of North Carolina
for such purposes, or actually used for such purposes.


Structure
 
 
A combination of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy, or
ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of land or
water.


Structure, Accessory
 
 
A structure separate and subordinate to the principal structure located on
the same lot as the principal structure used for purposes customarily
incidental to the principal structure. An accessory structure may also be
referred to as an "accessory building."


Structure, Detached
 
 
A structure having no party wall or common wall or other physical attachment
or connection with another structure. 


Structure, Nonconforming
 
 
Any structure lawfully existing on the effective date of these regulations,
or any amendment to it rendering such structure nonconforming, which does not
comply with all of the standards and regulations of these regulations or any
amendment thereto.


Structure, Permanent
 
 
A structure constructed for permanent occupancy that is in compliance with
all applicable North Carolina building codes and all applicable local and
State standards.


Structure, Principal
 
 
A structure containing the principal use which takes place on the lot. A
principal structure may also be referred to as a "principal building."


Structure, Temporary
 
 
A structure not intended for permanent occupancy and designed for easy
removal off premises. Examples include, but are not limited to: produce
stands, revival tents, mobile classrooms, etc.


Subdivision
 
 
All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
building sites, or the divisions when any one (1) or more of those divisions
is created for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate
or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication
of a new street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not
be included within this definition nor be subject to any regulations enacted
pursuant to this Ordinance.


 
 
1.   The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided
and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the
resultant lots are equal to or exceed the exceed the standards and
regulations prescribed by this ordinance


 
 
2.   The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where
no street right-of-way dedication is involved;


 
 
3.   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the express
purpose of widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system
corridors.


 
 
4.   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no
greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to
or exceed the standards of the City.


Subdivision, Major
 
 
A subdivision where (1) new streets (public or private) are proposed, or (2)
the entire tract to be subdivided is greater than ten (10) acres in size; or
(3) where more than five (5) lots will result after the subdivision is
completed or (4) where extension of any sewer or water system is required.


Subdivision, Minor
 
 
A subdivision where (1) no new streets (public or private) are proposed; and
(2) the entire tract to be subdivided is ten (10) acres or less in size; and
(3) where no more than five (5) will result after the subdivision is
completed and (4) where no extension of any sewer or water system is required.


Subdivision Technical Review Committee
 
 
A committee appointed by the governing board to review and recommend plats in
a manner as specified in this Ordinance. 


Swimming Pool Sales, Service and Supplies
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility where swimming pools and swimming pool-related products are
displayed and sold.  Such facility may have the outdoor display of products
for sale.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing Establishment
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
An establishment whose principal business activity is (1) placing ink under
the skin using needles that result in the coloration of the skin or (2) for
piercing of the body (other than for the ear).


Taxidermist
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility used for the operation of a taxidermy business.


Technical Review Committee
 
 
See “Subdivision Technical Review Committee”


Telecommunications Equipment Buildings
 
 
The buildings in which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a
telecommunication facility are housed.


Thoroughfare
 
 
A road so designated on the most recently adopted version of the thoroughfare
plan of the Gaston Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) or other
officially adopted plan.


Thoroughfare, Major
 
 
See “Principal Arterial”


Thoroughfare, Minor
 
 
See “Minor Arterial”


Thoroughfare Plan
 
 
The most recently adopted version of the thoroughfare plan of the
metropolitan planning organization of the Gaston Urban Area.


Tire Recap Facility
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility engaged in the business of recapping tires.


Tire Sales, New and/or Used
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A place where the principal use is the sale or installation of new, used or
retread tires and tubes to the general public. Tires may be stored,
maintained, altered, repaired, changed, prefabricated or disposed on the
premises.  Other ancillary indoor car repair services (other than services
associated with a "body shop") may be provided on premises.


Tower, Lattice
 
 
A freestanding and self-supporting structure consisting of connected sections
of metal supports used to support telecommunication equipment.  These towers
can be either three-or four-legged steel girdered structures designed
typically to support multiple telecommunications users. 


 
 



Tower, Monopole
 
 
A freestanding and self-supporting single pole structure that supports
telecommunication equipment.


Tower, Stealth
 
 
Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar
alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the
presence of antennae or towers.  Typically, such a telecommunication tower
and/or its equipment are incorporated into the supporting structure and
assume the color, texture, and appearance of the supporting structure.


 





Tower, Ham Radio
 
 
See term "Antenna, Amateur Radio"


Tower, Radio and Television Broadcast
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
A tower and/or associated station which receives and/or sends radio and/or
television waves such as radio towers. This definition does not include
amateur radio antennae. 


Tower, Telecommunication
 
Civic/ Institutional Principal Uses
 
A telecommunications facility that consists of the equipment and structure(s)
(including any accessory structures required to house transmitting or
maintenance equipment) designed to support antennae used for transmitting or
receiving communications, including wireless communications, and data
transmissions. Towers, or similar structures installed on or attached to tops
of buildings, water tanks, or similar facilities, shall be included in this
definition. This definition also includes accessory buildings and related
equipment required for the telecommunication facility. This definition does
not include ham radio operations, radio broadcast towers, or television
broadcast towers, or personal satellite dishes. Examples of
telecommunications towers and facilities include monopoles and lattice
construction steel structures.


Townhouse
 
 
A form of single-family attached dwelling where three or more dwelling units
located on separate lots are joined by a common building wall.


Tract, Parent
 
 
A parcel or tract respectively, lawfully in existence on the effective date
of this ordinance, from which lots are subdivided from and created.


Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND)
 
Residential/Agricultural Principal Uses
 
A development that exhibits several of the following characteristics: alleys,
streets laid out in a grid system, buildings oriented to the street, front
porches on houses, pedestrian-orientation, compatible, mixed land uses,
village centers and open space.


Traffic Impact Analysis
 
 
A report produced by a qualified professional (i.e. Transportation Engineer,
Transportation Planner, Traffic Engineer, etc.), in association with
subdivision plat approval that, at a minimum, addresses the following items
in relationship to the proposed subdivision:


 
 
a.   An estimation of traffic generated;


 
 
b.   An estimation of trip distribution to and from the development;


 
 
c.   An analysis of the existing road system serving the development (to
the nearest major intersections) and the effect of the development on that
system;


 
 
d.   A listing of proposed improvements, both on and off-site, and their
effect on the existing system.


Train Terminal
 
 
See "Bus or Train Terminal, Passenger"


Transit Station
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
Any premises designed for the loading and unloading of rail and/or bus
passengers from a public transit system. Facilities commonly referred to as
"bus stops” and which are designed to accommodate a handful of passengers
(at most) at one time, shall not be considered as being "transit stations."


Tree, Canopy
 
 
A tree, either single or multi-stemmed (i.e., in clump form) that has a
height of at least ten (10) feet and is of a species which, at maturity, can
be expected to reach a height in excess of forty (40) feet under normal
growing conditions in the local climate. If the tree is single-stemmed, it
shall have a caliper of at least one (1) inch at the time of planting.


Tree, Understory
 
 
A tree, either single or multi-stemmed (i.e., in clump form) which has a
height of at least five (5) feet and is of a species which at maturity, can
be expected to reach a height of 10 to 40 feet under normal growing
conditions in the local climate. If the tree is single-stemmed, it shall have
a caliper at the time of planting of at least three-quarters (3/4) of an inch.


Truck Stop
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A facility typically offering multiple services to the traveling public that
is particularly designed to serve the need of freight trucks and their
drivers. Such facilities typically include fuel stations (dispensing fuel for
trucks, and perhaps, for automobiles), one or more eating establishments
and/or sale of prepared food, sales of convenience and sundry items, shower
facilities, and overnight lodging facilities. Not all such facilities are
provided at all truck stops. The foregoing definition distinguishes a "truck
stop" from (1) a convenience store, (2) mini-mart, express fuel, (3) shopping
center, and (4) planned multi-tenant development.


Truck Terminal
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A facility where cargo is stored and where trucks load and unload cargo on a
regular basis for delivery.


Truck Washing Facility
 
Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses
 
A commercial establishment primarily engaged in the washing of
tractor-trailer trucks. Such washing shall be done using self-service
facilities or by fully automated machines.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Use, Accessory
 
 
A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or
structure and located on the same lot with such principal use or structure.


Use By Right
 
 
See “Use, Permitted”


Use, Conditional
 
 
A use category, indicated by a “C” in Table 7.1-1, that is allowed only
if it is reviewed and approved in accordance with the conditional use
procedures of Section 5.11.


Use, Incidental
 
 
A use located on the same lot as a primary use, but is subordinate and minor
in significance to the principal use, and bears a reasonable relationship
with the principal use.


Use, Nonconforming
 
 
A use or activity which does not conform to the use regulations of this
Ordinance for the district in which it is located either at the effective
date of this Ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments which are
incorporated into this Ordinance at some future date.


Use, Permitted
 
 
A use category, indicated by an “X” in Table 7.1-1 that is allowed by
right in a certain zoning district.  These uses are subject to all other
applicable regulations of this Ordinance.


Use, Principal
 
 
The primary or predominant use of any lot.


Use, Temporary
 
 
A land use or structure this is needed or in place only for short periods.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Variance
 
 
A relaxation of the strict terms of a specific provision of this Ordinance as
approved by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of
Section 5.14 of this Ordinance.


Vehicle, Commercial
 
 
A truck of any type used or maintained primarily to transport material or to
operate a power attachment or tool. Any vehicle with advertising or business
designation affixed to it shall be considered a commercial vehicle, except
for passenger vehicles having such affixations.


Vehicle, Emergency
 
 
A vehicle of a police or fire department, rescue squad, or similar public
service agency that is used in response to an emergency call.


Vehicle, Inoperable
 
 
A vehicle that for a continuous period of more than seventy-two (72) hours
has been in a state of disrepair and is incapable of being moved under its
own power.


Vehicle, Junked
 
 
Per NCGS 160A-303, a motor vehicle that does not display a lawful and valid
license plate and:


 
 
(i)   is partially dismantled or wrecked; or,


 
 
(ii)   cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
originally intended to move; or,


 
 
(iii)   is more than (5) five years old and appears to be worth less than
one hundred dollars ($100).


Vehicle, Passenger
 
 
An automobile, van, or pickup truck used exclusively as a passenger vehicle
and/or for hauling property of the owner. Pickup trucks may qualify as
passenger vehicles only when used exclusively as passenger vehicles or for
hauling property of the owner and not equipped as a camper or a commercial
vehicle.


Vehicle, Recreational
 
 
A vehicle that is designed as a temporary (as opposed to permanent) dwelling
for travel, recreational or vacation uses.  This term shall include
“camping trailer", "motor home", "travel trailer", "truck camper" and
"R.V.".  This term shall not include "manufactured homes" or "modular homes."


Vehicle, Septic Tank
 
 
A vehicle used primarily for the purpose of cleaning, maintaining and
repairing septic tank systems.


Vehicle, Solid Waste
 
 
A vehicle used primarily for the transport of solid waste.


Vested Right
 
 
The right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under
the terms and conditions of an approved site-specific site and/or subdivision
plan or through a “common law” vested right as described in Section
3.4.3(B).




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Wall, Building
 
 
The entire surface area, including windows and doors, of an exterior wall of
a building. As used in this Ordinance, the area of a wall will be calculated
for a maximum of fifty (50) feet in height of a building.  The term may also
be referred to simply as a “wall” or “exterior wall.”


Wall, Shared
 
 
A common or shared wall between two separate structures, buildings, or
dwelling units.


Warehouse
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A building or group of buildings for the storage of goods or wares belonging
either to the owner of the facility or to one or more lessees of space in the
facility of both, with access to contents only through management personnel.


Water, Public
 
 
Any water system defined as such by the North Carolina Division of Health
Services that complies with the regulations of the North Carolina Division of
Health Services and the community water system standard ordinance adopted by
Bessemer City.


Wireless Communications
 
 
Any personal wireless service, including but not limited to: cellular;
personal communication services (PCS); specialized mobile radio (SMR);
enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR); and, unlicensed spectrum services
utilizing devices described in Part 15 of the FCC rules and regulations
(e.g., wireless internet services and paging).


Wood Waste Grinding Operation
 
Industrial/ Distribution/ Heavy Impact Principal Uses
 
A facility where organic wastes are treated or processed for recycling or
reuse in soil-plant related industries, including activities such as grinding
or chipping land clearing debris, high carbon wood waste, nitrogen yard
waste, and untreated and unpainted pallets or construction wood waste into
mulch or fuel.


Working Days
 
 
Days exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays observed by the City.




 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition


Yard, Front
 
 
An area measured between the edge of the public street right-of-way line, and
the front of a building, projected to the side lot lines. On corner lots, the
front yard shall be measured perpendicular from the street lot line having
the shortest linear footage. If both street lot lines have equal linear
footage, the property owner shall determine the location of the front yard
where no principal structure is located. If a principal structure is located
on such a lot, the front yard shall be based on the architectural orientation
of the building.  The determination of front (side and rear yards) in a
planned multi-tenant development shall be considered on a case-by-case
basis. 


 





Yard, Rear
 
 
A yard extending the full width of the lot on which a principal building is
located and situated between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto
and passing through the point of the principal building nearest the rear lot
line.


Yard Sale
 
 
The sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five items of
personal property on any portion of a lot in a residential zoning district,
whether within or outside any building.  This may also be referred to as a
"garage sale", "carport sale", or "rummage sale."


Yard, Side
 
 
A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal
building and the side lot line as measured perpendicular from the side lot
line to the closest point of the principal building.



 



 

Term
 
Use Table Subcategory *
 
Definition




Zoning District, Commercial
 
 
The commercial zoning districts include the Central Business District
(stocktickerCBD), Urban Mixed Use (UMU), Light Commercial (C-1), Highway
Commercial (C-2), and General Commercial (C-3) districts.


Zoning District, Conditional
 
 
A zoning district that is enacted at the request of the property owner and
what is approved in a legislative manner by the governing board.  Fair and
reasonable conditions not otherwise spelled out in the Ordinance may be
attached to such approval.  Both the applicant and the governing board shall
mutually agree upon such conditions prior to the adoption of such a zoning
district.


Zoning District, Parallel Conditional Use
 
 
A zoning district that bears the same designation as a general zoning
district but is subject to additional conditions that are contained in a
conditional use permit.  This type of rezoning is appropriate where the
regulations of the general zoning district are not adequate to mitigate the
potential adverse impacts of a proposed development.  The approval of such
zoning and issuance of a conditional use permit may only be made after the
governing board holds a quasi-judicial public hearing.  Only the property
owner shall initiate any such zoning district.  This zoning district may
also be referred to as a “CUD Zoning District.”


Zoning District, General
 
 
A section or portion of the City within which certain zoning regulations and
requirements governing the use of buildings and land apply under the
provisions of this Ordinance.


Zoning District, Industrial
 
 
The industrial zoning districts include Light Industrial (I-1), General
Industrial (I-2), Exclusive Industrial (I-3), and Urban Industrial (IU)
districts.


Zoning District, Office
 
 
The office zoning districts include Transitional Mixed Use (TMU),
Office/Light Commercial (OLC), Office (O-1) and the Medical Office (OM)
districts.


Zoning District, Overlay
 
 
A zoning district established under this Ordinance that prescribes special
regulations to be applied to a site in combination with the underlying or
base district.


Zoning District, Residential
 
 
The residential zoning districts include three “rural residential”
districts, R-1, R-2 and R-3 and four “urban residential” districts,
RS-20, RS-12, RS-8 and RMF. 


Zoning District, Urban Standards Overlay
 
 
An overlay district, as described in Section 6.3 of this Ordinance, that
prescribes certain design and performance standards on new developments,
other than single- and two-family dwellings, in designated urban and
urbanizing areas of the planning jurisdiction.


Zoo
 
Civic/Institutional Principal Uses
 
An area, building or structure that contain animals on exhibition for viewing
by the public.  A petting zoo located on the premises of a “botanical
garden”, as herein defined, shall not be classified as a “zoo.” 
Rather, this shall be considered as an accessory use to the “botanical
garden.”




 



(Res. passed 7-9-2012; Res. passed 6-8-2015)



 


Notes

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 

* 
* All terms which are uses contained in the Table of Uses (i.e., Table
10.7-1) have a corresponding use table subcategory listed below.  The Table
of Uses organizes the uses into four use subcategories (e.g.
Residential/Agricultural, Office/Commercial Services/Retail, Industrial and
Civic/Institutional.  The appropriate subcategory is listed next to each use
defined below to make it easy to look the use up in the Table of Uses. 



CHAPTER 3.
APPLICABILITY OF ORDINANCE



3.1   Bona Fide Farms Exempt



3.2   Relationship With Other Adopted Ordinances



3.3   Reserved



3.4   Transitional Zoning/Vested Rights



3.5   Nonconforming Situations



Section 3.1   Bona Fide Farms Exempt



   The provisions of this Ordinance shall not affect bona fide farms,
owner-operated or leased, but any use of farm property used for non-farm
purposes shall be subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.



Section 3.2   Relationship With Other Adopted Plans



   It is the intention of the Board of Commissioners that this chapter
implements the planning policies adopted by the governing board as reflected
in the “Bessemer City Comprehensive Planning Program” document and other
relevant planning documents adopted by the governing board.  While the
governing board reaffirms its commitment that this Ordinance and any
subsequent amendments to it be in conformity with such adopted plans, the
governing board hereby expresses its intent that neither this Ordinance nor
any amendment to it may be challenged on the basis of any alleged
nonconformity with any adopted planning document.



Section 3.3   Reserved



Section 3.4   Transitional Zoning/Vested Rights



3.4.1   Approvals Granted Before UDO Effective Date



   Building permits, variances, conditional/special use permits,
preliminary or final subdivision plat approval, site plan approval, and other
similar development approvals that were valid on August 12, 2007 shall remain
valid until their expiration date.  Development may be completed in
accordance with such approvals, even if such building, development or
structure does not fully comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.  If
building construction is not commenced and diligently pursued in the time
allowed under the original approval or any extension granted, then the
building development or structure shall meet the standards of this Ordinance
at the time of re-application. 



3.4.2   Applications in Progress Prior to UDO Effective Date



   Applications for building permits, variances, special/conditional use
permits and other similar development approvals that were submitted in
complete form and accepted for review by the Administrator on August 12, 2007
shall be reviewed wholly under the terms of the ordinance in effect August
12, 2007.  Any re-application for an expired approval shall meet the
standards of this Ordinance in effect at the time of re-application.



3.4.3   Vested Rights



   Notwithstanding the above, the provisions of this UDO shall not apply
to:



   A.   Property upon which a valid statutorily approved vested right
(per NCGS  §160A-385.1) on August 12, 2007is in place as described in
Section 5.10; or,



   B.   A judicially established common law vested right where (1) the
owner has made substantial expenditures; (2) the expenditures were made in
good faith; (3) the expenditures were made in reliance upon a valid
governmental approval; and, (4) the owner would be harmed without a vested
right.



3.4.4   Violations Continue



   This Ordinance consolidates one or more previous stand-alone
ordinances.  Violations of those previous ordinances will continue to be a
violation of this Ordinance and be subject to the violations and penalties
provisions contained in Chapter 15 herein.  The adoption of this Ordinance
shall not affect any pending or future action to abate violations of previous
ordinances.



3.4.5   Nonconformities



   A.   Any nonconforming/grandfathered situation determined to exist
under this ordinance that lawfully existed under the previous zoning or
subdivision ordinance or any other ordinance identified in Section 1.6 will
also be considered to be a nonconformity under this Ordinance, so long as the
situation that resulted in the nonconforming status under the previous
ordinance continues to exist.



   B.   When a lot is used for a purpose that was a lawful use
immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and this Ordinance
no longer classifies such use as either a permitted or conditional use in the
zoning district in which it is located, such use shall be considered a
“nonconforming use” and shall be subject to the provisions ofSection 3.5
ofthis Ordinance.  Where any building, structure, or lot that legally
existed on the effective date of this Ordinance and which does not meet all
the standards set forth in this Ordinance, such building, structure or lot
shall be considered “nonconforming” and shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 3.5 of this Ordinance.



Section 3.5   Nonconforming Situations



   The purpose of this section is to regulate the continued existence of
uses and structures established prior to the effective date of these
regulations or any amendment subsequent thereto that does not conform to
these regulations. Given the fact that the implementation of this UDO and
previous zoning ordinances has in the past and will in the future result in
the creation of a number of nonconformities, some of which are viable uses
which do not produce substantial negative impacts, this Ordinance allows the
Administrator and the Board of Adjustment to issue permits for the expansion
and or replacement of nonconforming uses and structures in certain situations.



3.5.1   Nonconforming Principal Uses (excluding single- and two-family
residential uses, manufactured homes, and manufactured home parks)



   A.   Nonconforming uses of land or structures, and nonconforming
structures that contain nonconforming uses may continue only in accordance
with the provisions of this Section.



   B.   Normal structural repair and maintenance may be performed to
allow the continuation of the nonconforming use.



   C.   A nonconforming use may not be physically expanded through
additions to the structure in which the nonconforming use is located (either
principal or accessory structures) except in conformance with a Special
Exception permit issued by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section
5.12. Any occupancy of additional lands beyond the boundaries of the lot on
which the nonconforming use is located shall be prohibited.



   D.   A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use
of similar or less intensity through issuance of a permit by the
Administrator. Such permit may be issued if the Administrator determines that:



      1.   The new use is allowed only in the same or more
restrictive zoning districts as the previous use [refer to Section 14.1.3(D)
(5) for the list of zoning districts and their degree of restrictiveness]. 



      2.   The hours of operation generally can be expected to be
similar (i.e., with regard to opening and/or closing times) or fewer than the
previous use; and,



      3.   The days of operation generally can be expected to be
similar (or fewer) than the previous use; and,



      4.   The amount of required parking for the use is no greater
than ten (10) percent greater than the previous use; and,



      5.   The level of traffic generated by the new use can be
expected to be no more than ten (10) percent greater than the previous use as
determined by the most recent version of the ITE (International Traffic
Engineers) manual.



      6.   If one or more of the above conditions are not met, a
change in principal use may be allowed through the issuance of a Special
Exception by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 5.12.



   E.   Once a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use,
it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use.



   F.   If a nonconforming use is abandoned for a period of 90 days or
more (this period being measured from the day the use was initially
discontinued), the use shall not be allowed to reestablish. All new uses on
the lot in question shall be conforming (i.e., a use shown as either a “use
by right” or “conditional use” as indicated in Table 7.1-1, “Table of
Uses”. Notwithstanding, in the settlement of an estate, such period shall
be increased to one year.  The Administrator shall be authorized to extend
this period, on a case-by-case basis, for up to two (2) additional one-year
periods upon documentation that such additional time is needed to settle the
estate.



   G.   If a principal or accessory structure housing the nonconforming
use is destroyed [i.e., receiving damage to an extent of more than fifty (50)
percent of its assessed tax value at the time of destruction], the structure
may be allowed to be rebuilt and to house the former nonconforming use in
accordance with a permit issued by the Administrator per Section 3.5.1(D). An
application for reconstruction must be filed with the Administrator within
one year of the date of destruction. 



3.5.2   Nonconforming Principal Use- Manufactured Homes (not located
within a manufactured home park)



   A nonconforming manufactured home not located within a manufactured
home park may be replaced by another manufactured home under the following
conditions:



      1.   The replacement manufactured home is placed on the
property within one-hundred eighty (90) days following removal of the
existing manufactured home (except as provided in Subsection 8 herein);



      2.   The replacement manufactured home must be a Class A
manufactured home only.



      3.   Normal structural repair and maintenance on the
manufactured home may be performed. A nonconforming manufactured home cannot
be expanded, except: (i) to bring the structure into compliance with the
local government’s minimum housing code; or (ii) for the placement of
external appurtenances such as decks, porches, stairs, etc. accessory
structures may be placed on the lot in association with the manufactured
home, so long as the yard requirements and all other applicable criteria for
the placement of accessory structures contained in Section 9.9 are met.



      4.   Once a nonconforming manufactured home has been removed
from the property [except as provided by Sections 3.5.2(A) or (D)], it may
not be replaced.



      5.   If the nonconforming manufactured home is destroyed
(i.e., receiving damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its
assessed tax value at the time of destruction], the manufactured home may be
replaced in accordance with a permit issued by the Administrator and in
accordance with the criteria contained in Section 3.5.2(A). Application for
said permit shall be made within one (1) year of the date of destruction.



3.5.3   Reserved



3.5.4   Nonconforming Principal Use- Single- Or Two-family Dwellings
(other than manufactured homes), Including Accessory Structures



   A.   Nonconforming single- and two-family residential principal and
accessory structures (other than manufactured homes) may be continued in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.



   B.   Normal structural repair and maintenance may be performed to
allow the continuation of the nonconforming use.



   C.   A nonconforming single- or two-family dwelling or accessory
structure may be physically expanded (through additions or expansions) so
long as the addition or expansion does not increase the number of dwelling
units and so long as the front, side and rear yard requirements of the
underlying zoning district, or the RS-8 district, whichever is more
restrictive, are met.  If any of these yard requirements cannot be met, the
expansion may only occur through the issuance of a Special Exception by the
Board of Adjustment in accordance with all applicable provisions of Section
5.12. 



   Notwithstanding, such Special Exception may only be issued by the Board
of Adjustment for an expansion of an existing nonconforming structure if that
expansion does not extend any closer to a property line than the existing
structure and the expansion into a required yard setback does not more than
double the area of encroachment already existing within that required yard
setback. (Refer to Figure 3.5.4-1 below for an example of how this is to be
interpreted.)  Any occupation of additional lands beyond the boundaries of
the lot on which the nonconforming use is located shall be prohibited.



Figure 3.5.4-1









 



   D.   Once a nonconforming single- or two-family dwelling has been
changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any
nonconforming use.



   E.   If a nonconforming single- or two-family dwelling is abandoned
for a period of 90 days or more, or in cases involving the settlement of an
estate, one year, the use shall not be allowed to reestablish. All new uses
in said structure shall be conforming. 



   F.   If said principal or accessory structure is destroyed (i.e.,
receiving damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its assessed
tax value at the time of destruction), the residential structure may be
allowed to be rebuilt in accordance with a permit issued by the Administrator
per Section 3.5.5(C). Application for such permit must be made within 180
days of the date of destruction.



3.5.5   Other Nonconforming Principal Structures



   A.   Normal repair and maintenance may be performed to allow the
continuation of nonconforming structures.



   B.   An existing nonconforming structure may not be enlarged or
altered in a way that increases its nonconformity except in conformance with
a Special Exception permit issued by the Board of Adjustment in accordance
with all applicable provisions of Section 5.12 of this Ordinance.  One such
provision is that a Special Exception may only be issued by the Board of
Adjustment for an expansion of an existing nonconforming structure if that
expansion does not extend any closer to a property line than the existing
structure and the expansion into a required yard setback does not more than
double the amount of encroachment already existing within that required yard
setback. Refer to Figure 3.5.4-1 for an example of how this is to be
interpreted.



   C.   If such nonconforming structure is damaged to an extent greater
than fifty (50) percent of its assessed tax value, it may be rebuilt only
after the issuance of a permit from the Administrator. Application for such
permit shall be made within 180 days of destruction. In the issuance of said
permit the Administrator shall follow these standards:



      1.   If the foundation for the replacement structure is moved
or removed, the structure shall be rebuilt in as conforming a manner as
possible. If the original foundation is used, the structure may be rebuilt at
that same location on the lot.



      2.   A nonconforming structure shall not be rebuilt in a
manner that increases its nonconformity. 



      3.   A structure rebuilt in accordance with this subsection
shall not have a gross floor area larger than the structure it replaced
unless all setback and related requirements (e.g., landscaping, parking,
etc.) are met for the zoning district in which it is located.



      4.   If the rebuilt structure is still nonconforming, the
developer will be asked to meet, to the greatest degree feasible, each of the
following requirements for that use:



         a.   Buffer yard requirements, per Section 11.3.



         b.   Off-street parking requirements, per Chapter 10



         c.   Landscaping and street yard tree requirements, per
Section 11.4



      5.   Greatest priority will be given by the Administrator to
satisfying said buffering requirements, followed in decreasing levels of
priority by said off-street parking requirements and said landscaping and
street tree requirements. The Administrator shall have the authority to waive
and/or modify any of said requirements, on a case-by-case basis, in order to
best accommodate that development with respect to the lot upon which it is
located and surrounding land uses and development patterns.



      6.   If the application to rebuild is submitted more than one
180 days after the date of destruction, the structure may be built only in
accordance with all requirements of this Ordinance.



   D.   Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any distance on
the lot upon which it is located, whenever possible, it shall be moved so as
to make the structure conforming. Otherwise the structure, if moved, shall be
placed on the lot in a manner as conforming as possible.



3.5.6   Nonconforming Accessory Structures



   A.   A nonconforming accessory structure may be expanded only if the
nonconforming features of that structure are expanded in a manner that does
not increase the degree of nonconformity.



   B.   Replacement of any destroyed nonconforming accessory structure
is allowed in a manner consistent with the provisions of Section 3.5.5(C).



3.5.7   Nonconforming Lots



   A nonconforming vacant lot may be developed for any of the uses
permitted by this Ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located,
provided that the use meets all applicable yard, bulk, and dimensional
requirements for that zoning district. 



   Notwithstanding, in any zoning district where, prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance (1) a lot was recorded in a subdivision whose plat was
filed with the Register of Deeds; (2) such lot wasnot in violation of the
City Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Ordinance in effect at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance; and, (3) such lot does not comply with this
Ordinance’s minimum lot area and/or width requirements for the zoning
district in which such lot is located, then such lot may be used for any use
permitted in that zoning district.  In addition, the Administrator may use
the front, side, and rear yard setbacks for principal structures as they
appear on the recorded final plat or recorded deed in order to conform to any
additional or expanded principal structures on the lot in question.



3.5.8   Nonconforming Screening and Landscaping



   In accordance with Sections 11.3 and 11.4 of this Ordinance, certain
uses are required to provide screening and/or landscaping on-site. Except as
herein provided, an expansion of an existing use which is deficient in
screening and/or landscaping or a change in principal use cannot occur
without the required screening and/or landscaping having first been provided
on site. The requirements for providing such screening and/or landscaping may
be waived or modified by the Administrator under any of the following
situations:



   A.   Screening requirements shall be waived when the new principal
use is a permitted use (i.e., use by right) in the same zoning district as
the former principal use. Notwithstanding, if the new principal use is
established within one (1) year of the property in question being rezoned to
a more restrictive general district, parallel conditional zoning district or
conditional district, said screening requirements shall not be waived.



   B.   Screening requirements may be waived on a one-time basis for
any principal use (or for a shopping center, office park, or other
multi-tenant development), where building expansion of ten (10) percent [or
five (5) percent if adjacent to a residential zoning district] occurs.



3.5.9   Nonconforming Off-street Parking and/or Loading



   A.   On any lot which contains a use which does not comply with the
off-street parking and/or loading regulations contained in Section 10.5 of
this Ordinance, a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any
expansion [except as provided in Section 3.5.9(B)] or any change of use,
either of which would result in a need to increase the number of off-street
parking and/or loading spaces required (except as herein provided), until the
off-street parking and pavement requirements have been met.



   B.   A certificate of occupancy may be issued when there has been a
change in a principal use and the number of off-street parking spaces
required for the new use (per Chapter 10 of this Ordinance) is within ten
(10) percent or ten (10) spaces, whichever is less, of the number of
off-street parking spaces actually provided.  For a greater reduction of
off-street parking space requirements, but not to exceed fifteen (15) percent
of the required number of parking spaces, the expansion may only occur
through the issuance of a Special Exception by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with all applicable provisions of Section 5.12.



   C.   Such relief may be granted on a onetime only basis per lot or
planned development. In instances where such relief is provided, the
additional parking spaces need not be paved (but shall have a graded gravel,
crushed-stone or similar dust-reducing surface) if the parking lot prior to
said expansion was not paved.



   D.   Any use that is nonconforming with respect to off-street
parking and which is destroyed [i.e., receives damage to an extent greater
than fifty (50) percent of its assessed tax value at the time of destruction)
may be rebuilt so long as the number of off-street parking spaces is not
reduced and the zoning permit application for reconstruction is submitted to
the Administrator within one (1) year of the date of destruction.



3.5.10   Nonconforming Signs



   A.   Subject to the restrictions of this Section, nonconforming
signs that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this Ordinance may
be continued.



   B.   No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in
the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming sign or causes a previously
conforming sign to become nonconforming. This provision shall not apply when
the nonconformity is the result of the acquisition of right-of-way by a
public entity. The City Manager or the governing board of such jurisdiction
in such instances may authorize the continuation or replacement of a sign in
the right-of-way.



   C.   A nonconforming sign may not be moved or sign structure
replaced except to bring the sign into complete conformity with this Chapter.
Once a nonconforming sign is removed (i.e., the removal of the structural
appurtenances above the base or footing, and/or removal of the footing) from
the premises or otherwise taken down or moved, said sign only may be replaced
or placed back into use with a sign that is in conformance with the terms of
this Section and Chapter 12.  Refer to Figure 3.5.10-1 below for examples of
how this is to be interpreted.



Figure 3.5.10-1































 



   D.   Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs necessary
to keep a nonconforming sign in sound condition are permitted.



   E.   If a nonconforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it may
not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed, or replaced except in conformity
with all the provisions of this Chapter, and the remnants of the former sign
structure shall be cleared from the land. For purposes of this Section, a
nonconforming sign shall be considered "destroyed" if it receives damage to
an extent of greater than fifty (50) percent of its current assessed tax
value. 



   F.   Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this Chapter,
the message of a nonconforming sign may be changed so long as this does not
create any new nonconformities.



   G.   If a nonconforming on-premise sign remains blank for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months, that sign shall be deemed abandoned
and, within thirty (30) days after such abandonment, be altered to comply
with this Chapter or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property
where the sign is located, or other person having control over such sign. For
purposes of this section, a sign shall be deemed "blank" if:



      1.   It advertises a business, service, commodity,
accommodations, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer
operating, offered, or being conducted; or



      2.   The advertising message it displays becomes illegible in
whole or substantial part; or



      3.   It does not contain an advertising message. (For such
purposes, the terms "Sign For Rent," "Sign For Lease," "Sign For Sale," etc.,
shall not be deemed to be an advertising message).



   H.   Reserved



   I.   All other advertising signs which are nonconforming by virtue
of their height, setback, size, spacing (i.e., distance between two
advertising signs, or location in a zoning district other than a residential
zoning district), shall not be required to be removed and may continue
subject to all other applicable portions of this section. 



   J.   Reserved



   K.   Reserved



   L.   Any sign which is prohibited under Section 12.3 (prohibited
signs) which was lawfully existing at the time it became prohibited shall be
allowed to continue provided that:



      1.   No additions or expansions of the sign occur;



      2.   The message display time shall not be less than one
second;



      3.   At no time shall light rays be cast directly upon
residential dwellings.



CHAPTER 4.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES/FUNCTIONS



4.1   Summary of Ordinance Administration and Review Roles



4.2   (City Council) (Town Board) (Board of Commissioners)



4.3   UDO Administrator



4.4   Planning (Board) (Commission )



4.5   Board of Adjustment



4.6   Subdivision Technical Review Committee



Section 4.1   Summary of Ordinance Administration and Review Roles



4.1.1   Ordinance Administration and Review Bodies



   The following persons and entities shall have roles in administering
the provisions of this Ordinance:



   A.   City Council



   B.   Zoning Administrator



   C.   Planning Board



   D.   Board of Adjustment



   E.   Technical Review Committee



4.1.2   Summary of Administration and Review Roles



   Table 4.1-1 summarizes the review and decision-making responsibilities
of the entities that have specific roles in the administration of this
Ordinance.    The “section” numbers shown indicate the section of this
Ordinance where specific procedures are detailed.



 



Table 4.1-1
Summary of Ordinance Administration and Review Bodies


Procedure
 
Section
 
Administrator
 
Planning Board
 
City Council
 
Board of Adjustment
 
Technical Review Committee


UDO Map Amendment
 
14.1
 
Receive Application
 
Make Recommendation
 
Final Decision
 
 


UDO Text Amendment
 
14.2
 
Receive Application
 
Make Recommendation
 
Final Decision
 
 


Zoning Permit
 
5.3
 
Receive Application; Final Decision
 
 
 
Appeal of Administrators Decision
 


Site Plan
 
5.2
 
Receive Application; Final Decision
 
 
 
Appeal of Administrators Decision
 


Major Subdivision Sketch Plan
 
13.9.1
 
Receive Application; Final Decision
 
Appeal of Administrator’s Decision
 
 
 


Major Subdivision Preliminary Plat
 
13.9.2
 
Receive Application
 
Final Decision
 
 
 
Make Recommendation


Major Subdivision Final Plat
 
13.9.3
 
Receive Application; Final Decision
 
Appeal of Administrator’s Decision
 
 
 


Temporary Use Permit
 
5.8
 
Receive Application; Final Decision
 
 
 
Appeal of Administrators Decision
 


Home Occupation/ Accessory Use Permit
 
5.9
 
Receive Application; Final Decision
 
 
 
Appeal of Administrators Decision
 


Vested Rights Certificate
 
5.10
 
Receive Application
 
Make Recommendation
 
Final Decision
 
 


Conditional Use Permit
 
5.11
 
Receive Application
 
 
 
Final Decision
 


Special Exception
 
5.12
 
Receive Application
 
 
 
Final Decision
 


Admin. Appeal
 
5.13
 
Receive Application
 
 
 
Final Decision
 


Variance
 
5.14
 
Receive Application
 
 
 
Final Decision
 


Minor Modifications to Standards
 
5.15
 
Receive Application; Final Decision
 
 
 
Appeal of Administrators Decision
 




 



Section 4.2   Bessemer City Council



4.2.1   Powers and Duties



   The governing board shall have the following powers and duties:



   A.   To appoint members to the Planning Board pursuant to NCGS
153A-344 and Board of Adjustment pursuant to NCGS 153A-345.



   B.   To initiate, adopt, and amend a Comprehensive Plan.



   C.   To initiate amendments to the text of this Ordinance.



   D.   To review recommendations of the Planning Board and make final
decisions on applications for amendments to the text of this Ordinance
pursuant to NCGS 153A-344. 



   E.   To hear, review, approve, conditionally approve or deny
requests for conditional use permits associated with a parallel conditional
use zoning (CUD) request.  Requests for conditional use permits NOT
associated with a CUD rezoning request shall be heard by the Board of
Adjustment.



   F.   To adopt and amend a schedule of fees for a variety of
procedures addressed in this Ordinance.



   G.   To hear, review, and approve, conditionally approve, or deny
amendments to the Official Zoning Map after a recommendation of the Planning
(Board) has been submitted pursuant to NCGS 153A-344.



   I.   To hear appeals of decisions made by the Planning Board
regarding subdivision plats as provided for in Section 13.6.



Section 4.3   UDO Administrator



4.3.1   Establishment and Duties



   The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by
the Unified Development Ordinance Administrator (hereafter referred to as the
“UDO Administrator”, “Floodplain Administrator”, “Watershed
Administrator” or “Administrator”) and any other officials designated
by the City for the administration of this Ordinance.  The City shall have
the authority to appoint one (1) or more persons to serve as the
“Administrator.” 



4.3.2   Appeals from the Decisions of the Administrator



   Appeals from the decisions of the Administrator in which it is alleged
there is an error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made
in the enforcement of this Ordinance shall be made to the Board of Adjustment
in accordance with Section 5.13 of this Ordinance.



Section 4.4    Planning Board



   Pursuant to NCGS 160A-387, a Planning Board is hereby established.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.4.1   Powers and Duties



   The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:



   A.   To prepare or hear, review, and make recommendations on the
content of a comprehensive plan, land use plan, and other plans that address
land use and planning-related issues and to submit such plan to the governing
board.



   B.   To prepare or hear, review, and make recommendations on
amendments to any such plans for submittal to the governing board.



   C.   To initiate or hear, review, and make recommendations to the
governing board amendments to the Ordinance text or to the Official Zoning
Map.



   D.   To adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings and
for any other purposes deemed necessary and consistent with this Ordinance
and all other applicable local and State regulations.



   E.   To grant variations to the terms of Chapter 13 as provided for
in Section 13.7.



   F.   To render decisions on preliminary plats of major subdivisions
per Section 13.9.



   G.   Reserved.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.4.2   Membership



   A.   The Bessemer City Planning Board shall be comprised of five (5)
regular members as provided in this Ordinance. The Planning Board shall
represent both the corporate limits of the City and the extraterritorial
areas outside of the corporate limits. Members representing the corporate
limits shall be appointed by the City Council. Members representing the
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be recommended by the City Council and
approved by the Gaston County Board of Commissioners and shall have equal
rights, privileges, and duties with the other members of the board in all
matters, whether they arise inside the corporate limits or within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction. At least one (1) member, but no more than two
(2) members, shall represent the extraterritorial jurisdiction. Initial terms
of office shall be as follows:



      1.   Two members shall be appointed for a term of one year.



      2.   Two members shall be appointed for a term of two years,
and



      3.   One member shall be appointed for a term of three years.



      4.   At the expiration of the terms of such members first
selected, their successors, except in the case of vacancy, shall be appointed
for a term of three years.



   B.   The City Council shall elect one (1) of the Planning Board
members as Chair and one (1) as Vice-Chair, annually. In the absence of the
Chair, the Vice-Chair shall act as Chair and shall have all the powers and
duties of the Chair. In the absence of both, the Board shall elect a
temporary Chair to conduct the meeting. The Chair, or acting Chair, shall
administer oaths, be in charge of all proceedings before the Board, and take
such action necessary to preserve the order and integrity of all proceedings
before the Board.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.4.3   Clerk



   The Clerk to the Board shall be the City Clerk, or as designated by the
City Manager. The Clerk shall keep Planning Board minutes, showing the vote
of each member on all voting matters. In addition, the Clerk shall maintain
all records of the Planning Board meetings, hearings, and proceedings, as
well as the correspondence of the Planning Board. All such minutes, records,
and files, shall be housed in City Hall as a public record.



(Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.4.4   Staff



   The Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, shall serve as the
professional staff to the Planning Board. Staff shall arrange for all
required public notices to be given, shall notify parties to items before the
Board and of subsequent decisions, and shall perform such tasks as the Chair
shall assign, and shall generally supervise the clerical work of the Board.
Staff is also responsible for training the members of the Boards as they are
appointed.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



Section 4.5   Board of Adjustment



   Pursuant to NCGS § 160A-388, a Board of Adjustment is hereby
established.



4.5.1   Powers and Duties



   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:



   A.   To hear and decide appeals from the decisions of the Zoning
Administrator, in which it is alleged there is an error in an order,
requirement, decision, or determination in the enforcement of this Ordinance,
pursuant to Section 5.13. Administrative Appeals Interpretations.



   B.   To hear and decide on applications for variances pursuant to
Section 5.14. Variances.



   C.   To hear and decide on applications for special exceptions as
provided in Section 5.12. Special Exception.



   D.   To interpret the Official Zoning Map and shall make
determinations on disputed questions of lot lines or district boundary lines
and similar questions that may arise in the administration of this Ordinance.



   E.   To adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings and
for any other purposes deemed necessary and consistent with this Ordinance
and all other applicable local and State regulations.



   F.   To hear and decide applications for conditional use permits,
pursuant to Section 5.11. Conditional Use Permit.



   G.   The Board of Adjustment shall exercise any other powers as may
be granted herein by this Ordinance. In carrying out its duties, the Board of
Adjustment may subpoena witnesses and compel the production of evidence.



   H.   Reserved.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.2   Quasi-judicial Procedures



   The consideration and final decision on any application for an appeal,
variance, special exception, conditional use permit or interpretation, as
provided above, shall be made by the Board of Adjustment only after a
quasi-judicial public hearing has been properly advertised and convened.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.3   Membership



   A.   The Bessemer City Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5)
regular and two (2) alternate members. The Board of Adjustment shall
represent both the corporate limits of the City and the extraterritorial
areas outside of the corporate limits. Members representing the corporate
limits shall be appointed by the City Council. Members representing the
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be recommended by the City Council and
approved by the Gaston County Board of Commissioners and shall have equal
rights, privileges, and duties with the other members of the board in all
matters, whether they arise inside the corporate limits or within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction. At least one (1) member, but no more than two
(2) members, shall represent the extraterritorial jurisdiction. Except in the
case of filling a vacancy, each such appointment shall be for a term of three
(3) years.



   B.   The City Council shall elect one (1) of the Board of Adjustment
members as Chair and one (1) as Vice-Chair, annually. In the absence of the
Chair, the Vice-Chair shall act as Chair and shall have all the powers and
duties of the Chair. In the absence of both, the Board shall elect a
temporary Chair to conduct the meeting. The Chair, or acting Chair, shall
administer oaths, be in charge of all proceedings before the Board, and take
such action necessary to preserve the order and integrity of all proceedings
before the Board.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.4   Clerk



   The Clerk to the Board shall be the City Clerk, or as designated by the
City Manager. The Clerk shall keep Board of Adjustment minutes, showing the
vote of each member on all voting matters. In addition, the Clerk shall
maintain all records of the Board of Adjustment meetings, hearings, and
proceedings, as well as the correspondence of the Board. All such minutes,
records, and files, shall be housed in City Hall as a public record.



(Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.5   Staff



   The Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, shall serve as the
professional staff to the Board of Adjustment. Staff shall arrange for all
required public notices to be given, shall notify parties to cases before the
Board and of subsequent decisions, and shall perform such tasks as the Chair
shall assign, and shall generally supervise the clerical work of the Board.
Staff is also responsible for training the members of the Boards as they are
appointed.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.6   Quorum



   No meeting of the Board of Adjustment may be called to order, nor may
the Board of Adjustment transact any business not requiring a public hearing
without a quorum consisting of a majority of the appointed regular membership
of said body.



(Res. passed 4-14-2014; Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.7     Application Procedure



   The following regulations apply to all applications submitted to the
Board of Adjustment:



   A.   Before a petition for an administrative appeal, special
exception, interpretation of the zoning ordinance maps, conditional use
permit, or variance is heard, and a public hearing is conducted by the Board
of Adjustment, a completed application shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator along with a fee in accordance with the adopted fee schedule.
Said fee shall be waived for any petition request made on behalf of Bessemer
City or the State of North Carolina. The application will not be deemed
complete without the names and addresses of all adjacent properties, from the
most recent official tax records provided by the applicant, except for
petitions for appeals and interpretations.



   B.   The filing of any application halts all proceedings unless the
Administrator certifies that such action in his or her opinion will cause
imminent peril to life or property, or, that because the violation charged is
transitory in nature and that it would seriously interfere with enforcement
of the Ordinance. In that event, proceedings shall not be halted except by
restraining order, which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the
Superior Court of Gaston County.



   C.   Within five (5) working days after having received an
application for an appeal, interpretation, variance, conditional use, or
special exception permit, the Administrator shall determine whether the
application is complete. If he or she determines that the application is not
complete, he or she shall serve a written notice on the applicant specifying
the application’s deficiencies. The Administrator shall take no further
action on the application until the deficiencies are remedied. If the
Administrator fails to notify the applicant within said five (5) working day
period, the application shall be deemed complete.



(Am. Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.8   Public Hearing Notification



   The City shall give notice of all Board of Adjustment public hearings
according to procedures set forth in the NCGS.



   A.   Interpretations: Appeals. The City shall send a notice by first
class mail to the applicant and to the owner(s) of any properties that have
given rise to the application. The Zoning Administrator shall also post in
the City Administrative Building, in a conspicuous location, a notice that
indicates the nature of the public hearing and the date, time, and place at
which the public hearing is to occur. Said notices shall be mailed, posted at
least 10 days prior to the public hearing.



   B.   Variances, Special Exceptions, Conditional Use Permits, and all
other matters that require a Board of Adjustment Public Hearing



      1.   Notices shall be sent by the City by first class mail to
the applicant, and to owners of all contiguous properties. The Administrator
shall also post a copy of such notice in the City Administrative Building, in
a conspicuous location. Each notice shall indicate the nature of the public
hearing and the date, time, and place at which it is to occur and shall be
mailed/posted at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.



      2.   The City shall also place at least one (1) sign on the
subject property(ies) indicating the case number, hearing date, and phone
number to call for further information. Said sign(s) shall be placed at least
10 days prior to the public hearing. The posted sign may only be removed once
the public hearing has been concluded.



(Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.9    Board of Adjustment Decision



   A.   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a quasi-judicial public
hearing on an application no later than 30 days after a completed application
has been filed with the Zoning Administrator. The Board of Adjustment shall
decide on the matter that was presented at the public hearing within 31 days
of the close of the public hearing.



   B.   The concurrent vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the voting members
of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to grant a variance. A majority
of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial matter or
to determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari. Vacation positions
on the Board of Adjustment, and members who are disqualified from voting on a
quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered in calculating the requisite
majority if there are no qualified alternate members available to take the
place of such members.



   C.   The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision
based upon competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record.



   D.   All decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be in writing
and signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member and filed with the
Administrator. A written copy thereof shall be delivered by personal
delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property
owner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for copy, prior
to the date the decision becomes effective. The Zoning Administrator shall
certify that proper notice has been made.



(Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.10    Appeals from the Board of Adjustment Rehearings



   A.   An application for a rehearing shall be made in the same manner
as provided for in the original hearing within a period of 15 days after the
decision of the Board of Adjustment has been signed and officially filed with
the Clerk. In addition, specific information to enable the Board of
Adjustment to determine whether or not there has been a substantial change in
facts, evidence, or conditions in the case, shall be presented in writing or
graphically. The Board of Adjustment shall deny a rehearing, if in its
judgment, such change in facts, evidence, or conditions have not been proven.
A public hearing shall not be required to be held by the Board to consider
holding such a rehearing. Approval of said consideration, however, shall
require an affirmative vote of at least 4/5 of the Board’s voting
membership. In the event that the Board finds that a rehearing is warranted,
it shall thereupon proceed as in the original hearing.



   B.   Upon the denial of an original application, or upon the denial
of an application from which a rehearing has been conducted, a similar
application affecting all or any portion of the same property(ies) may not be
filed for a period of one (1) year after the date of denial of the original
application.



   C.   Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to
review by the Superior Court of Gaston County proceedings in the nature of
certiorari. Any petition for review by the Superior Court shall be duly
verified and filed with the clerk of the Superior Court within 30 days after
the decision of the Board of Adjustment is filed in the office of the Clerk,
or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has
filed a written request for such copy with the Administrator or the chairman
of the Board of Adjustment at the time of the Board’s hearing of the case,
whichever is later.



(Ord. passed 8-13-18)



4.5.11    Board of Adjustment Decision



   A.   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a quasi-judicial public
hearing on an application no later than thirty (30) days after a complete
application has been filed with the Administrator.  The Board of Adjustment
shall decide on the matter that was presented at the public hearing within
thirty-one (31) days of the close of the public hearing.



   B.   The concurrent vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the voting members
of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to grant a variance.  A
majority of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial
matter or to determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari.  Vacant
positions on the Board of Adjustment and Board of Adjustment members who are
disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered
“members of the Board of Adjustment” for calculation of the requisite
majority if there are no qualified alternate members available to take the
place of such members.



   C.   The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision
based upon competent, material and substantial evidence in the record.



   D.   All decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be in writing
and signed by the chair or other duly authorized member and filed with the
Administrator.  A written copy thereof shall be delivered by personal
delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property
owner and to any person who has submitted a written request for copy, prior
to the date the decision becomes effective.  The Administrator shall certify
that proper notice has been made.



(Res. passed 4-14-2014)



4.5.12    Appeals from the Board of Adjustment/Rehearings



   A.   An application for a rehearing shall be made in the same manner
as provided for in the original hearing within a period of fifteen (15) days
after the decision of the Board of Adjustment is filed in the office of the
Administrator.  In addition, specific information to enable the Board of
Adjustment to determine whether or not there has been a substantial change in
facts, evidence, or conditions in the case, shall be presented in writing or
graphically. The Board of Adjustment shall deny a rehearing, if, in its
judgment, such change in facts, evidence or conditions has not been proven. A
public hearing shall not be required to be held by the Board of Adjustment to
consider holding such a rehearing. Approval of said consideration, however,
shall require an affirmative vote of at least 4/5 of the Board of
Adjustment’s voting membership. In the event that the Board of Adjustment
finds that a rehearing is warranted, it shall thereupon proceed as in the
original hearing.



   B.   Upon the denial of an original application, or upon the denial
of an application from which a rehearing has been conducted, a similar
application affecting all or any portion of the same property (ies) may not
be filed for a period of one (1) year after the date of denial of the
original application.



   C.   Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to
review by the Superior Court of proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any
petition for review by the Superior Court shall be duly verified and filed
with the clerk of Superior Court within thirty (30) days after the decision
of the Board of Adjustment is filed in the office of the Administrator, or
after a written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has
filed a written request for such copy with the Administrator or the chairman
of the Board of Adjustment at the time of the Board's hearing of the case,
whichever is later.



Section 4.6   Technical Review Committee



4.6.1   Powers and Duties



   The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall review Preliminary Plats
based on standards set forth in this ordinance and make recommendations to
the Planning Board on such plats as shown in Table 13.8-1.



4.6.2   Membership



   A.   The TRC shall be comprised of the following persons.  If such
person is not listed by his/her specific title, then the City Manager, or the
head of the agency listed below shall have the authority to appoint one (1)
person to serve on the TRC:



      1.   Planning Director



      2.   Public Works Director



      3.   City Engineer



      4.   City Council Member



      5.   Planning Board Member



      6.   Bessemer  City Fire Inspector



      7.   Gaston County Schools



      8.   Gaston County Police



      9.   Gaston  Urban Area Metropolitan Planning Agency.



   B.   Such persons shall serve on the TRC at the pleasure of the
Manager/Administrator or their respective agency head, provided, however,
that the TRC shall at all times consist of at least one (1) person from each
such agency listed above.



4.6.3   Secretary



   A Secretary shall be appointed to serve the TRC.  The Secretary shall
keep TRC minutes showing the vote of each member on all voting matters.  In
addition, the Secretary shall maintain all records of TRC meetings, hearings
and proceedings, as well as the correspondence of the TRC.  All such
minutes, records and files shall be housed in the Office of the Planning
Department as a public record.



CHAPTER 5.
PERMITS APPROVAL PROCEDURES



5.1   General Submittal Requirements



5.2   Site Plan Review



5.3   Zoning Permit



5.4   Building Permit



5.5   Zoning Certificate of Compliance



5.6   Certificate of Occupancy



5.7   Sign Permit



5.8   Temporary Use Permit



5.9   Home Occupation/ Accessory Use Permit



5.10   Vested Rights Certificate



5.11   Conditional Use Permit



5.12   Special Exception



5.13   Administrative Appeals/ Interpretations



5.14   Variances



5.15   Minor Modifications to Development and Zoning District Standards &
Approved Plats



Section 5.1   General Submittal Requirements



   A.   Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, applications for
review and approval may be initiated by (1) the owner of the property that is
subject to the application; or, (2) the owner’s authorized agent(s). 



   B.   When an authorized agent files an application on behalf of a
property owner, the agent shall provide the Administrator with written
documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the
application.



   C.   In certain instances, such as revocation of a conditional use
permit, a governing board may initiate an application.  When such a petition
is filed, it is being done without prejudice toward the final outcome.



   D.   All uses, signs, structures, buildings, or other improvements
addressed by this Ordinance shall be in compliance with this Ordinance and
all other applicable federal, State, and local codes and ordinances as
regulated and enforced by those agencies.



Section 5.2   Site Plan Review



5.2.1   Statement of Intent



   The propose of these requirements is to promote orderly development in
Bessemer City and to ensure that such activities are developed in a manner
harmonious with surrounding properties and in the interest of the general
public welfare.  To achieve these ends and to assure compliance with all
applicable requirements of this Ordinance, site plans for certain uses or
land shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Administrator prior to the
issuance of a zoning permit.



5.2.2   Development and Uses Requiring a Site Plan



   Site plan review shall be required for all uses and development other
than single or two-family dwelling units and their accessory structures. 
Provided however, the Administrator may waive site plan requirements when he
determines that the submission of a site plan or parts thereof would serve no
useful purpose.



5.2.3   Procedure for Preparation



         a.   Site plans or any portion thereof shall be prepared
by an engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor who is
authorized by the State of North Carolina to practice as such;



         b.   Site plans shall be prepared to a scale of one inch
equal to fifty (50) feet (1" = 50') or larger;



         c.   A site plan may be prepared in one or more sheets
to show clearly the information required by this section and to facilitate
the review and approval of the site plan;



         d.   All horizontal dimensions shown on the site plan
shall be in feet and;



         e.   Decimal fractions of a foot shall be to the closest
one hundredth of a foot (0.00); all bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and
seconds,



         f.   Every site plan shall show the name and address of
the owner or developer, the north arrow, the date, the scale of the drawing,
and the number of sheets.  In addition, it shall reserve a blank space three
(3) inches in width by five (5) inches in length for the use of the approving
authority;



         g.   An adequate number of copies of the completed site
plan (such number determined by the Administrator on a case-by-case basis)
shall be submitted to the Administrator for internal and outside agency
review;



5.2.4   Required Information on Site Plans - All Site Plans Shall Contain
the Following Information:



         a.   Location of the tract on an insert map at a scale
of not less than one inch equal to two thousand feet (1" = 2,000') indicating
the scale, the north point, and such information as the names and numbers of
adjoining roads, streams, subdivisions, or other landmarks, sufficient to
clearly identify the location of the property;



         b.   A boundary survey of the tract by bearings and
distances certified by a licensed land surveyor or engineer;



         c.   The location and dimensions of any sidewalks and
curbs and gutters to be installed along public street frontages;



         d.   All existing property lines; existing streets and
easements, their names, numbers and widths; the location and size of existing
sanitary and storm sewers, gas lines, water mains, culverts, and other
utilities and their easements; existing buildings; existing watercourses; and
any other prominent physical features on or adjoining the tract;



         e.   Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries on
the tract and on adjoining properties;



         f.   The present use of all adjoining properties;



         g.   Existing topography with contours drawn at two (2)
foot intervals.  This requirement for topography information may be waived
by the Administrator for developments smaller than one (1) acre in size and
where he determines that there is insufficient topographic change to make
such information necessary;



         h.    Proposed changes in zoning, if any;



         i.   The proposed location, general use, number of
floors, height and floor area for each building; and, where applicable, the
number, size and type of dwelling units;



         j.   All off-street loading spaces, parking and walkways
indicating the type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles, and
a specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided;



         k.   All proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities,
indicating all pipe sizes, types and grades and where connection is to be
made to City or other utility systems; all proposed gas lines and other
utilities and their easements;



         l.   The location, dimensions and character of
construction of proposed streets, alleys, driveways; and the location, type
and size of vehicular entrances to the site;



m. Proposed finished grading at two (2) foot intervals and/or by spot
elevations.  This requirement may be waived in the same manner as in
Subsection (g) above;



         n.   Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural
and stormwater indicating location, sized, types and grades of ditches, catch
basins, pipes, and connections to existing drainage systems or suitable
outlet;



         o.   Provisions for the adequate control of erosion and
sedimentation indicating the proposed temporary and permanent control
practices and measures that will be implemented during all phases of
clearing, grading and construction;



         p.   Delineation of any flood hazard areas as shown on
the City's FEMA maps;



         q.   Location, type, size and height of fencing,
retaining walls and screen planting where required under the provision of
this or any other City ordinance;



         r.   The location of wooded areas on the property and
the location of trees and wooded areas that will be retained;



         s.   The location and dimensions of proposed recreation
areas, open space and required amenities and improvements; and,



         t.   The location, character, size, height and
orientation of proposed signs and outdoor lighting systems.



5.2.5   Compliance with Other Requirements



   All features and elements of the site plan shall in all respects
conform to all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance and Ordinances
of Bessemer City; and the standards and requirements of the North Carolina
Department of Transportation and the North Carolina Department of Health and
Environment, as regulated by those agencies.



5.2.6   Procedure for Processing



   The Administrator shall review all site plans submitted to his
office.  The Administrator shall verify the completeness and compliance of
the site plan and circulate the site plan to the relevant City and State
agencies and officials for comments as to the proposed development's
conformance to all applicable standards and requirements and whether approval
of the site plan is recommended. 



   Except under abnormal circumstances, within twenty-one (21) working
days of the receipt of the site plan the Zoning Administrator shall approve,
subject to conditions, or disapprove the site plan and notify the applicant
in writing of the action taken.  In cases when the site plan approval is
subject to conditions or when the site plan is denied approval, the Zoning
Administrator shall set forth in writing any conditions or changes that might
make the site plan acceptable.



Section 5.3   Zoning Permit



   No building, sign or other structure (except as otherwise for in this
Ordinance) shall be erected, moved, extended or enlarged or structurally
altered, nor shall any excavation or filling of any lot for the construction
of any building be commenced until the Zoning Administrator has issued a
zoning permit for such work in accordance with a fee schedule established by
the City Council.



   A.   Expiration of Zoning Permit



   Any zoning permit issued in accordance with this Ordinance will lapse
and become invalid unless the work for which it was issued is started within
six (6) months of the date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is
suspended or abandoned for a period of at least one (1) year.



   B.   Records



   The Administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning permits on file
at his office, and copies shall be made available on request to interested
parties.



   C.   Conditions for Approval



   Zoning permits issued on the basis of dimensional plans approved by the
Administrator authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth
in such approved plans and applications.  Use, arrangement, or construction
that differ from that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance and shall be punishable as indicated under Chapter 15 of this
Ordinance.



   D.   Zoning Permit Not Required



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance a zoning permit
shall not be required for the following uses or activities:



      1.   Street construction or repair.



      2.   Electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television,
gas, water, and sewer lines, wires or pipes, together with supporting poles
or structures, located within a public right-of-way; Essential Services,
Class 1.



      3.   Signs, as indicated in Section 12.2 of this Ordinance.



      4.   Mailboxes, newspaper boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses,
flag poles, pump houses, and doghouses.



   E.   Pre-Existing Violations



   In cases where a preexisting zoning violation has been cited in
accordance with Section 15.1, a new zoning permit, for work not related to
the violation, shall not be issued until the preexisting violation is brought
into compliance.



(Res. passed 3-8-2010)



Section 5.4   Building Permit



   A building permit or structure that is governed by the State Building
Code may be erected, added to, structurally altered, moved, occupied or
demolished only after the Gaston County Inspections Department has issued a
building permit for such work.  A building permit shall be issued only for
work that conforms to the requirements and standards of this Ordinance (and
all other applicable ordinances) and the terms and conditions of any other
permits, approvals, or variances granted pursuant to this Ordinance. 



Section 5.5   Zoning Certificate of Compliance



   No building or structure hereafter erected or structurally altered or
changed in use shall be used or occupied until the Administrator has issued a
zoning certificate of compliance.  The zoning certificate of compliance
shall state that the building or portion of a building or lot is in
compliance with the zoning provisions of this Ordinance, and with the
information stated on the zoning permit.  Once the Administrator has issued
a zoning certificate of compliance, the applicant can seek a certificate of
occupancy from Gaston County.



Section 5.6   Reserved



Section 5.7   Sign Permit



5.7.1   Permit Requirements



   A.   For any sign for which a permit is required (refer to Section
12.4), the following information shall be submitted to the Administrator in
order for a sign permit to be issued:



      1.   An accurate and scaled depiction of the lot upon which
the sign is to be located.



      2.   Location of all buildings, driveways, and required
landscaped/buffered areas on such lot.



      3.   Location, type, size and height of all proposed signs.



      4.   Location, type, size and height of all existing external
signs.  Wall signs shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the proposed
location of the wall sign on the building.



      5.   Other information deemed necessary by the Administrator
to ensure that the sign(s) for which a permit is being requested, will be in
compliance with all applicable sections of this Ordinance.



   B.   Notwithstanding the above, the Administrator shall have the
ability to waive or modify any one of the above requirements when strict
compliance would serve no practical or useful purpose.



5.7.2   Permit Review Procedures



   A.   The Administrator shall endeavor to review the sign permit in
an expeditious manner and will notify the applicant in writing if a decision
on the sign permit cannot be rendered within twenty-one (21) working days of
submittal. 



   B.   The Administrator may issue a sign permit concurrently with
site plan approval (refer to Section 5.2) and/or zoning permit approval
(refer to Section 5.3) for the same development. 



Section 5.8   Temporary Use Permit



5.8.1   Purpose



   Temporary use permits are a mechanism to allow a use on a short-term
basis and to permit certain seasonal and transient uses that otherwise may
not be allowed.  Certain temporary uses are allowed subject to the issuance
of a temporary use permit by the Administrator; others are allowed without a
permit but are nonetheless subject to all applicable regulations contained
herein.



5.8.2   Table of Allowed Temporary Uses



   A.   All temporary uses will be subject to the requirements
contained in Section 5.8.3.  Table 5.8-1 shows a list of allowed temporary
uses is shown below.  Additional supplemental requirements for individual
temporary uses are also indicated and are found in Section 5.8.4. 
Otherwise, if a temporary use is not listed in Table 5.8-1 such use may be
granted a zoning permit only after (1) a public hearing has been conducted by
the Board of Adjustment, and (2) the Board of Adjustment had made the
following determinations:



      1.   The proposed use will not materially endanger the public,
health, welfare and safety; and



      2.   The proposed use will not have a substantial negative
effect on adjoining properties.



   In approving such permit, the Board of Adjustment may authorize
conditions regarding duration of the use, hours of operation, signage,
lighting, etc. and such conditions shall be made part of the permit issued. 
Violations of such conditions shall be considered a violation of this
Ordinance.



 




TABLE 5.8-1
ALLOWED TEMPORARY USES




TEMPORARY USE

 

PERMIT NEEDED?

 

OTHER REGULATIONS



Real Estate Sales Office/Model Sales Home
 
Yes
 
5.8.4 (A)


Sale of Goods Other Than Agricultural Products
 
Yes
 
5.8.4 (B)


Sale of Agricultural Products Grown Onsite
 
No
 
5.8.4 (D)


Sale of Agricultural Products Grown Off-site
 
Yes
 
5.8.4 (C)


Garage/Yard Sales
 
Yes
 
5.8.4(E)


Special Outdoor Event
 
Yes
 
5.8.4 (F)


Construction Trailers
 
Yes
 
5.8.4 (G)


Temporary Manufactured Homes
 
Yes
 
5.8.4 (H)


Temporary Recreational Vehicles for Workers of Construction Projects Lasting
Greater Than Six (6) Months
 
Yes
 
5.8.4 (I)


All Other Temporary Uses Not Specifically Listed
 
Yes
 
5.8.4(J)




 



5.8.3   General Requirements for Temporary Uses



   Unless otherwise specified, all temporary uses shall be subject to the
following requirements:



   A.   Reserved



   B.   All temporary signs associated with the temporary use shall be
removed when the activity ends.



   C.   The temporary use may not violate any applicable conditions of
approval that apply to a principal use on the site.



   D.   If the site is undeveloped, it shall contain sufficient land
area to allow the temporary use to occur, as well as any required parking and
traffic movement that may be associated with the temporary use without
disturbing any required landscaping, screening, natural plantings or other
required protective resources.



   E.   If the site is developed, the temporary use shall be located in
an area that does not negatively impact existing buffers, landscaped areas,
required natural plantings, traffic and pedestrian circulation nor
significantly impact parking space availability.  (NOTE:  The Administrator
shall have the authority to allow the placement of certain temporary uses in
required off-street parking areas and may allow that use to occur upon
determining that the use, given its nature, location, time-frame, and
anticipated amount of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, would not unduly cause
harm by locating in such an area and that existing off-street parking
provided on-site is sufficient to accommodate both the existing principal and
temporary uses simultaneously.)



   F.   Tents and other temporary structures shall be located so as to
not interfere with the normal operation of any permanent use on the site.



   G.   In approving a temporary use permit, the Administrator may
impose other requirements that he/she deems reasonable and necessary to
ensure that:



      1.   The proposed use will not endanger the public health,
welfare or safety; and,



      2.   The proposed use will not have a substantial negative
effect on adjoining or nearby properties.



   H.   Prior to the issuance of a temporary use permit, the applicant
shall provide proof of the property owner’s or an agent of the property
owner’s permission to occupy such property for the requested temporary use.



   I.   All temporary uses shall comply with the permit requirements
contained in Table 5.8-1 and conditions contained in Section 5.8.4 and any
other requirements applicable to the use in question.



   J.   A sketch plan that shows, among other things, setbacks,
location and number of off-street parking spaces, means of ingress and egress
and other relevant information as deemed appropriate by the Administrator.



   K.   Unless otherwise noted, setbacks for any structures housing the
temporary use shall be the same as provided for the principal structure. 
Notwithstanding, the Administrator may grant relief to the setback
requirements on a case-by-case basis, upon determination that:



      1.   The placement of the structure would be harmony with
other structures both on the lot in question and nearby lots;



      2.   Placement of the structure at the required setback would
serve no useful purpose; and,



      3.   The placement of the structure at an alternative location
on the lot would not impact the public’s health, welfare and safety.



5.8.4   Specific Regulations for Certain Temporary Uses



   A.   Temporary Real Estate Sales Office/Model Sales Home



      1.   If a modular home is used, it shall have been built to
the applicable commercial building code standard.  Manufactured homes built
to HUD building standards shall not be used as a sales office.  All such
sales offices shall be in compliance with all applicable Code standards.



      2.   The structure shall be located on an approved lot within
a subdivision containing 25+ lots as indicated in the recorded final plat. 
Such structure shall only be used for the sale of lots within the underlying
subdivision.



      3.   If the structure is permanently placed on the lot, it
must meet applicable setback regulations for the lot; otherwise, the
Administrator shall have the ability to waive or modify one or more setback
requirements for the placement of the temporary structure.



      4.   Off-street parking for at least three (3) off-street
vehicles shall be provided.  Such spaces need not be paved.  In addition,
one paved handicapped space shall be provided in accordance with the North
Carolina Building Code.



      5.   A wall sign, no greater than sixteen (16) feet in area
may be used.



      6.   Upon termination of the temporary real estate office or
model sales home, the structure shall be converted into a permanent
residential use or be removed from the property.



      7.   The maximum duration for such uses is as follows: 
Temporary Real Estate Sales Offices- One (1) Year; Model Homes- Three (3)
Years.  The Administrator shall have the authority to issue renewals for
each in one (1) year increments provided that substantial progress is being
made in the selling and/or marketing of lots/homes within the subdivision.



   B.   Sale of Goods Other Than Agricultural Products (AND Other Than
“Garage/Yard Sales”)



      1.   Receipt of a municipal “peddler’s or business
license” shall not exempt a merchant from needing to obtain a temporary use
permit for such sales.



      2.   The proposed display and/or sales of goods shall not
occur within two-hundred (200) linear feet of an occupied residential
dwelling unit located in a Residential zoning district.



      3.   Reserved



      4.   The temporary sales of goods for civic, charitable,
educational or religious purposes shall only be allowed on a lot located in a
Commercial or Office zoning district or on a developed lot in a Residential
zoning district that contains a civic, public, charitable, educational or
institutional use (e.g., church, school, etc.)  Provided however, the
Administrator may allow such sales to take place on public property
including: public parks, public street rights-of-way, or any other political
subdivision of the State of North Carolina.  Approval from the City Manager,
as well as other public officials, as deemed necessary by the Administrator,
shall also be required.



      5.   Such sales shall be allowed from 8:00 AM to 10:00 PM only
or, if there is a principal use on the lot, the same hours of operation as
the principal use, whichever is more restrictive.  The Administrator may
allow exceptions to these regulations for lots that contain principal uses
with limited hours of operations.



      6.   Sales at any one site are allowed a maximum of thirty
(30) days per calendar year;



   C.   Sales of Agricultural Products Grown Off-Site



      1.   Sales may occur on a vacant or developed lot in a
Commercial or Office zoning district.



      2.   Receipt of a municipal “peddler’s or business
license” shall not exempt a merchant from needing to obtain a temporary use
permit for such sales.



      3.   Sales at any one site are allowed a maximum of sixty (60)
days during any calendar year.  Sales of food products for greater than
sixty (60) days per calendar year shall require the issuance of a conditional
use permit per Section 5.11 of this Ordinance.  All procedures contained in
Section 5.11 shall be followed except that the following findings shall
substitute for those found in Section 5.11.5(B):



         a.   The proposed use will not endanger the public
health, welfare or safety.



         b.   The proposed use will not have a substantial
negative effect on adjoining or nearby properties.



      4.   Such sales shall be allowed from 8:00 AM to 10:00 PM only
or, if there is a principal use on the lot, the same hours of operation as
the principal use, whichever is more restrictive.  The Administrator may
allow exceptions to these regulations for lots that contain principal uses
with limited hours of operations.



   D.   Sales of Agricultural Products Grown On-Site



      1.   For purposes of this section the term “on-site” shall
mean (1) the lot upon which the sales take place; (2) any other lot(s in
Bessemer City owned by the party (ies) upon which) the sales occur; or, (3)
any lot leased by the party (ies), with such lease being of a minimum one (1)
year duration.



      2.   Sales may occur on any lot upon which agricultural
products are grown, regardless of the underlying zoning district.



      3.   Such sales shall be allowed during daylight hours only.



      4.   Sales at any one site are allowed a maximum of one
hundred eighty (180) days during any calendar year.  Sales of food products
for greater than one-hundred eighty (180) days per calendar year shall
require the issuance of a conditional use permit per Section 5.11 of this
Ordinance.  All procedures contained in Section 5.11 shall be followed
except that the following findings shall substitute for those found in
Section 5.11.5(B):



         a.   The proposed use will not endanger the public
health, welfare or safety.



         b.   The proposed use will not have a substantial
negative effect on adjoining or nearby properties.



   E.   Garage/Yard Sales



      1.   Such sales shall be allowed during daylight hours only.



      2.   Such sales shall be limited to household goods.



      3.   Such sales shall be allowed on any lot in a Residential
zoning district or on any public, charitable, educational or institutionally
developed lot in other zoning districts.



      4.   Garage sales may take place on any one site no greater
than four (4) days per calendar year.



   F.   Special Outdoor Events



      1.   The Administrator shall submit the temporary use permit
application for the special event to local police, fire and emergency service
providers and to the City Manager for review and comment.  Such persons and
agencies will be given up to twenty-one (21) days to provide comment.  Based
on such comments, the Administrator shall approve, approve with fair and
reasonable conditions or disprove the permit.



      2.   If the event is to last for greater than nine (9)
consecutive days or if such events are to occur on any particular lot for
greater than nine (9) days in a calendar year, a conditional use permit per
Section 5.11 shall be required.  All procedures contained in Section 5.11
shall be followed except that the following findings shall substitute for
those found in Section 5.11.5(B):



         a.   The proposed use will not endanger the public
health, welfare or safety.



         b.   The proposed use will not have a substantial
negative effect on adjoining or nearby properties.



      3.   Events may be held between 8:00 AM-10:00 PM, unless,
given the nature of the event, the Administrator (or the approval body, in
the issuance of a conditional use permit) allows for other hours of operation
if he determines that such extended hours will not have a substantial
negative impact upon adjoining and nearby properties and that all necessary
public safety concerns have been addressed.



      4.   Such special events may take place on any one site no
greater than seven (7) times per calendar year.



   G.   Construction Trailers



   Construction trailers shall be allowed as follows:



      1.   They shall only be located at a building site where there
is a valid building permit.



      2.   They shall be located at least ten (10) feet off any
street right-of-way or property line.



      3.   Construction trailers shall be removed within ten (10)
days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the lot or development
in question. 



   H.   Temporary Manufactured Homes



      1.   Disasters



         a.   In the event of a disaster, which results in the
destruction of an owner-occupied single-family dwelling (i.e., receives
damage greater than fifty (50) percent of its assessed tax value as indicated
on the most current tax listings) a Class C manufactured home may be placed
on the lot containing the dwelling unit that was damaged or destroyed. The
purpose of allowing such manufactured home on said lot is to give the
occupants of the destroyed dwelling unit a place to live while a new dwelling
unit is being constructed or damage to the original dwelling unit is repaired.



         b.   Such manufactured home may be located (1) no closer
than twenty [20] feet to another principal residential structure on another
lot; (2) no closer than ten [10] feet to any lot line on the lot in question;
and, (3) no closer than twenty [20] feet from the edge of the road
right-of-way.



         c.   The Administrator shall be given the authority to
issue a temporary use permit for up to six (6) months for the temporary
manufactured home. Such permit may be renewed on a one-time only basis [for a
period of no greater than nine (9) months] by the Administrator if he
determines that construction of a new dwelling unit is proceeding in a
diligent manner.



         d.   Notwithstanding the above if, at any time a
temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy is issued for the repaired or
reconstructed dwelling, the manufactured home shall be removed from the site
within thirty (30) days of such issuance.



      2.   Family Medical Needs



         a.   On any lot containing an existing single-family
dwelling or Class A, B or C Manufactured Home, a temporary use permit may be
issued for not more than one (1) manufactured home to be placed on a
residential lot as an accessory use.    If located in the R-2 or R-3
district, the Administrator may grant the permit; in all other districts, a
conditional use permit, per Section 5.11, shall be required.



         b.   Such permit shall only be granted where conditions
exist requiring care for an immediate family member due to medical reasons. 
The temporary use permit may only be granted after the Administrator or, the
permitting agency, with respect to a conditional use permit, has determined
each of the following [NOTE:  These findings shall substitute for those
found in Section 5.11.5(B)]:



            i.   That the manufactured home is an accessory
use to a principal residential use;



            ii.   That there exists a medically related need
for the proximate care of an immediate family member (this finding must be
substantiated by a certificate of need from a medical doctor or similar
evidence.) As used herein, proximate care shall mean the same level of care
that would normally necessitate living in the same dwelling as the care
provider or in a domiciliary care facility that provides basic day-to-day
living needs, (e.g., feeding, bathing, and other such functions)]. 



            iii.   That the person(s) responsible for
providing the care will live in either the principal dwelling or the
manufactured home and that the person(s) needing the care shall live in the
structure not occupied by the person(s) providing the care;



            iv.   That the person(s) in need of care is an
immediate family member of the person(s) to be responsible for providing the
care;



            v.   That the manufactured home will have adequate
access to public water and sewer or a well and septic tank as verified by
permits from the Gaston County Health Department;



            vi.   That the manufactured home will be placed in
the rear or side yard and will be no closer than twenty (20) feet from any
property line.



            vii.   That the manufactured home used is a Class
B or C manufactured home.



         d.   Any temporary use permit initially issued by the
Administrator shall be valid for one (1) year but may be renewed by the
Administrator on a year-to-year basis if all of the findings indicated above
continue to exist.  Irrespective of the above, any permit issued shall
automatically terminate within thirty (30) days after any of the reason(s)
justifying the permit cease to exist.  Such permit is granted to a
particular owner on the basis of circumstances peculiar to that owner and it
shall automatically terminate should the person needing care (or immediate
family members) no longer reside on the premises.



   I.   Temporary Recreational Vehicles for Construction Projects
Lasting Greater Than Six (6) Months



   Recreational vehicles shall be allowed provided:



      1.   Such recreational vehicles may only be placed in an
approved space within an existing manufactured home park;



      2.   The occupant of the recreational vehicle and its owner
must be the same party;



      3.   The project site must maintain a valid building permit;



      4.   Any zoning permit associated with the site must be
renewed every six (6) months; and,



      5.   Any recreational vehicle must be removed within thirty
(30) days after completion of the project or whenever the building permit is
no longer valid, whichever is sooner.



   J.   All Other Temporary Uses Not Specifically Listed



   All other such temporary uses not otherwise listed may only be granted
a zoning permit only after (1) a public hearing has been conducted by the
Board of Adjustment, and (2) the Board of Adjustment had made the following
determinations:



      1.   The proposed use will not materially endanger the public,
health, welfare and safety; and



      2.   The proposed use will not have a substantial negative
effect on adjoining properties.



   In approving such permit, the Board of Adjustment may authorize
conditions regarding duration of the use, hours of operation, signage,
lighting, etc. and such conditions shall be made part of the permit issued. 
Violations of such conditions shall be considered a violation of this
Ordinance.



Section 5.9   Home Occupation/Accessory Use Permit



5.9.1   Purpose



   A home occupation or accessory use permit shall be required to ensure
that a proposed home occupation or accessory use is developed in accordance
with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance.  Lists of permissible
customary and home occupations are found in Section 9.1 and 9.2.



5.9.2   Application Procedures



   A.   An application for an accessory use or home occupation shall be
filed with the Administrator on a form so prescribed by the City.  The form
shall be complete and accompanied by a fee, in accordance with the most
recently adopted fee schedule approved by the governing board, in order to be
reviewed by the Administrator. 



   B.   The Administrator shall endeavor to review the permit in an
expeditious manner and will notify the applicant in writing if a decision on
the permit cannot be rendered within fifteen (15) working days.   



   C.   Failure to adhere to an approved permit shall be deemed a
violation of this Ordinance.



   D.   Reserved



   E.   Reserved



   F.   Any accessory use shall be subject to all applicable
regulations contained in Section 9.9.



Section 5.10   Vested Rights Certificate



   Pursuant to NCGS 153A-344.1 and not withstanding any other provision of
this Ordinance or amendment thereto, a landowner may apply for a vested
rights certificate which shall entitle said landowner to develop property in
accordance with an approved site specific development plan.  The procedure
for establishing a vested right is set forth in this section.



5.10.1   Definitions



   For the purpose of this section only, the following definitions shall
apply:



   A.   Landowner



   Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property, including
the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and personal representative of such
owner.  The landowner may allow a person holding a valid option to purchase
to act as his agent or representative for purposes of submitting a proposed
site-specific development plan in the manner allowed by this Ordinance.



   B.   Property



   All real property subject to the zoning regulations of this Ordinance.



   C.   Vested Right



   The right to undertake and complete the development and use of property
under the terms and conditions of an approved site-specific development plan.



5.10.2   Submission of a Site Specific Development Plan



   A.   To apply for vested right, a landowner shall first submit to
the Administrator a site-specific development plan.  The plan shall be
submitted in completed form to the Administrator and processed in the same
manner, except as herein provided, as a conditional use permit per Sections
5.11 of this Ordinance. 



   B.   Once a public hearing has been held, the governing board shall
issue the vested rights certificate for a period of no less than two (2)
years if it has evaluated an application and determined that:



      1.   The use meets all required specifications of this
Ordinance, and



      2.   The use, as approved, will protect the public health,
safety and welfare.  Conditions, if any, placed on the site-specific
development plan by the City Council shall be adequate to satisfy this
requirement.



   C.   If the City Council issues a vested right certificate for site
specific development plan for a period of more than two (2) years and up to
five (5) years, this shall be based on one or more factors so described in
Section 5.10.3.



   D.   If the use or development for which a vested rights certificate
is submitted is a conditional use, the City Council may approve the vested
rights certificate contemporaneously with the approval of the conditional use
permit.  In no case, however, may a site specific development plan be
approved for a use or development which requires the issuance of a
conditional use permit without the conditional use permit having first been
issued.



5.10.3   Effect of Approval



   A.   The effect of approval of a vested rights certificate shall be
to vest the site specific development plan for a period of two (2) to five
(5) years from the date of approval.  Any vesting for a period of greater
than two (2) years shall be at the request of the applicant and where the
governing board determines that such greater period of vesting is needed due
to (1) the sizing and phasing of the development; or (2) the level of
investment; or (3) the need for the development; or (4) economic cycles; or
(5) the market of conditions, building permits for all phases of the
development cannot be secured within two (2) years.



   B.   An approved vested right certificate shall confer upon the
landowner a vested right, the right to undertake and complete the development
and use of said property under the terms and conditions of the site-specific
development plan as provided for in this Section.  Failure to abide by the
terms and conditions placed upon such approval will result in the forfeiture
of the vested right previously accorded.



   C.   A vested right, once established as herein provided, shall
preclude any zoning action by the City that would change, alter, impair,
prevent, diminish or otherwise delay the development or use of the property
as set forth in the approved site specific development plan except under the
following conditions:



      1.   The affected landowner provides written consent to the
City of his desire to terminate the vested right; or,



      2.   The City determines, after having advertised and held a
public hearing per Section 14.1.3(C) of this Ordinance, that natural or
man-made hazards exist on or in the immediate vicinity of the property which
pose a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare if the project
were to proceed as indicated in the site specific development plan; or,



      3.   Compensation is made by the City to the landowner for all
costs, expenses, and other losses incurred including, but not limited to, all
fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural, planning,
marketing, legal, and any other consultant's fees incurred after approval
together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid; or,



      4.   The City determines, after having advertised and held a
public hearing per Section 14.1.3(C) of this Ordinance, that the landowner or
his representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made
material misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval by the
City of the site specific development plan; or,



      5.   Upon the enactment or promulgation of a State or Federal
law or regulations that precluded development as contemplated in the
site-specific development plan.  In such case the City may [after having
advertised and conducted a public hearing per Section 14.1.3(C) of this
Ordinance] modify the affected provisions upon a finding that the change in
State or Federal law has had a fundamental effect on the plan.



   D.   Once a vested right certificate is granted for a particular
site-specific development plan, nothing in this Ordinance shall preclude the
City from conducting subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance
with the terms and conditions of the original approval, provided such reviews
and approvals are not inconsistent with the original approval.



5.10.4   Revocation or Expiration of a Vested Right



   In addition to the revocation provisions cited in Section 5.10.3, a
revocation of a vested rights certificate may occur if the governing board
determines that the landowner has failed to comply with the terms and
conditions of the approval or with any other applicable portion of the UDO. 
The vested right shall otherwise expire at the end of the approval period
established by the governing board.



5.10.5   Revocation of Building Permit



   A building permit issued by (Bessemer City) may not be revoked because
of the running of time on a piece of property for which a vested rights
certificate has been approved and the vested right period has not otherwise
expired.



5.10.6   Amendments to the UDO



   The establishment of a vested right on a piece of property for a site
specific development plan shall not preclude the City from establishing and
putting into place one or more overlay districts which may impose additional
restrictions on said property, provided such restrictions do not affect the
allowable type or intensity or use.  Otherwise such regulations shall become
effective with respect to the subject property upon the expiration or
termination of the vested right certificate.  The City may also enforce on
the property additional regulations (adopted during the time the vested right
certificate was in effect) that are general in nature and applicable to all
property subject to the regulations of this Ordinance.



Section 5.11   Conditional Use Permit



NOTE:  The following procedures pertain to conditional use permits that are
not associated with a Parallel Conditional Use Zoning (CUD) District.  Refer
to Section 14.1.4 for procedures to be followed in association with Parallel
Conditional Use Zoning Redistrict requests.



5.11.1   Purpose



   There are many uses identified in Table 7.1-1 that are “uses by
right” and that are allowed “by right” in each general zoning district
subject to the use meeting certain area, height, yard and off-street parking
and loading requirements. In addition to these uses, there are some uses in
these districts that are “conditional uses” are and subject to the
issuance of a conditional use permit.  The purpose of having conditional
uses is to ensure that these uses are compatible with surrounding development
and are in keeping with the purposes of the general zoning district in which
they are located.  There may be some uses that prior to adoption of this
Ordinance were allowed as “uses by right” but now are allowed subject to
a conditional use permit.  For these uses, any expansion or modification to
the uses would be subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. 



5.11.2   Procedures



   A pre-application meeting between the applicant and the Administrator
shall be required in order to familiarize the applicant of the procedure for
securing approval of a conditional use permit.  The Administrator shall
accept no conditional use permit application for review without such meeting
having first occurred unless the Administrator determines that such meeting
would not serve any meaningful purpose and waives the meeting requirement. 
 



   Procedures for application submittal are as follows:



   A.   A complete conditional use permit application that is signed by
the applicant and that is accompanied by a submittal fee (in accordance with
a fee scheduled approved by the Governing Board) shall be filed with the
Administrator.



   B.   The application shall be accompanied by a drawing or plan,
drawn to scale, that includes or is accompanied by the following:



      1.   Name, address and phone number of the property owner (or
his agent) and the property identification number of the property. (Note: The
property owner or his authorized agent are the only two parties who may
initiate a request for a conditional use permit).



      2.   A boundary survey and vicinity map, showing the
property's total acreage, general location in relation to adjoining streets,
railroads and/or waterways, date and north arrow. The zoning classification
of the property in question and contiguous properties shall also be shown.
(In lieu of the boundary and survey maps, one or more up-to-date tax maps
depicting the area in question may be submitted. Any required drawing or
depiction of the proposed development or use shall not appear on the tax maps
but rather shall appear on the drawing or plan.)



      3.   The name and addresses of all owners, tax parcel numbers
and existing land use(s) of all contiguous properties.



      4.   Proposed use of all land and structures including the
number of residential units proposed, if any, and total square footage of
nonresidential development.



      5.   Location of all proposed structures, their approximate
area and exterior dimensions, height, and proposed number of structures.



      6.   A description of all screening and landscaping required
by the UDO and/or proposed by the applicant; the delineation of any wooded,
landscaped or grassed areas existing prior to development and proposed to
remain on the property once the development is completed.



      7.   All existing easements, reservations and rights-of-way.



      8.   Proposed phasing, if any, and approximate completion time
for the project.



      9.   Delineation of areas within the regulatory floodplain as
shown on the official Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood hazard
boundary maps for Bessemer City.



      10.   Traffic, parking and circulation plans, showing the
proposed location and arrangement of parking spaces and ingress and egress to
adjacent streets.



      11.   A list, if any, of all additional development conditions
or standards that differ from those that would normally apply to that use. 
Only conditions that exceed the UDO minimum standards can be considered and
listed by the applicant, except those minor modifications listed in Table
5.15-1(B).



      12.   The Administrator reserves the right to waive the
depiction of some or all of the information contained in paragraphs five (5)
through ten (10) when, in his opinion, would serve no meaningful purpose for
the particular conditional use being requested. 



   C.   In the course of evaluating the proposed conditional use, the
Board of Adjustment may request additional information from the applicant in
order to assist in the review process. A request for such additional
information shall stay any further consideration of the application by such
agency.  Such additional requested information may include (but shall not be
limited to) the following:



      1.   Stormwater drainage plan.



      2.   Existing and proposed topography at five (5) foot contour
intervals or less.



      3.   The existing and proposed location of all water and sewer
lines and fire hydrants intended to serve the proposed development.



      4.   Proposed number, type, and location of signs.



      5.   A traffic impact study of the proposed development
prepared by a qualified transportation or traffic engineer or planner.
Information requested to be a part of the impact study may include:



         a.   Existing traffic conditions within the study area
boundary.



         b.   Traffic volumes generated by the existing and
proposed development on the parcel, including the morning peak, afternoon or
evening peak, and average annual daily traffic levels.



         c.   The distribution of existing and proposed trips
through the street network.



         d.   Analyses of the capacities of intersections located
within the study area boundary.



         e.   Recommendations for improvements designed to
mitigate traffic impacts and to enhance pedestrian access to the development
from the public right-of-way; and



         f.   Other pertinent information, including but not
limited to accidents, noise, and impacts of air quality and other natural
resources.



      6.   Drawings of proposed building elevations.



      7.   An environmental impact statement that includes some or
all of the following:



         a.   A cover sheet that provides, in summary form, a
description of the proposed project;



         b.   A statement of purpose and need of the project;



         c.   For projects proposed by public entities, a list of
alternatives of the proposed project;



         d.   A succinct description of the environment affected
by the project;



         e.   A discussion of short and long term consequences of
the project on the environment including any adverse environmental impacts
which cannot be avoided; and,



         f.   A list of means that could be employed to mitigate
any negative effects on the environment caused by this project.



   D.   Except as herein provided, no application shall be deemed
complete unless it contains or is accompanied by all items listed in Section
5.11.2(B) and as may otherwise be required per Section 5.11.2(C) and a fee,
in accordance with a fee schedule approved by the governing board for the
submittal of conditional use permit applications. Said fee shall be waived
for any application submitted by any official or agency acting on behalf of
the Bessemer City or the State of North Carolina.



5.11.3   Public Hearing Notification



   In order for a conditional use permit to be considered for approval, a
public hearing must be held by the Board of Adjustment.  Any complete
application shall be submitted to the Administrator at least thirty (30)
working days prior to the public hearing.  This shall be sufficient time
period for the staff to review the application and produce a staff report and
to ensure that all applicable notification requirements can be met. 
Notification of the public hearing shall be as follows:



      1.   The City shall send notice by first class mail to the
applicant, and to owners of all contiguous properties.  The Administrator
shall also post a copy of such notice in the City Administrative Building in
a conspicuous location.  Each notice shall indicate the nature of the public
hearing and the date, time and place at which it is to occur and shall be
mailed/posted at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing



      2.   The City shall also place at least one (1) sign on the
subject property (ies) notifying of a public hearing.  Said sign(s) shall be
placed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.  The posted sign
may only be removed once the public hearing has been concluded. [NOTE: The
Administrator may waive the sign-posting requirement or relocate the
placement of the sign(s) where the literal application of this provision
would serve no meaningful purpose.]



5.11.4   Reserved



5.11.5   Final Decision



   A.   Conduct of Public Hearing



   The Board of Adjustment public hearing shall be held in a
quasi-judicial manner. In approving an application for a conditional use
permit, the Board of Adjustment may attach fair and reasonable conditions to
the approval. Such conditions shall be limited to those that address the
impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the development or use of the
site.  The petitioner will have a reasonable opportunity to consider and
respond to any additional requirements prior to approval or denial by the
Board of Adjustment. In no instance shall any of these conditions be less
restrictive than any requirements that would pertain to that particular
development found in the zoning district in which the property is located
(except for minor modifications as indicated in Table 5.15-1) and except
where otherwise specifically allowed in this Ordinance. Such conditions may
exceed any performance criteria or minimum requirements listed elsewhere in
this Ordinance that pertain to that development.  Such conditions shall be
mutually agreeable by the City and the petitioner.



   B.   Burden of Proof.



      1.   The applicant has the burden of producing competent,
material and substantial evidence tending to establish the facts and
conditions that Subitems (2) and (4) below require. If any person submits
competent, material, and substantial evidence allegedly contrary to any of
the facts or conditions listed in Subitems (1) and (3) below, the burden of
proof for overcoming such evidence shall rest with the applicant.



      2.   The Board of Adjustment may only issue a conditional use
permit if it has evaluated an application and found each of the following
findings in the affirmative:



         a.   The use will not materially endanger the public
health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to plan;



         b.   The use meets all required conditions and
specifications;



         c.   The use will not substantially injure the value of
adjoining or abutting property unless the use is a public necessity; and,



         d.   The location and character of the use, if developed
according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the
area in which it is to be located and will be in general conformity with the
adopted Land Use Plan and other plans for the physical development of the
City as adopted by the governing board.



   C.   Additional Review Criteria/Findings of Fact



   In addition to the findings of fact listed in Section 5.11.5(B),
certain uses require the consideration of additional review criteria. Before
a conditional use permit may be issued for said uses, the findings of fact
listed in Section 5.11.5(B) along with those pertaining to that individual
use must each be found in the affirmative.  [NOTE:  in certain instances
the findings contained in Section 5.11.5(B) shall be substituted with those
so indicated.]



   D.   Effect of Approval



      1.   If an application for a conditional use permit is
approved, the owner of the property shall have the ability to (i) develop the
use in accordance with the stipulations contained in the conditional use
permit or (ii) develop any other use listed as a "permitted use" for the
general zoning district in which it is located.  Such approval, however,
does not immediately authorize development activity, as the property owner
will need to file for and secure a zoning permit, in accordance with Section
5.3, in order to proceed with development.  The Administrator shall ensure
that any development plans submitted with such zoning permit request are
consistent with the terms and conditions of the conditional use permit
approved for such property or for any other use by right allowed in the
underlying zoning district.  If, however, a conditional use permit is issued
in relation to the rezoning of a property to a parallel conditional use
district (refer to Section 14.1.4), the property may be used only for the
development for which that conditional use permit was approved.



   E.   Binding Effect



      1.   Any conditional use permit herein authorized shall be
perpetually binding to the property included in such permit unless
subsequently changed or amended by the Board of Adjustment.  All conditions
contained in the conditional use permit shall run with the land and shall be
binding on the original applicants, their heirs, successors, and assigns,
unless subsequently changed or amended as provided for herein. However, the
Administrator may approve minor changes in the detail of the approved
application. A “minor change” to the approved conditional use permit
shall be deemed to be a change which:



         a.   Will not alter the basic relationship of the
proposed development to adjacent property;



         b.   Will not increase the gross floor area of any
nonresidential use by the smaller of ten (10) percent or ten-thousand
(10,000) square feet (Note: Such limitations shall be cumulative and shall be
based on the gross floor area of the conditional use permit as originally
approved);



         c.   Will not decrease the off-street parking ratio
below the minimum number of parking spaces required by this Ordinance;



         d.   Will not increase the height of any structure to
the extent that additional usable floor space could be added; or



         e.   Will not result in an increase in the number of
dwelling units constructed;



         f.   Will not alter the uses permitted.



      2.   Further changes to the development may be made only by
the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 5.11.2 through 5.11.5 of
this Ordinance.



      3.   No zoning certificate of compliance for a use listed as a
conditional use shall be issued for any building or land use on a piece of
property which has received a conditional use permit for such particular use
unless the building is constructed or used, or the land is developed or used,
in conformity with the conditional use permit. In the event that only a
segment of a proposed development has been approved, the zoning certificate
of compliance shall be issued only for that portion of the development
constructed or used as approved.



   F.   Period of Validity of Conditional Use Permit



   Unless the Board of Adjustment issues a conditional use permit which
either is specifically exempt from any time constraints or has some other
specified time period for implementation, the applicant must secure a valid
building permit (or zoning certificate of compliance) within twenty-four (24)
months from date of issuance of the conditional use permit. 



5.11.6   Twelve-Month Limitation on Reapplication



   A.   If a request for conditional use permit is denied, a similar
application for the same property or any portion thereof shall not be filed
until the expiration of a twelve (12) month period from the date of denial.
This waiting period shall not be applicable where the application for a
conditional use permit is determined by the Administrator to be substantially
different from (i.e., not similar to) the original application.



   B.   Notwithstanding, the Administrator may allow resubmission of a
similar application within said twelve-month period if it determines that
since the date of action on the prior petition:



      1.   There has been a significant change in the zoning
district classification of an adjacent piece of property; or,



      2.   The governing board has adopted a plan that changes
public policy regarding how the property affected by the proposed conditional
use should be developed; or,



      3.   Construction or expansion of a road, water line, sewer
line, or other such facilities has occurred to serve the property and can
accommodate comfortably the intensity of development allowed under the
proposed classification; or,



      4.   There has been some other extraordinary change in
conditions or circumstances, outside the control of the petitioner, which
justifies waiver of the twelve-month restriction on a new petition; this,
however, shall not include a change in the ownership of the subject property.



5.11.7   Petition Withdrawal



   A.   An applicant who has submitted a complete application for a
conditional use permit may withdraw the application prior to a final decision
being rendered.



   B.   If said petition is withdrawn at least two (2) working days
prior to the Board of Adjustment public hearing, a similar petition submitted
by that property owner (or his agent) shall not be accepted by the
Administrator within one-hundred (180) days of the date of withdrawal. 



   C.   If said petition is otherwise withdrawn prior to a final
decision being rendered, a similar petition submitted by that property
owner/or his agent shall not be accepted by the Administrator within one (1)
year of the date of withdrawal.



5.11.8   Change in Conditional Use Permit



   Any request to materially change [i.e., undergo a change other than one
listed as a "minor change" in Section 5.11.5(E)] to the conditional use
permit once it has been issued shall require the issuance of a new
conditional use permit.  All notification and procedural steps and
requirements as outlined in Sections 5.11.2 through 5.11.5 shall be followed.



5.11.9   Appeals



   An appeal to the decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be filed
with the Clerk of Superior Court in the nature of certiorari no later than
thirty (30) days after said decision has been filed in the Administrator’s
office and as otherwise provided for in NCGS 160A-388(e).



Section 5.12   Special Exception



5.12.1   Authority



   The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to grant a “special
exception” for the following activities:



   A.   Expansion of nonconforming uses per Sections 3.5.1(C) and
Section 3.5.4(C);



   B.   Expansion of certain nonconforming structures in accordance
with Section 3.5.5(B);



   C.   Change of one nonconforming use into another nonconforming use
per Section 3.5.1(D);



   D.   Reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces
per Sections 3.5.9(B) and 10.1(D)(4);



   E.   Provision of greater than fifty (50) percent more off-street
parking spaces that required, per Section 10.1(D)(5).



   F.   Provision of satellite parking greater than five-hundred (500)
feet from the principal use, per Section 10.7.



   G.   Reserved



   H.   Relief from the requirements of the TH Thoroughfare Highway
Overlay District, as provided in Section 6.6.2.5(B)(5).



   I.   Provision for two (2) or more family care homes to be located
within one-half (1/2) mile of each other per Section 8.1.6



   J.   Extended operating hours for certain non-residential uses in
Residential zoning districts per Section 9.20.



5.12.2   Procedures



   Procedures for processing and deciding upon a request for a Special
Exception shall be the same as for variances as contained in Section 5.14,
except the following findings must be each found in the affirmative prior to
the issuance of a Special Exception:



   A.   Expansion of a Nonconforming Use [Sections 3.5.1(C) and
3.5.4(C)]



      1.   The nonconforming use will not occupy any additional
lands beyond the boundaries of the lot upon which said nonconforming use was
located as of the date said use became nonconforming. The lot boundaries to
be used to determine this shall be those existing at the time the use became
nonconforming; and,



      2.   The expansion will not result in a negative effect on any
adjoining property; and,



      3.   The expansion will be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this Ordinance and will not be harmful to the neighborhood or
otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare.



   B.   Expansion of a Nonconforming Structure [Section 3.5.5(B)]



      1.   The expansion will not result in a negative effect on any
adjoining property. 



      2.   The expansion will be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this Ordinance and will not be harmful to the neighborhood or
otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare.



   C.   Change of a Nonconforming Use Into Another Nonconforming Use
[Section 3.5.1(D)]



      1.   The proposed use will be more suitable and appropriate
for the lot(s) upon which it is located than the existing use; and



      2.   The proposed use will have a less harmful effect on
adjacent properties than the existing use; and



      3.   The change in use will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this Ordinance and will not be harmful to the
neighborhood or otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare.



   D.   Reductions or Additions in the Number of Off-street Parking
Spaces Provided [Sections 3.5.9(B) and 10.1(D)(4) and (5)]



      1.   The particular use is of such nature that the amount of
required off-street parking is not consistent with that which is needed to
properly serve said use; and



      2.   The reduction or addition to the number of off-street
parking spaces will not have an undue negative effect or burden on adjacent
and nearby properties and the adjoining road network.



      3.   The granting of the special exception may be conditioned
upon the applicant setting aside a designated area for future parking spaces
if the Administrator finds that the reduced off-street parking spaces does
not satisfy the needs of the particular use at a later date, provided the
site conditions allow for such future parking spaces.



   E.   Provision of Satellite or Shared Parking Greater than
Five-hundred (500) Feet from the Principal Use [Section 10.7]



      1.   The location of the satellite parking will not have an
undue negative effect or burden on adjacent and nearby properties and the
adjoining road network.



      2.   Adequate steps have been taken to ensure that the
satellite parking, where located, will blend in to the greatest degree
feasible with adjoining land uses.



   F.   Relief from the Provisions of Section 6.6.2.5(B)(5) (TH
Thoroughfare Highway Overlay District)



      1.   The Thoroughfare Plan affecting the area in question
recommends that a street right-of-way be of less than one hundred (100) feet
in width for a major thoroughfare and eighty (80) feet for a minor
thoroughfare is needed; and



      2.   Such reduced right-of-way area is determined to be
sufficient for said road; and



      3.   The reduction in setback will not result in a jagged or
irregular setback line being created.



   G.    Family Care Homes to be Within One-half (1/2) Mile of Each
Other (Per Section 8.1.6)



      1.   Such reduced separation will not result in the clustering
of family care homes that could promote the cloistering and isolation of
handicapped persons instead of the integration and interaction of handicapped
persons with the community mainstream.



      2.   The Board of Adjustment shall only consider evidence
relevant to the above finding in reaching a decision to grant the special
exception.



   H.   Extended Operating Hours for Certain Non-residential Uses in
Residential Zoning Districts (Per Section 9.20)



      1.   The nature of the use is such that limiting the hours of
operation for that use in that particular location would result in a
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and,



      2.   The use is in such location that it would not have a
significant negative impact on surrounding and/or nearby property owners and
cannot yield a reasonable return or cannot be put to reasonable use unless
relief is granted; and,



      3.   In balancing the public interest and the interest of the
property owner, the grant of relief in the form of extended operating hours
is required by considerations of justice and equity.



Section 5.13   Administrative Appeals/Interpretations



   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from and review
any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or citation made by the
Administrator or and apply such interpretation to particular fact situations.
In addition, the Administrator may ask the Board of Adjustment to interpret
the Official Zoning Map and to pass upon disputed questions of lot lines or
district boundary lines and similar questions that may arise in the
administration of this Ordinance.



   Notwithstanding the above, any decision made by the Administrator
relative to Chapter 13 shall first be appealed to the Planning Board per
Section 13.6.  Any such decision made by the Planning Board may be appealed
to the governing board in accordance with Section 13.6. 



5.13.1   Filing of Appeal; Effect of Filing



   A.   An appeal to the Board of Adjustment may be brought by any
person, firm, corporation, office, department, board aggrieved by the order,
requirement, or decision made by the Administrator.  A complete application
including a fee, in accordance with a fee schedule approved by the governing
board, shall be filed with the City Clerk or the Administrator.  The owner
or other party shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of the written notice
within which to file an appeal.  Any other person with standing to appeal
shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt from any source of actual or
constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.



   B.   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with
standing to appeal have constructive notice of the decision of the
Administrator from the date that a sign containing the words “Zoning
Decision” in letters at least six (6) inches high and identifying the means
to contact the Administrator for information about the decision is
prominently posted on the property that is the subject of the decision,
provided that the sign remains for at least ten (10) days.  It shall be the
responsibility of the owner or the applicant to post such signs; provided
however that posting shall not be required.  The applicant or owner shall
provide verification of the posting to the Administrator.



   C.   The Administrator shall transmit to the Board all documents and
exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken
and shall provide a copy of the record to the applicant and to owner of the
property, if different from the applicant.



   D.   The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the contested action, unless the Administrator certifies to
the Board of Adjustment that, in his/her opinion by reason of facts stated in
the certification, such a stay would cause imminent peril to life and
property.  In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a
restraining order granted by the Gaston County Superior Court on notice to
the Administrator, with due cause shown.  If enforcement proceedings are not
stayed, the appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited
hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the
appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming that
a proposed use of property is consistent with the ordinance shall not stay
the further review of an application for permits or permissions to use such
property; in these situations the appellant may request and the Board may
grant a stay of a final decision of permit applications or building permits
affected by the issue being appealed.



(Res. passed 4-14-2014)



5.13.2   Action by the Board of Adjustment



   A.   Upon receiving the application materials from the
Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall hold a quasi-judicial public
hearing on the appeal.  Notice of the public hearing shall be per Section
4.5.10 of this Ordinance.  The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide the
appeal within a reasonable time. The official who made the decision shall be
present at the hearing as a witness.



   B.   Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment
shall adopt a resolution that may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the decision appealed from and shall make any order, requirement,
decision, or setermination that ought to be made.  Similarly, the Board of
Adjustment shall have the ability to make an interpretation of the zoning
district boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map.  In making such a decision,
the Board of Adjustment shall have all the powers of the Administrator with
respect to the action being contested or decision being made.



(Res. passed 4-14-2014)



5.13.3   Effect of Reversal or Modification



   In the event that the Board of Adjustment reverses or modifies a
contested action, all subsequent actions taken by the Administrator with
respect to the subject matter shall be in accordance with the reversal or
modification granted by the Board of Adjustment.



5.13.4   Effect of Interpretation



   Upon a ruling regarding an interpretation of the Official Zoning Map,
said map shall be altered to accurately depict the Board of Adjustment’s
ruling and all uses of land on the affected property (ies) shall thereafter
be in harmony with the rules of regulations of the appropriate zoning
district(s) for such properties.



Section 5.14   Variances



   The procedures for processing applications for variances are shown
below.  Additional procedures for variances that relate the WS Water Supply
Watershed District are found in Appendix B; procedures for the WF Waterfront
Overlay Districts are found in 6.6.2.8(C)(2)(f), respectively, of this
Ordinance.  Variations to the subdivision improvement requirements found in
Chapter 13 may be made by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 13.7.



5.14.1   Purpose



   The variance process is intended to provide limited relief from the
requirements of this Ordinance in those cases where strict application of a
particular requirement will create practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships.  This process is not intended so that variances can be granted so
as to merely remove inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements
of this Ordinance may otherwise impose on property owners.  Rather, it is
intended to provide relief where the requirements of this Ordinance render
land unduly difficult or impossible to use because of some unique physical
attribute of the property itself or some other factor unique to the property
for which the variance is being requested.  Any state or federal
requirements may not be varied through the granting of a variance. 
Furthermore, use variances (i.e., the allowance for a use to be developed in
a zoning district where that use is otherwise not allowed) may not be granted
by the Board of Adjustment.  In addition, the Board of Adjustment shall have
no authority to grant a variance for any situations that are subject to a
“Special Exception” as indicated in Section 5.12.  For instance, if a
property owner wanted to place a family care home within a distance of less
than one-half (1/2) mile from another family care home, the applicant would
seek a special exception, as called for in Section 5.12, as opposed to
seeking a variance.



5.14.2   Variance Submittal Procedure



   An application for a variance may be filed only by the owner of the
lot(s) upon which the variance is sought or by an agent of such owner.  The
application shall be processed and a public hearing called and advertised as
set forth in Sections 4.5.9 and 4.5.10 of this Ordinance



5.14.3   Reserved



5.14.4   Action by the Board of Adjustment



   A.   In considering an application for a variance, the Board of
Adjustment shall review the application, the approval criteria set forth in
Section 5.14.5 and all testimony and evidence received at the public hearing.



   B.   After conclusion of the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment
shall have the following options:



      1.   Approve the application for a variance as requested; or,



      2.   Approve the application for a variance with fair and
reasonable conditions attached that the Board of Adjustment feels are
necessary to satisfy one or more of the findings contained in Section 5.14.5;
or,



      3.   Deny the variance application.



   C.   Unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Adjustment and
included in its decision to grant a variance, any order of the Board of
Adjustment in granting a variance shall expire, if a building permit, or
certificate of occupancy (for a use for which a building permit is not
required), has not been obtained within twenty-four (24) months from the date
of the Board of Adjustment’s decision.



   D.   Before granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall take
a separate vote on each of the findings shown in Section 5.14.5.  A variance
cannot be granted unless each finding is found in the affirmative by a 4/5
majority of the Board.  A motion to make an affirmative finding on each of
the findings contained in Section 5.14.5 shall be accompanied by one or more
reasons, based on evidence heard at the public hearing, supporting such
motion.



5.14.5    Variance Approval Criteria



   The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance only having first held a
public hearing on the matter and having found that each of the following
findings exist:



   A.   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application
of the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the
absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made on the property.



   B.   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size or topography.  Hardships resulting from
personal circumstance, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that
are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis
for granting a variance.



   C.   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant
or the property owner.  The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship.



   D.   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose,
and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and
substantial justice is achieved.



(Res. passed 4-14-2014)



5.14.6    Variance Approval Criteria



   A.   Once the Board of Adjustment approves a variance, the applicant
shall follow the procedures found elsewhere in this Ordinance for securing
the requisite permit to proceed with the development of his property.  All
orders, decisions, determinations and interpretations made by the
Administrator under those procedures shall be consistent with the variance
granted by the Board of Adjustment.



Section 5.15   Minor Modifications to Development and Zoning District
Standards and Approved Plats



5.15.1   Development and Zoning District Standards



   A.   Purpose



      1.   As part of the review and approval process set forth in
the Ordinance, the Administrator is hereby authorized to approve minor
modifications to certain development standards where such modifications are
incidental and do not have significant impact on adjacent properties.  The
“minor modification” process is seen as a way to:



         a.   Grant minor modifications that would not
significantly alter the relationship of a building or structure to
neighboring properties;



         b.   Allow building encroachments into required setbacks
that may be commonly found elsewhere in the City;



         c.   Address minor and insignificant construction errors
which have occurred in the past and which could only otherwise be alleviated
through the issuance of a variance.



      2.   The list of situations for which the Administrator is
authorized to apply a “minor modification” is listed in Section 5.15.1
(B).  Unless specifically listed there (or elsewhere in the Ordinance) any
other modifications to the terms of this Ordinance shall require the issuance
of a variance by the Board of Adjustment.



   B.   Minor Modifications Allowed



   Table 5.15-1 indicates those minor modifications that are suitable for
approval by the Administrator.



 



TABLE 5.15-1: Minor Modification Table


Standard That May be Modified
 
Modification Allowed


Façade and HVAC Encroachment- Placement of Eaves, Gutters, Cornices, Bay
Windows, and HVAC Equipment
 
An eave, bay window or external HVAC equipment may extend into the required
front, side or rear yard by no greater than three (3) feet, but in no case
closer than five (5) feet to an adjoining property line.1


Handicap Ramp Encroachment- Placement of Handicap Ramps
 
A ramp designed to accommodate handicapped persons may extend into a required
front, side or rear yard, but in no case closer than five (5) feet to an
adjoining property line.1


Uncovered and Unenclosed Decks, Porches and Terraces
 
Such decks, porches and terraces which are not in any part more than six (6)
feet above the finished grade level shall not project more than twenty-five
percent (25%) into any required yard setback. 1


At-grade Driveways, Paths, Walks or Uncovered Concrete Slabs
 
May be placed in any required setback.


Other Yard Encroachments
 
One (1) foot or ten (10) percent of the required yard standard, whichever is
less. 1, 2


Reduction in the Required Amount of Landscaping or Buffering Plant Materials
 
Refer to Section 11.1.2(F)


Accessory Structures
 
An accessory structure may exceed its maximum area requirement by up to three
(3) percent.




 



1 In no case shall the Administrator have the authority herein to allow for a
buildingencroachment into any of the following:



      1. Street or railroad right-of-way;



      2.  Street or utility easement;



      3. Designated floodplain or floodway areas;



      4.  Encroachment into another lot or parcel;



      5.  Encroachment into land that lies in another local
government’s planning jurisdiction, unless approval from that local
government is given to do so.



2 The Administrator shall only be able to grant such modification if the
petitioner can demonstrate that the modification required was not the result
of a deliberate action to circumvent the terms of this Ordinance.



   C.   Procedures



   The Administrator may approve a minor modification in conjunction with
a Site Plan review as set forth in Section 5.2, the issuance of a zoning
permit as set forth in Section 5.3, the issuance of certificate of compliance
as set forth in Section 5.6.  That notwithstanding, the Administrator may
not approve a request for a minor modification in cases where the development
application must go to the City Council for approval or to another approval
body even in cases where the requested modification is small enough to be
granted by the Administrator.  In such cases, the Administrator shall
transmit his/her recommendations with respect to the minor modification and
the designated approval body shall have the authority to approve such minor
modification in conjunction with their approval process.



   D.   Approved Final Subdivision Plats



      1.   Purpose



   The Administrator is hereby authorized to approve minor modifications
to approved and recorded final plats where such modifications are incidental
and do not have significant impact on affected and adjacent properties. 
Such modifications shall not result in any lessening of any requirements that
are otherwise called for in this Ordinance.  Rather, the minor modification
process is designed to address minor infrastructural changes that may not
have been anticipated at the time of final plat approval.



(NOTE:  Changes to a subdivision plat that involve the combination or
recombination of lots, where the resultant lots are not increased and meet
all of the Ordinance requirements, shall not be considered a
“subdivision” per NCGS 153A-335.  Provisions for making such changes are
addressed in Section 13.2 of this Ordinance.)



      2.   Types of Subdivision Plat Modifications Allowed



   Changes to a recorded subdivision plat that may be authorized by the
Administrator include those that are a result of minor field alterations to
accommodate physical site conditions involving interior features of the site
design that involve the relocation of streets, easements, utilities and other
infrastructural improvements. 



      3.   Process



         a.   The applicant shall present a copy of the recorded
subdivision plat along with a paper copy of the modified plat with (1) the
modifications clearly identified and labeled, and (2) the lots that are
affected by such modifications.  A written statement that gives reason as to
why such modifications are needed shall accompany this. 



         b.   If any of the lots so identified have been sold to
other parties, a signed statement from each of the affected property owners
shall accompany such plat.  Each such statement shall (1) list the
modifications that are proposed and (2) indicate their agreement with and
support of the proposed subdivision plat modifications.  Once this
information has been received, the Administrator shall have the ability to
administratively approve the subdivision plat, send the plat to the TRC for
their review and decision, or reject the plat amendment.  The plat amendment
may be approved by the Administrator (and/or the TRC) if determined that the
proposed amendment(s) (1) does not violate any of the standards contained in
this ordinance; (2) will be beneficial to the residents of the subdivision
and/or the community as a whole; and,  (3) will create conditions essential
to the public health, welfare or safety.



CHAPTER 6.
ZONING DISTRICTS



6.1   Zoning Districts Established



6.2   General Zoning Districts



6.3   Overlay Zoning Districts



6.4   Conditional Zoning Districts



Section 6.1    Zoning Districts Established



   A.   In order to achieve the purposes established for this Ordinance
as indicated in Section 6.2, and to further the goals and objectives stated
in any plans for the future development of  Bessemer City as adopted by the
governing board, a number of zoning districts are hereby created. Districts
are divided into the following four categories:



      1.   General zoning districts



      2.   Overlay districts



      3.   Conditional districts



   B.   Each general zoning district category serves a different
function.  A number of “residential”, “commercial”, “office” and
“industrial” zoning districts have been created.  Most allow for a
variety of land use types and categories; certain districts allow for the
mixing of land use types is encouraged.  All of the geographic area to which
this Ordinance applies shall be divided into one of the various general
zoning districts.



   C.   Overlay districts are created to address issues of particular
concern in the community that overlay one or more of the general zoning
districts.  These regulations supplement those that are found in the
underlying general zoning district.  Any proposed use located within an
overlay district would have to meet the requirements of the underlying
general zoning district along with the requirements of the overlay district.



   D.   Conditional districts are designed to reach the same end-result
as parallel conditional use districts.  The major difference between the two
is that while a parallel conditional use rezoning requires two steps (the
rezoning to a parallel conditional use districts and the issuance of a
conditional use permit, the latter being done through a quasi-judicial
process), conditional zoning involves the creation of a completely new zoning
district designed to serve the needs of a particular development.  No
conditional use permit is involved, nor are there any quasi-judicial
procedures.  The owner of the property in question, or his authorized agent,
are the only persons who can request a conditional district rezoning.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



Section 6.2   General Zoning Districts



6.2.1   Rural Residential Districts



   A.   Three "rural residential" districts, R-1, R-2 and R-3, are
hereby established.  All three are designed for location in areas outside
the designated "urban standards overlay," i.e., the area covered by the USO
Urban Standards Overlay District as designated in Section 6.3.6.  Although
such areas may be served with utilities, most of these areas are located
beyond existing or anticipated utility service coverage areas.  Minimum lot
sizes for residential uses are therefore larger than in other zones.



   B.   The RLD, “Residential Low Density” district may be located
both within and beyond the Urban Standards Overlay District.  The district,
which contains the largest standard minimum lot size (87,000 square feet), is
used in two ways:  to accommodate residential uses in the most rural
portions of the County; or, to protect areas from large-scale residential
development where industrial or intense commercial development is called for
on the land development plan in the future, but where specific development
plans do not currently exist.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



6.2.2   Urban Residential Districts



   Four urban residential districts are hereby created: RS-20, RS-12, RS-8
and RMF.  The RS-20, RS-12 and RS-8 districts are primarily geared towards
single-family residential development with standard minimum lot sizes ranging
from twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet in the RS-20 zone to eight-thousand
(8,000) square feet in the RS-8 zone.



   These districts will most likely be found in the Urban Standards
Overlay District and are served by public utilities.  Higher densities than
those normally allowed and a variety of different residential types may be
accommodated in all zones through planned residential developments (PRD’s),
infill residential developments, and traditional neighborhood developments
(TND’s) and/or through the satisfaction of certain of certain performance
design and construction criteria.



6.2.3   Office Districts



   A.   Four office and low-impact commercial zoning districts are
hereby created: Transitional Mixed Use (TMU), Office/Light Commercial (OLC),
Office (O-1) and the Medical Office (OM) districts. 



   B.   The TMU district encourages office and mixed office and
residential uses at an intensity to compliment nearby residential land
uses.  Such areas are most often found in developed, urban portions of the
County within the Urban Standards Overlay District.  Many such areas,
especially those found along major corridors, were originally developed for
residential areas.  But due to their location, the blending of office uses
and higher density residential development has taken place.  The TMU
district is designed to encourage such mixed development to continue.



   C.   The OLC district also allows for and is designed to accommodate
mixed office, retail and residential development.    Such higher intensity
development will most likely occur within the Urban Standards Overlay
District where public utilities are present and where access to major
thoroughfares and/or transit is found.  Development in OLC areas will most
likely be at a higher intensity level than in the TMU district.



   D.   The O-1 district accommodates larger-scale office developments
along with complimentary commercial service establishments. 



   E.   The OM district is designed to accommodate medically oriented
uses that lie in close proximity to Gaston Memorial Hospital or other
existing or planned community medical facilities in the County.  In order to
serve the general public better, complementary uses (doctors' offices,
medical supply shops, pharmacies, etc.) are encouraged to locate near these
medical facilities. Uses that are non-medically related are generally
excluded for this zoning district so as to not compete for space that could
otherwise be developed for medically related uses.  Given the relative small
amount of land suitable for such zoning, uses which predominate in other
zoning districts (e.g., residences, non-medically related retail uses) are
not allowed in the O-M district.



6.2.4   Commercial Districts



   A.   Five commercial districts are hereby created:  Central
Business District (CBD), Urban Mixed Use (UMU), Light Commercial (C-1),
Highway Commercial (C-2), and General Commercial (C-3).



   B.   The CBD district is designed to accommodate the uses found in a
central city location and to encourage high intensity, compact, urban
development in a pedestrian-oriented setting. Retail, office, personal
service, and institutional uses normally found in a central business district
are allowed. In order to encourage more efficient building usage and to take
advantage of the area's centralized location, second-story residential uses
are permitted, as are high-density residential developments. Signage
requirements shall be specifically tailored for a downtown setting.



   C.   The UMU district is generally located in the periphery of
central business districts and is designed to allow for the redevelopment of
older commercial districts in a pedestrian-friendly manner.  An UMU zoned
area may not represent the true downtown business core of a community, but
contains development features (e.g., limited or no front yard setbacks,
limited amounts of off-street parking) that often pre-date the implementation
of land use regulations.  Redevelopment of such areas, for both commercial
and residential purposes, is encouraged. 



   D.   The C-1 Light Commercial District is designed to accommodate a
large variety of retail uses designed to meet the needs of individual
neighborhoods, or other relatively small geographic areas.  Stores and
shopping complexes are therefore relatively small in size and are designed to
be compatible and integrated with adjoining residential neighborhoods. This
zoning district is not intended to accommodate retail uses which attract
persons from outside the neighborhood or which attract large numbers of
passing motorists.



   E.   The C-2 Highway Commercial District is primarily intended to
accommodate those retail service and distributive uses that are typically
located along or adjacent to principal or minor arterials and which require
high visibility, good road access, and which cater primarily to passing
motorists. Development in this district is designed to promote aesthetics and
the safe and efficient movement of traffic so as to not unduly burden
adjacent thoroughfares. As larger and/or more intensive developments normally
will create more significant impacts on adjoining neighborhoods and road and
utility infrastructures, larger developments may be allowed in this zoning
district.  Most C-2 zoning districts will be located within the Urban
Standards Overlay District.



   F.   The C-3 District is intended to accommodate the broadest array
of commercial uses of all the commercial zoning districts, some of which are
not allowed in any of the other commercial zoning districts.  Like the C-2
district, the C-3 district is intended to accommodate the community’s
larger and most intense commercial developments (outside of the central
business district) and be located within the Urban Standards Overlay
District. 



6.2.5   Industrial Districts



   A.   Four industrial districts, light industrial (I-1), general
industrial (I-2) exclusive industrial (I-3), and Urban Industrial (IU) are
hereby created.



   B.   The I-1 district is established to provide for areas that
contain a mix of light manufacturing uses, office park and service uses in an
attractive setting with proper screening and buffering.  I-1 districts
should include areas that continue the orderly development and concentration
of light industrial uses.  Any areas rezoned to the I-1 district subsequent
to the adoption of this Ordinance should be located so as to have direct
access to or lie within close proximity of a principal or minor arterial. 



   C.   The I-2 district is established to provide for areas of heavier
manufacturing and industrial uses that are properly sited, based on such
factors as: adjacent land uses, access to the transportation network, and the
availability of public services and facilities. It is the intent of this
district to provide an environment for industries that is unencumbered by
nearby residential or commercial development. I-2 zoned districts shall be
located in areas where conflicts with other uses can be minimized to promote
orderly transitions and buffers between uses. The I-2 district is established
in order to provide sites for activities that involve major transportation
terminals, and manufacturing facilities that have a greater impact on the
surrounding area than industries found in the I-1 district. I-2 districts
shall generally not be located adjacent to any property that is zoned for
residential use, except when mitigating factors (i.e., terrain, buffering,
transportation access) are in place to substantively mitigate any potential
negative impacts upon such residential areas caused by uses in the I-2
district.  Any areas that are rezoned to an I-2 district subsequent to the
adoption of this Ordinance shall be located so as to have direct access to or
lie in close proximity of a principal or minor arterial.



   D.   The I-3 district is established to provide areas for the most
intensive heavy manufacturing and industrial uses that may have impacts such
as excess noise, environmental concerns and extended hours of operation. 
Uses in this district are extremely limited and include extractive and mining
uses, petroleum refining and slaughterhouses.  I-3 districts shall not be
located adjacent to any property that is zoned for residential use.  Any
areas that are rezoned to an I-3 district subsequent to the adoption of this
Ordinance shall be located so as to have direct access to or lie in close
proximity of a principal or minor arterial.



   E.   The I-U urban industrial district is normally found in older
portions of the community that were developed prior to the advent of zoning
regulations and which contain older industrial and warehouse-type uses. 
Such uses oftentimes do not conform to the parking, bulk, or setback
requirements that would be applicable if those structures were developed
today. The purpose of this district is to accommodate such existing uses and
to encourage the redevelopment of such uses for industrial, commercial and/or
residential purposes. 



Section 6.3   Overlay Zoning Districts



   Overlay districts are established to provide for certain additional
requirements and/or uses for properties located in one (1) or more general
zoning districts. Thus, in addition to the requirements of the underlying
general zoning district, the provisions of the overlay district would also
prevail in the areas so zoned. The initial zoning of areas to an overlay
district and/or any subsequent rezoninqs may be initiated by an individual,
the Planning Commission, or City Council. A zoning map change either
establishing or changing any overlay district shall be subject to the same
procedures and requirements as any other zoning map change. In certain areas,
two (2) or more overlay districts may apply. In any such instance where there
are conflicting provisions, the more stringent requirements shall apply.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



6.3.1   FH Flood Hazard Overlay District



   A.   It is the purpose of this zoning district to promote public
health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions within floodprone areas by provisions designed to:



      1.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in
damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;



      2.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction;



      3.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;



      4.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other
development that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



      5.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers
that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards
to other lands.



      6.   Specific objectives of this zoning district are:



         a.   To protect human life and health;



         b.   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly
flood control projects;



         c.   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding that are at the expense of the general public;



         d.   To minimize prolonged business losses and
interruptions;



         e.   To minimize damage to public facilities and
utilities (i.e., water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer
lines, streets, and bridges) that are located in floodprone areas;



         f.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for
the sound use and development of floodprone areas; and,



         g.   To ensure that potential buyers are aware that
property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area.



   B.   Design standards are found in Section 7.9.3



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



6.3.2   Water Supply Watershed Overlay District



   The regulations herein are designed to protect the water quality of the
streams in the water supply watershed that lie within the jurisdiction of
this Ordinance.  It is the intent of this Ordinance to provide regulations
that implement the rules adopted by the North Carolina Division of Water
Quality, pursuant to NC General Statute 143-214.5.  Design standards are
found in Section 7.9.4.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



6.3.3   USO- Urban Standards Overlay District



   Areas of the County that are located (1) within existing municipal
corporate limits or (2) outside their corporate limits but where the
provision of public water and sewer services can reasonably be expected to
occur over the next 10-15 years, have been designated as the "Urban Standards
Overlay District".  Accordingly, standards for development, more akin to
those that traditionally are found in urban areas, as opposed to rural areas,
are called for. Standards address such issues are, but not limited to:
building design, off-street parking, road, lot and subdivision standards. 
Design standards are found in Section 7.9.1.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



6.3.4   TD- Traditional Downtown Overlay



   The TD district has been created to ensure that development that takes
place in the area adjacent to a downtown central business district is
executed with appropriate urban design, site planning and architectural
principles and techniques. A goal of this district is to promote a stable,
attractive, economically viable, pedestrian-scaled environment in the
downtown area of Bessemer City. The TD district contains many requirements
similar in nature and intent to those of the CBD central business district,
but with somewhat more flexibility. To accomplish the goals stated herein,
architectural standards, site layout, building materials, and sign standards
are specified and categorized as either required or voluntary standards to
insure high quality design. Where there is conflict with other portions of
this subsection in terms of allowed uses, yard and height requirements,
parking and landscaping standards, etc., the requirements of the TD district
shall prevail, whether more or less restrictive. However, with respect to
sign requirements, where these standards are silent, the requirements of
Chapter 12 ("Signs") shall prevail.  Design standards are found in Section
7.9.2.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



Section 6.4   Conditional Zoning (CD) Districts



   The Conditional Zoning (CD) District process allows for the
establishment of certain uses that, because of their nature or scale, have
particular impacts on both the immediate area and the community as a whole.
The development of these uses cannot be predetermined or controlled by
general district standards. In order to accommodate these uses, this Section
establishes the conditional zoning district process.  The process for
approval of a CD Zoning District is explained in Section 14.1.5.  The
rezoning of any parcel of land to a CD district shall be a voluntary process
initiated by the property owner or his authorized agent.  Any area rezoned
to a CD district shall be in strict compliance with the goals, objectives and
implementation strategies of the Bessemer City Land Use Plan and all other
plans and regulations officially adopted by the  Bessemer City Council. 
The review process established in this Section provides for the accommodation
of such uses by a reclassification of property into a CD district, subject to
specific conditions (which may exceed those that would otherwise be required
for the use in question), which ensure compatibility of the use with the
enjoyment of neighboring properties and in accordance with the general plans
of development of the City.  A conditional zoning district is not intended
for securing early zoning for a proposal.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



CHAPTER 7:
USE AND BUILDING LOT STANDARDS



7.1   Table of Uses



7.2   Uses Not Expressly Listed or Addressed



7.3   Bulk and Dimensional Standards



7.4   Location of Required Yards on Corner and Irregular Lots



7.5   Orientation of Manufactured Homes in Residential Zoning Districts



7.6   Height Calculations and Exceptions



7.7   Conversion of Residential Uses to Non-Residential Uses



7.8   Pre-existing Lots of Record



7.9   Overlay District Design Standards



7.9.1   Urban Standards Overlay



7.9.2   Traditional Downtown Overlay



7.9.3   Flood Hazard Overlay



7.9.4   Water Supply Watershed Overlay



7.1   Table of Uses



   Uses designated as "permitted uses" are allowed in a zone as a matter
of right and are designated with an "X" in Table 7.1-1.  Uses designated
with a "C" in Table 7.1-1 are  "conditional uses" allowed only after a
conditional use permit has been issued per Section 5.8.  Uses designated
with an "E" are existing uses that are subject to certain limitations on
expansions.  If an "S" follows either the "X", "C" or "E" in Table 7.1-1 it
means that that use is subject to additional performance criteria specific to
that use.  The location of those performance criteria for that use is shown
in Table 7.1-1.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



7.2   Uses Not Expressly Listed or Addressed



   No building or structure, sign or land shall hereafter be used, erected
or occupied and no building or structure shall be erected, expanded or moved
except in conformity with the regulations of this Ordinance. Table 7.1-1
shows the principal uses that are allowed in each zoning district. Temporary
uses are discussed in Section 5.8; accessory uses, customary and rural home
occupations, and private residential quarters are discussed in Chapter 9.



   Certain uses predating the adoption of this Ordinance are allowed to
remain as nonconforming uses in accordance with Section 3.4 of this
Ordinance. Unless a use is allowed as a "permitted," "conditional,"
"nonconforming use," "temporary use," allowed as "special exception" per
Section 5.12. or otherwise specifically address in this Ordinance, then such
use shall be expressly prohibited in that zoning district. The Board of
Adjustment shall have no authority to grant a variance or special exception
to allow for such prohibited use.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



7.3   Bulk and Dimensional Standards



   Bulk and dimensional standards for all uses in all general zoning
districts are shown in Tables 7.1-2 through 7.1-5.  Such dimensional
standards shall prevail unless specific standards for individual uses are
found elsewhere in this Ordinance.



7.4   Location of Required Yards on Corner and Irregular lots



   If a lot is abutted on three sides by streets, the front yard (for
setback purposes) shall be designated by the property owner. Notwithstanding,
the front and rear yards, and subsequent placement of structures on said lot,
to the greatest degree possible, shall be in keeping with the architectural
fronts and rears of other pre-existing structures situated on that block.



   The location of required front yard setbacks and side and rear yards on
other irregularly shaped lots shall be determined by the Administrator based
on the spirit and intent of this Ordinance to achieve an appropriate spacing
and location of buildings and structures on individual lots.



(Res. passed 6-13-2011)



7.5   Orientation of Manufactured Homes in Residential Zoning Districts



   Any manufactured home shall be situated on the lot so that the external
wall which, by design, is intended to be the front, generally faces a street
adjoining the lot. This requirement shall not apply if the dwelling is
located on a "flag" or "panhandle" lot; or, the dwelling is set back at least
100 feet from the street right-of-way on an interior lot.



   Relief to this requirement may be granted by the Administrator subject
to the following findings:



      ∙   The dwelling cannot practically be located on the
subject lot in any other manner; and,



      ∙   The dwelling shall have sufficient architectural
treatment (e.g. roof gables, addition of windows, doors, porches, etc.) so
that the end wall does not appear to be an end wall.



7.6   Height Calculations and Exceptions



   The maximum heights indicated in the various zoning districts may be
exceeded for the following uses:



      ∙   Roof structures not intended for human occupancy and
serving in an accessory capacity to the principal structure on the lot, such
as skylights, housing for elevators, stairways, water tanks, ventilating
fans, air conditioning equipment or similar equipment, steeples, spires,
belfries, and cupolas or chimneys, and radio and television antennae
(excluding communication towers) may exceed the maximum allowable heights as
provided in any of the zoning districts. The height of communication towers,
as a principal or accessory use, shall be governed per Section 9.15(F)(8).



      ∙   Any structure which exceeds the prescribed maximum
building height for the zoning district in which it is located by more than
ten feet shall be located on the lot so that no portion of the structure is
located closer to any lot line than the greater of: (1) the minimum setback
regulations in that zoning district or, (2) the difference between the actual
height of the structure and the normally allowed maximum building height in
that zoning district.



   For all other structures in excess of 35 feet in height which are (i)
located in any zoning district except the CBD district and, (ii) which abut
any Residential district, the minimum side yard shall be increased one foot
for each one foot of building height in excess of 35 feet.



   A parapet wall or cornice may extend up to five (5) feet above the
maximum building height for the zoning district in question without
necessitating any greater setback requirement.



7.7   Conversion of Residential Structures to Non-Residential Uses or
Mixed-Use Dwelling



   In any non-Residential zoning district, a residential structure that
existed on or before the date of adoption of this Ordinance, may be converted
to a permitted nonresidential use (or a mixed-use dwelling), so long as all
applicable off-street parking and landscaping, screening requirements are
met.  If such use is a conditional use, the City Council may attach fair and
reasonable conditions which would serve to mitigate any existing
nonconforming situations arising from such conversion.



7.8   Pre-Existing Lots of Record



   For residentially zoned lots approved by the City and platted prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance, the minimum dimensional requirements to
be observed for the principal single-family residence shall be the lesser of
those approved and platted or of such dimensional requirements in effect on
the date the building permit is issued. All other structures proposed on such
lots shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance.



7.9   Overlay District Design Standards



7.9.1   Urban Standards Overlay



   The Urban Standards Overlay (USO) District contains a number of design
and subdivision standards that apply solely to non-residential uses on
properties located in USO District (except where otherwise indicated):



      A.   Parking Lot Connections



      (NOTE: These requirements shall also apply in the CH Overlay
District)



      (NOTE: The following provisions regarding parking lot connections
shall NOT be applicable to lots in the CBD, I-1, I-2, I-3 or I-U zoning
districts, irrespective of whether they are in the USO or CH Overlay
Districts.)



      Parking lots for commercial or office uses (but not for
industrial uses) that lie in an applicable Commercial or Office zoning
district and which contain more than fifty (50) off-street parking spaces
shall be designed to inter-connect with an undeveloped adjoining lot in such
zoning district. At least one (1) future access point to such parking lot
from the undeveloped adjoining lot shall be provided. The Administrator may
require additional access points, when in his opinion, such additional access
point would serve to benefit traffic flow and the safety of pedestrians and
motorists using the street. The location of the access point shall be
determined by the developer of the property in question and shall be subject
to the Administrator's approval. The total number of required off-street
parking spaces for all parking lots meeting the requirements of this section
shall be reduced by three (3) parking spaces per access point for the lot
being developed. The Administrator shall have the authority to waive or
modify the requirements of this section upon finding that there is no
practical way to create a shared driveway with an adjoining undeveloped lot.



   Example below illustrates how this requirement is to be implemented.



   Figure 7.9.1-1







 



      B.   Building Materials (NOTE: These regulations are also
applicable in the CH and SH Overlay Districts)



         1.   Seventy-five percent (75%) of the area below the
facia of any non-residential building face (excluding industrial uses)
including doors and windows shall be finished with one (1) or more of the
materials listed below, subject to applicable building code requirements.
This shall apply to any side of the building that is visible from an adjacent
public street. (NOTE: The Administrator shall have the authority to approve
building materials not specifically listed but similar in appearance and
texture to those herein listed.)



            a.   Brick, brick veneer or polystyrene faced with
real brick veneers and field applied jointing.



            b.   Decorative CMU (concrete masonry unit)
concrete block.



            c.   Pre-cast or field-poured tilt concrete panels
with texture (such as exposed aggregate) and/or architectural detailing.



            d.   Stone, stone veneer, lath applied stone and
cultured stone.



            e.   Flush architectural metal panels or other
metal panels with architectural detailing, but not including sheet metal
panels of "R" or similar corrugated and/or ribbed configuration or appearance.



            f.   Stucco with architectural detailing or
artificial stucco (EPS/expanded polystyrene/"Drivet®") with architectural
detailing.



            g.   Glass, plastic "glass," e.g., "Plexiglas®"
and translucent fiberglass panels.



            h.   Doors, windows and other fenestration along
with their casings.



            i.   Wood and wood materials designed and intended
for use as exterior finish material.



         2.   Trim and similar architectural detailing shall be
composed of any code-approved materials (any material may be painted;
however, paint and similar coatings themselves are not considered a finish
material for the purpose of this list.)



         3.   Portions of the roof that are visible from an
adjacent public street shall not have a shiny surface appearance similar to
aluminized or galvanized metal; however, anodized or baked-on paint metal
roofs shall be allowed.



      C.   Location of Off-Street Loading Areas (NOTE:  These
regulations are also applicable in the SH and CH Overlay Districts)



         To the maximum extent feasible, all off-street loading
berths shall be located between the building and rear lot line of the
property, and/or shall be screened from the view of an adjacent public street
and abutting properties.  The Administrator shall have the authority to
waive or modify this provision upon making a determination that (1) location
of the berths in such location would impede pedestrian safety; and (2) that
due to the location of the building and the lot size and shape, the location
of the berths in such location would be impractical.



      D.   Building Colors



         NOTE:  The following provisions regarding building colors
shall be applicable ONLY within the UMU, TMU and CBD zoning districts.



         1.   In addition to the building material standards
contained in Subsection B, buildings in the applicable general zoning
districts within the Urban Standards Overlay District shall meet the
following standards regarding building façade colors.  Façade colors shall
be of low reflectance earth tone, muted, subtle, or neutral colors. Building
trim may feature brighter colors as an accent material. The use of
high-intensity or metallic colors shall not be allowed except for accent
purposes. The use of fluorescent, day glow, or neon colors shall be
prohibited as a predominate wall color. Variations in color schemes are
encouraged in order to articulate entryways and public amenities so as to
give greater recognition to these features. Color samples shall be provided
to the Administrator at the time of site plan review and prior to any
renovations, remodelings, facelifts, and repainting, along with a description
of how and where each color will be used. Colored renderings are encouraged,
but shall not be a substitute for this requirement. 



         2.   This prohibition shall not apply to any wall or
freestanding signage for the use.



      E.   Building Articulation (NOTE:  These provisions do not
apply to industrial uses.)



         No wall that faces an adjacent public street shall have a
blank, uninterrupted length exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
"Interruptions" as herein used shall include changes in plane by more than
one (1) foot or changes in texture or masonry patterns.  This shall apply to
any building that is greater than one hundred (100) feet in length.  For
buildings that have a length less than one hundred fifty (150) feet, one (1)
interruption shall be required within thirty (30) feet on either side of the
center of the building.  Refer to Figure 7.9.1-2 below for an illustration
of this requirement.



   Figure 7.9.1-2







 



      F.   Entrance Orientation



      NOTE:  These provisions do not apply to industrial uses.



      NOTE:  The following provisions regarding entrance orientation
shall be applicable ONLY within the UMU, TMU and CBD zoning districts.



      NOTE:  These provisions apply only to principal buildings
constructed or physically expanded after the effective date of this Ordinance



      For all principal buildings whose exterior façades that face or
are visible from a public street are altered after the effective date of this
Ordinance, such buildings shall install a pedestrian entryway opening onto at
least one (1) adjoining public street.  Corner entrances shall comply with
this requirement.  Access from the adjoining public sidewalk, street
right-of-way or driveway to the principal structure shall be provided through
an improved surface.



      G.   Rooftop Equipment



         A parapet or an enclosure consisting of materials that meet
the building material requirements of Subsection B herein shall conceal
rooftop and HVAC equipment on all buildings visible from a public road,
except I-85.  This requirement shall not apply to any equipment required by
to be located on the roof by either the State Building Code or the County
Health Department.  The Administrator shall have the authority to waive or
modify this requirements based on site-specific conditions, including but not
limited to: topography, lot size or site configuration that would make
adherence to this requirement impractical.



      H.   Sidewalks



         Refer to Section 9.18.



      I.   Off-Street Parking in the Front Yard



         No greater than two (2) rows of off-street parking shall be
provided in the front yard of the lot except for single- and two-family
dwellings and individual manufactured homes not located within a manufactured
home park.  Refer to Figure 7.9.1-3 below for an illustration of this
requirement.  This requirement does not apply to industrial uses or to any
use located in an Industrial zone.  Notwithstanding, for multi-family uses,
and for uses located within the TND Center component of a TND, no off-street
parking shall be allowed within the front yard.



   Figure 7.9.1-3







 



   Outparcels which are situated at the periphery of any shopping center
or similar planned multi-tenant development shall also adhere to this rule.



      J.   Street Trees



         Refer to Section 9.18.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



7.9.2   TD Traditional Downtown Overlay District



      A.   Permitted Uses



All permitted principal and accessory uses in the underlying general zoning
district, except that the following uses are prohibited, irrespective of the
underlying zoning district:



         1.   Agricultural and equestrian uses.



         2.   Automobile, boat, light duty truck and motorcycle
sales without an indoor showroom.



         3.   Bus charter service company.



         4.   Cabinet and woodworking shop.



         5.   Distribution center, product, greater than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in size.



         6.   Farm equipment sales.



         7.   Florist, wholesale.



         8.   Fortuneteller.



         9.   Machine shop.



         10.   Manufactured home sales.



         11.   Manufacturing machinery sales and service.



         12.   Membership warehouse club.



         13.   Monument sales.



         14.   Moving and storage facilities.



         15.   Pest control service.



         16.   Petroleum jobber.



         17.   Recreational vehicle sales.



         18.   Retailing fixture parts, sales, and service.



         19.   Roofing repair and installation.



         20.   Textile machinery sales and service



         21.   Truck, heavy duty, and self-propelled heavy
construction equipment, cranes, and paving equipment sales and service.



         22.   Adult establishment.



         23.   Automobile body shop.



         24.   Automobile wash, class 2.



         25.   Baseball hitting range.



         26.   Cemetery/columbarium, principal use.



         27.   Communication towers of any height, including
towers erected as an accessory use to a radio and television studio.



         28.   Communication tower, combined.



         29.   Contractor's storage and equipment yard.



         30.   Home center.



         31.   Landfill, on-site demolition, accessory use.



         32.   Mini-warehouse facility.



         33.   Restaurant, drive-through.



         34.   Recycling deposit station (principal use).



         35.   Rental center, class 2.



         36.   Truck and utility trailer rental facility.



         37.   Golf course (public or private)



         38.   Military reserve center.



         39.   Petroleum distributor.



         40.   Theater, outdoor movie.



      B.   Performance Criteria for Specific Uses



         1.   Restaurant. Fast Food. Permitted in the district
provided that such use is allowed in the underlying zoning district. No high
intensity colors (such as yellow, red, orange, etc.) metallic colors, or
fluorescent colors shall be allowed on any building or architectural element.
The use of such colors shall be permitted on business identification signs,
provided all other sign requirements herein are adhered to. Furthermore, the
use of "franchise architecture" shall not be allowed. For purposes of this
section franchise architecture shall be defined as a distinct architectural
building style and/or elements commonly employed by a fast food franchise
that serves to enhance or promote brand identity through visual recognition.
This type of architecture has been shown to contribute to the dilution of a
unique community identity. Finally, any children's play area provided by the
restaurant may not be located in the front or side yard of any lot.



         2.   Dwelling units. Permitted in the district provided
that such use is allowed in the underlying zoning district. The total average
size of all residential dwelling units within the same building shall not be
less than seven hundred (700) square feet; however, in no case may any
individual unit smaller than six hundred (600) square feet be allowed
anywhere in the district. Residential dwelling units may be provided on the
second or higher floor of any building containing commercial uses, non-profit
organizations, or office type uses on the ground floor, provided each unit
meets or exceeds all applicable fire safety and minimum housing and/or
building codes. Detached multi-family apartment, townhouse, or condominium
buildings shall be allowed, subject to the following standards:



            a.   When more than one (1) building is proposed,
all buildings shall be oriented parallel toward either a public street, or an
interior courtyard. All buildings shall be separated from one (1) another by
at least sixteen (16) feet.



            b.   Any project containing three (3) or more
separate buildings shall provide landscaped common areas totaling not less
than ten percent (10%) of the lot area, with no individual piece being less
than two thousand (2,000) square feet in size. Such areas shall be landscaped
in a manner similar to a Level 2 buffer, and shall be recreation/open space
that is readily usable by residents.



            c.   Parking areas. Parking stalls may be provided
under the units, provided that they do not have direct access to a street via
a driveway.



            d.   Driveway entrances shall comply with any
applicable City engineering standards to a point ten (10) feet beyond the
pavement or to the limit of street right-of-way, whichever is greater.



            e.   Minimum driveway widths shall be twelve (12)
feet for one-way drives, and twenty (20) feet for two-way drives.



      C.   Building Appearance Standards, Mandatory



         1.   Unless otherwise noted, these requirements shall
apply to all new buildings constructed after the date of passage of these
standards. Single-family residential dwelling units are exempt from the
design requirements herein. In situations where existing buildings need to be
repaired, the requirements of this section shall not apply if the repairs are
made using identical materials and design. However all modifications or
changes to the design or materials of existing buildings shall be in
conformance with the standards herein. For use of wood materials within the
downtown fire district, refer to the North Carolina State Building Code.



         2.   Metal siding, metal cladding, and/or metal
architectural panels shall be prohibited within the district for use on the
exterior of new or existing buildings. Ornamental metal trim work (i.e.,
copper sheathing, brass, wrought iron, etc.) and/or architectural details
shall be allowed provided the cumulative area of such materials does not
exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total square footage of the wall onto
which it is affixed. These provisions shall not apply to roof surfaces.



         3.   All buildings shall be clad in one (1) or more of
the following: brick, brick veneer, ornamental split-faced concrete block,
stucco (synthetic or natural), painted wood siding, stone or simulated
stone/marble. Other materials specifically disallowed as primary siding
materials include, but are not limited to: aluminum siding, unfinished wood,
concrete block (except split-faced block or similar decorative concrete
masonry unit [CMU]). Vinyl siding, while not specifically prohibited as a
primary siding material, is strongly discouraged. Vinyl and/or aluminum may
be used to clad soffets, trim, or windows. Aggregate stone panels may be used
provided not more than thirty percent (30%) of any wall area is so covered.



         4.   Any ground floor, street-facing facade of any new
building constructed within the district shall have openings (windows and/or
doors) equaling or exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the total square footage
of the ground floor façade wall. For purposes of the design standards
herein, the ground floor of a building shall be defined as the area between
the street level floor and the ceiling. For new and existing buildings, no
openings on any portion of a wall oriented toward a public street shall be
covered or blocked with any material so as to render the opening functionally
obsolete or to cause it to be opaque. Furthermore, no security bars, panels,
or curtains, whether retractable or permanent, shall be constructed, erected,
or utilized on the exterior portion of any building wall oriented toward a
public street. Such devices, if utilized, shall be installed on the interior
of the building, (behind windows for example).



         5.   The height of any new building or any building,
whose height is proposed to be altered, shall not deviate by more than three
(3) stories (floors) from the average number of stories of all buildings
within the same block, on both sides of the street. For purposes of this
paragraph, a block shall be defined as all buildings fronting either side of
a single street, for the entire length of said street that is between the
nearest intersecting roads. This requirement shall be waived for a building
situated in a block containing four (4) or fewer existing buildings.



         6.   Awnings and hanging signs shall be allowed to
protrude a maximum of five (5) feet from the building face over a public
sidewalk, provided that the bottom edge of the awning or sign leaves at least
eight (8) feet of vertical clearance from the sidewalk; and provided that the
awning or sign comes no closer than two (2)  feet to the street pavement.
Entryway canopies shall not be subject to the five (5)-foot limit described
herein; but all other rules shall apply.



         7.   Any above-grade parking structures must have a
retail or service component on the ground floor, for the entire length of the
facade abutting or within twenty (20) feet of any public street(s) except
where ingress and egress drives are provided. The façade treatments for the
retail component(s) shall be subject to the same design requirements detailed
herein.



         8.   Automobile fueling stations shall be required to
site the main building as described below, and such building shall be
required to adhere to the same design criteria specified herein. Any canopy
used to cover the gasoline pumps may be sited within the front, side, or rear
yard, provided that a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from all property
lines shall be observed. Support columns for canopies must be clad in brick
or stucco. The design of canopies must be reviewed and approved by the
Administrator on a case-by-case basis. The Administrator will require design
criteria for canopies that meet the requirements TD Zoning District and be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of the TD Zoning District.



         9.   Buildings shall be required to maintain a
functional public entrance on one (1) or more public streets with a public
sidewalk. A public or private parking lot shall not be construed to be a
public street for purposes of this section.



      D.   Building Appearance Standards, Voluntary



The following standards are not required to be met, but are highly suggested
to be followed:



         1.   All windows should be framed with wood, or finished
metal. Windows with true-divided panes are encouraged, however, if snap-in
mullions are used, they should be attached to the outside of the glass in
order to provide a shadow line. Internal mullions and vinyl-clad windows
should be avoided.



         2.   Entry doors along public streets should be
constructed of and framed with wood, or finished metal. Such doors should
have glass panes to allow light and visibility. Unfinished metal frames
should be avoided. Metal security doors are acceptable for entrances not
readily visible from a street.



         3.   Awnings should be canvass. Mansard style wood
awnings, awnings with roof shingles, and all metal awnings should be avoided,
with the exception of copper- or bronze-clad awnings.



         4.   Façade materials and architectural detailing
should be similar to those available and typically used prior to 1940, and
taking into consideration the dominant architectural themes of the block in
which the building is situated.



         5.   Roof materials should not be of the type that
harshly reflects sunlight, causing glare.



         6.   The floors of multi-story buildings should be
articulated on the façade with a horizontal band of contrasting material or
architectural detail.



         7.   Window openings should be framed with wood or brick
sills, and an exposed header, head molding or lintel course of masonry.



         8.   Quoins are encouraged to frame building edges.



         9.   Bricks and stone materials used in the construction
of buildings should be of an appearance or type commonly used in the pre-1940
period.



         10.   Single buildings housing three (3) or more ground
floor retail, service, and/or office establishments should utilize distinctly
different, yet complimentary façade treatments for each business to avoid
large-scale uniformity of design.



         11.   Window tinting on ground floor windows should not
be excessive. Pedestrians should be able to see into a building from the
sidewalk in front of the building. Darker tinting may be used on upper floor
windows.



         12.   All building entrances fronting a public street
shall be articulated (recessed or protruding) from the main façade line not
less than three (3) feet. The façade line shall not be construed to include
awnings or canopies attached to the building face.



      E.   Site considerations



         1.   New buildings may sit back from a public street
right-of-way not less than ten (10) feet and not more than twenty (20) feet.
Buildings existing at the time of passage of this zoning district may be
enlarged to within ten (10) feet of a public street right-of-way. Any
addition to such buildings shall not, however, be subject to the twenty
(20)-foot maximum setback; therefore, compliance with the maximum setback is
voluntary in such cases. All other yard requirements shall be as set forth in
the underlying zoning district.



         2.   All parking shall be provided in the side and rear
yards behind the front building line; except that any on street parking
adjacent to (and on the same side of the street as) the building may count
toward fulfilling the parking requirements.



         3.   Fences shall consist of one (1) or more of the
following designs:



            a.   Picket fence, constructed with either wood or
vinyl pickets.



            b.   Wrought-iron fences, or brushed aluminum or
anodized aluminum fences that mimic the style and appearance of wrought iron.



            c.   Brick, stone, stucco (decorative CMU can be
used as an accent material).



            d.   Solid wood panel or similar fences not closer
than fifty (50) feet to a public street right-of-way. Any portion of such
fence that is shielded from view from all adjoining streets by a building
wall may be exempted from the fifty (50)-foot requirement.



            e.   Vinyl-coated chain link fences not
exceeding  six (6) feet in height, and not closer than seventy-five (75)
feet to a public street right-of-way. Any portion of such fence that is
shielded from view from all adjoining streets by a building wall may be
exempted from the seventy (70)-foot requirement.



            f.   Any combination of the above not exceeding
six (6) feet in height.



            g.   Picket or wrought-iron fences, as described
above, may be placed up to the property line if their height does not exceed
four (4) feet. Brick, stone or stucco fences, as described above, may be
placed up to the property line if their height does not exceed three (3)
feet. All other allowed fence types, as described above, may not be placed up
to the property line and must be set at least ten (10) feet from any public
street right-of-way (or more if so required).



      F.   Alternative Designs



         1.   The Administrator may approve certain alternate
designs to those that are herein required where, in his opinion, such
deviations may not meet the strict requirements of the TD Zoning District,
but clearly satisfy its purpose and intent. No request for alternate design
shall be considered unless an application has been filed with the
Administrator. The Administrator may approve such alternate design only upon
making each of the following findings in the affirmative:



            a.   The proposed design substantially meets the
requirements of the TD Zoning District.



            b.   The proposed design is in harmony with the
general purpose and intent of the TD District and preserves its spirit.



            c.   The public interest will be served at least
equally by allowing the alternate design as opposed to not allowing such
alternate design.



            d.   The granting of the alternate design will not
endanger the public health or safety if approved; and, that it will not
substantially injure the value of adjoining properties or other properties
within the central business district.



            e.   The applicant has submitted reasons
justifying the need for the alternate design and that such need results from
the strict application of this section. Such reasons can include building
codes, or other law, as opposed to reasons not resulting from the Ordinance
or law such as personal hardship, economic hardship, or violation of this
section.



         2.   Upon making all such findings in the affirmative
the Administrator shall send notice that, unless an appeal to the Board of
Adjustment is filed, the alternate design will take effect within fifteen
(15) days of said notice. Said notice shall be sent, by hand delivery or
first class mail, to all adjoining property owners, the City Manager, and any
other persons who have filed with the City, a request to



be notified of any alternated designs approved under this section. If the
Director of Planning fails to find all five (5) findings in the affirmative,
the Director shall send notice along with reason(s) for denial by
hand-delivery or certified mail to the applicant. The notice shall state that
the applicant shall have up to thirty (30) days from the date the notice is
received to file an appeal to the Planning Commission.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010; Res. passed 4-14-2014)



7.9.3   FH- Flood Hazard Overlay District



      A.   Statutory Authorization; Findings



         1.   Statutory Authorization



            a.   The Legislature of the State of North
Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of
Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North
Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local governmental the responsibility
units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry.



         2.   Findings



The floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of Bessemer City are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.  These flood losses are caused by the
cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood
heights and velocities and by the occupancy in floodprone areas of uses
vulnerable to floods or other hazards.



      B.   Definitions



The following are definitions of terms that are found in Section 7.9.3
herein.  The application of such terms shall be limited to Section 7.9.3. 
If there is a conflict between a term defined herein and a term also defined
in Section 2.7, for purposes of Section 7.9.3, the definition found herein
shall apply.



         1.   Accessory Structure (Appurtenant Structure).  A
structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure
and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.



         2.   Addition (to an existing building).  An extension
or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure.



         3.   Appeal.  A request for a review of the
Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance.



         4.   Area of Shallow Flooding.  A designated Zone AO on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths
determined to be from one (1) to three (3) feet.  These areas are located
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.



         5.   Area of Special Flood Hazard.  See "Special Flood
Hazard Area (SFHA)"



         6.   Basement.  Any area of the building having its
floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.



         7.   Base Flood.  The flood having a one percent (1%)
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.



         8.   Base Flood Elevation (BFE).  A determination of
the water surface elevations of the base flood as published in the Flood
Insurance Study. When the BFE has not been provided in a "Special Flood
Hazard Area", it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a
Federal or State or other source using FEMA approved engineering
methodologies.  This elevation, when combined with the "Freeboard",
establishes the "Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation".



         9.   Building.  See "Structure"



         10.   Chemical Storage Facility.  A building, portion
of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage
of any chemical or chemically reactive products.



         11.   Development.  Any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.



         12.   Disposal.  As defined in NCGS 130A-290(a)(6), the
discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any
solid waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any
constituent part of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted
into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters.



         13.   Elevated Building.  A non-basement building that
has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.



         14.   Encroachment.  The advance or infringement of
uses, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



         15.   Existing Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured
Home Subdivision.  A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the original effective date of
the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.



         16.   Flood or Flooding.  A general and temporary
condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from
(1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or (2) the unusual and rapid
accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.



         17.   Flood Insurance.  The insurance coverage provided
under the National Flood Insurance Program.



         18.   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).  An official map
of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which
both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community are delineated.



         19.   Flood Insurance Study (FIS).  An examination,
evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface
elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in
a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The Flood
Insurance Study report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published.



         20.   Floodprone Area.  See "Floodplain"



         21.   Floodplain.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source.



         22.   Floodplain Development Permit.  Any type of
permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
prior to the commencement of any development activity.



         23.   Floodplain Management.  The operation of an
overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood
damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the
floodplain, including, but



not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.



         24.   Floodplain Management Regulations.  This
Ordinance and other zoning ordinances, regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police
power that control development in flood-prone areas.  This term describes
Federal, State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



         25.   Floodproofing.  Any combination of structural and
nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce
or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitation facilities, structures, and their contents.



         26.   Floodway.  The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot.



         27.   Flood Zone.  A geographical area shown on a Flood
Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or
type of flooding in the area.



         28.   Freeboard.  The height added to the Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) to account for the many unknown factors that could contribute
to flood heights greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization on the watershed.  The Base Flood
Elevation plus the freeboard establishes the "Regulatory Flood Protection
Elevation".



         29.   Functionally Dependent Facility.  A facility
which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close
proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. 
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.



         30.   Hazardous Waste Facility.  As defined in NCGS
130A, Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing,
treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.



         31.   Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG).  The highest
natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, immediately
next to the proposed walls of the structure.



         32.   Historic Structure.  Any structure that is:



            a.   Listed individually in the National Register
of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



            b.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



            c.   Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic landmarks in communities with a "Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program"; or



            d.   Certified as contributing to the historical
significance of a historic district designated by a community with a
"Certified Local Government (CLG) Program."  Certified Local Government
(CLG) Programs are approved by the US Department of the Interior in
cooperation with the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources through
the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the requirements of the
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in 1980.



         33.   Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG).  The elevation of
the ground, sidewalk or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck
support, after completion of the building.



         34.   Lowest Floor.  The lowest floor of the lowest
enclosed area (including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design
requirements of this Ordinance.



         35.   Manufactured Home.  A structure, transportable in
one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities.  The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle".



         36.   Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision.  A parcel
(or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.



         37.   Market Value.  The building value, not including
the land value and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on
the lot.  Market value may be established by independent certified
appraisal; replacement cost depreciated



for age of building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.



         38.   Mean Sea Level.  The National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)
as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which Base Flood
Elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced.  Refer to each FIRM panel
to determine datum used.



         39.   New Construction.  Structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the
original version of the community's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.



         40.   Non-Encroachment Area.  The channel of a river or
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one (1) foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study
report.



         41.   Post-FIRM.  Construction or other development for
which the "start of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of
the initial Flood Insurance Rate Map for the area.



         42.   Pre-FIRM.  Construction or other development for
which the "start of construction" occurred before the effective date of the
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map for the area.



         43.   Principally Above Ground.  At least fifty-one
percent (51%) of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground.



         44.   Public Safety and/or Nuisance.  Anything which is
injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or
any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay,
stream, canal, or basin.



         45.   Recreational Vehicle (RV).  A vehicle, which is:



            a.   Built on a single chassis;



            b.   Four-hundred (400) square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection;



            c.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and



            d.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.



         46.   Reference Level.  The top of the lowest floor for
structures within Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE,
A, A99 or AO.



         47.   Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.  In
"Special Flood Hazard Areas" where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) have been
determined, this elevation shall be the BFE.  In "Special Flood Hazard
Areas" where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least
four (4) feet above the highest adjacent grade.



         48.   Remedy a Violation.  To bring the structure or
other development into compliance with State and community floodplain
management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of
its noncompliance.  Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the
structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the
enforcement provisions of the Ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar
violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the
structure or other development.



         49.   Riverine.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling
a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.



         50.   Salvage Yard.  Any non-residential property used
for the storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and
including but not limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.



         51.   Solid Waste Disposal Facility.  As defined in
NCGS 130A-290(a)(35), any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste. 



         52.   Solid Waste Disposal Site.  As defined in NCGS
130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by
incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.



         53.   Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).  The land in
the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of being
flooded in any given year.



         54.   Start of Construction.  Substantial improvement,
and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement,
or other improvement was within one-hundred eighty (180) days of the permit
date.  The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation.  Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.  For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



         55.   Structure.  A walled and roofed building, a
manufactured home, or a gas, liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is
principally above ground. 



         56.   Substantial Damage.  Damage of any origin
sustained by a structure during any one (1)-year period whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.  See definition of "substantial improvement".  Substantial damage
also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two (2) separate
occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred. 



         57.   Substantial Improvement.  Any combination of
repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, taking place during any one (1)-year period for which the cost
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement.  This term includes
structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual
repair work performed.  The term does not, however, include either:



            a.   Any correction of existing violations of
State or community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or,



            b.   Any alteration of a historic structure,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.



         58.   Violation.  The failure of a structure or other
development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations.  A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other



evidence of compliance required in Subsection D herein is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



         59.   Water Surface Elevation (WSE).  The height, in
relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies
in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.



         60.   Watercourse.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash,
channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least
periodically.  Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which
substantial flood damage may occur.



      C.   General Provisions



         1.   Lands To Which This Zoning District Applies



            This Ordinance shall apply to all Special Flood
Hazard Areas within the jurisdiction, including Extra-Territorial
Jurisdictions (ETJs) if applicable, of the City.



         2.   Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard
Areas



            The Special Flood Hazard Areas are those identified
under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of
North Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for Gaston County dated 
(enter date), that are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
Ordinance.



         3.   Establishment of a Floodplain Development Permit



            A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required in
conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance prior to the commencement
of any development activities within any Special Flood Hazard Area.  A
zoning permit, issued in accordance with Section 5.3 may be issued in lieu of
a Floodplain Development Permit, provided all information as contained in
this Section is given to the Administrator in order to show that the proposed
development, as called for in the permit, is in accordance with all
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.



         4.   Compliance



            No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance
with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations.



         5.   Abrogation and Greater Restrictions



            The provisions of this zoning district are not
intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions.  However, where the regulations contained herein and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



         6.   Interpretation



            In the interpretation and application of these
regulations, all provisions shall be:



            a.   Considered as minimum requirements;



            b.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing
body; and



            c.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other
powers granted under State statutes.



         7.   Warning and Disclaimer of Liability



The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration.  Larger floods can and will occur.  Actual flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This Ordinance does not imply
that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This Ordinance
shall not create liability on the part of Bessemer City or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



      D.   Administration



         1.   Floodplain Development Application, Permit and
Certification Requirements



            a.   Application Requirements



Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be made to the
Administrator prior to any development activities located within Special
Flood Hazard Areas.  A plot plan drawn to scale shall be presented to the
Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit.  The plot plan
shall include, but shall not be limited to all of the information required
for submittal of a zoning permit per Section 5.3, the following specific
details of the proposed floodplain development:



               i.   The nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed
structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage
areas, drainage facilities, and other development;



               ii.   The boundary of the Special Flood
Hazard Area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map, or a statement that
the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard Area as determined in
Subsection (C)(2).



               iii.   Flood zone(s) designation of the
proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as
determined in Subsection (C)(2).



               iv.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in Subsection (C)(2);



               v.   The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where
provided as set forth herein;



               vi.   The old and new location of any
watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development;



               vii.   Certification of the plot plan by a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer.



               viii.   Proposed elevation, and method
thereof, of all development within a Special Flood Hazard Area including but
not limited to:



                  •   Elevation in relation to mean
sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all
structures;



                  •   Elevation in relation to mean
sea level to which any non-residential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be
flood-proofed; and



                  •   Elevation in relation to mean
sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or
floodproofed.



               ix.   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing
Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan
that includes, but is not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance
of floodproofing measures.



               x.   A Foundation Plan, drawn to scale that
includes details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions
of this Ordinance are met.  These details include but are not limited to:



                  •   The proposed method of
elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid
backfilled foundation, open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear
walls);



                  •   Openings to facilitate
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with
Subsection (E)(2), when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A,
AO, AE, and A1-30;



                  •   Usage details of any enclosed
areas below the regulatory flood protection elevation;



                  •   Plans and/or details for the
protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;



                  •   Copies of all other Local, State
and Federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance
(Wetlands, Endangered Species, Erosion and Sedimentation Control, Riparian
Buffers, Mining, etc.);



                  •   Documentation for placement of
Recreational Vehicles and/or Temporary Structures, when applicable, to ensure
Subsection (E)(2) herein is met; and



                  •   A description of proposed
watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an
engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties
located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan)
showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.



            b.   Permit Requirements



            The Floodplain Development Permit shall include, but
not be limited to:



               i.   A description of the development to be
permitted under the floodplain development permit;



               ii.   The Special Flood Hazard Area
determination for the proposed development per available data specified in
Subsection (C)(2);



               iii.   The regulatory flood protection
elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities;



               iv.   The regulatory flood protection
elevation required for the protection of all public utilities;



               v.   All certification submittal
requirements with timelines;



               vi.   A statement that no fill material or
other development shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area
of any watercourse, as applicable; and



               vii.   The flood openings requirements, if
in Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30.



            c.   Certification Requirements



               i.   Elevation Certificates



                  •   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA
Form 81-31) is required prior to the actual start of any new construction. 
It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level.  The Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. 
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
prior to the beginning of construction.  Failure to submit the certification
or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit.



                  •   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA
Form 81-31) is required after the reference level is established.  Within
seven (7) calendar days of establishment of the reference level elevation, it
shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean
sea level.  Any work done within the seven (7) day calendar period and prior
to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.  The permit
holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed shall
correct deficiencies detected by such review.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.



                  •   A final as-built Elevation
Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after construction is completed and
prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance.  It shall be the duty
of the permit holder to submit to the Administrator a certification of final
as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all
attendant utilities. The Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted.  Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance.  In some instances, another certification may be required to
certify corrected as-built construction.  Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.



               ii.   Floodproofing Certificate



                  •   If non-residential floodproofing
is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a
Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data and an
operational plan, is required prior to the actual start of any new
construction.  It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the
reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. 
Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
The Administrator shall review the certificate data and plan.  Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval.  Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.  Failure
to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.



                  •   If a manufactured home is placed
within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than
thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation
certification is required per Subsection (E)(2).



                  •   If a watercourse is to be
altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration
or relocation; a professional engineer's certified report on the effects of
the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and
the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map
showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation
shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit.



               iii.   Certification Exemptions



               The following structures, if located within
Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in this subsection:



                  •   Recreational Vehicles meeting
requirements of Subsection (E)(2);



                  •   Temporary Structures meeting
requirements of Subsection (E)(2); and



                  •   Accessory Structures less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet meeting requirements of Subsection (E)(2).



         2.   Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator



            The Administrator shall perform, but not be limited
to, the following duties:



            a.   Review all floodplain development
applications and issue permits for all proposed development within Special
Flood Hazard Areas to assure that the requirements of this Ordinance have
been satisfied.



            b.   Advise permittee that additional Federal or
State permits (Wetlands, Endangered Species, Erosion and Sedimentation
Control, Riparian Buffers, Mining, etc.) may be required, and require that
copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the floodplain
development permit.



            c.   Notify adjacent communities and the North
Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency
Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



            d.   Assure that maintenance is provided within
the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the
flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.



            e.   Prevent encroachments into floodways and
non-encroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction
provisions of Subsection H herein are met.



            f.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant
utilities of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with
Subsection (D)(1)(c).



            g.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and
utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with Subsection (D)(1)(c).



            h.   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with Subsection (D)(1)(c).



            i.   When floodproofing is utilized for a
particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional
engineer or architect in accordance with Subsections (D)(1)(c) and (E)(2).



            j.   Where interpretation is needed as to the
exact location of boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions), make the necessary interpretation.  The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation to the Board of Adjustment per Section 5.13.



            k.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not
been provided in accordance with Subsection (C)(2) herein, obtain, review,
and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data, along with
floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a Federal, State,
or other source, including data developed pursuant to Subsection F herein, in
order to administer the provisions of this Ordinance.



            l.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is
provided but no floodway nor non-encroachment area data has been provided in
accordance with Subsection (C)(2) herein, obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
Federal, State, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this
Ordinance.



            m.   When the lowest ground elevation of a parcel
or structure in a Special Flood Hazard Area is above the Base Flood
Elevation, advise the property owner of the option to apply for a Letter of
Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA.  Maintain a copy of the Letter of Map
Amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.



            n.   Permanently maintain all records that pertain
to the administration of this Ordinance and make these records available for
public inspection.



            o.   Make on-site inspections of work in
progress.  As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit
progresses, the Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as
may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the
provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit.  In
exercising this power, the Administrator has a right, upon presentation of
proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



            p.   Issue stop-work orders as required. 
Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed,
altered, or repaired in violation of this Ordinance, the Administrator may
order the work to be immediately stopped.  The stop-work order shall be in
writing and directed to the person doing the work.  The stop-work order
shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the
stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. 
Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.



            q.   Revoke floodplain development permits as
required.  The Administrator may revoke and require the return of the
floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing
stating the reason(s) for the revocation.  Permits shall be revoked for any
substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or
specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of
State or Local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in
securing the permit.  Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in
violation of an applicable State or Local law may also be revoked.



            r.   Make periodic inspections throughout all
special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community.  The
Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



            s.   Follow through with corrective procedures of
Subsection (D)(3).



            t.   Review, provide input, and make
recommendations for special exception requests.



            u.   Maintain a current map repository to include,
but not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and
studies adopted in accordance with Subsection (C)(2) herein of this
Ordinance, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change,
issued by FEMA.  Notify State and FEMA of mapping needs.



            v.   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and
FIRMs, including Letters of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) and Letters
of Map Revision (LOMR).



         3.   Corrective Procedures



            a.   Violations to be Corrected



               When the Administrator finds violations of this
Ordinance, it shall be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the
building of the violation.  The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy
each of the violations of law cited in such notification.  With respect to
alleged violations of this Ordinance as applicable to the FH Flood Hazard
Overlay District, the Administrator shall follow the corrective procedures
shown herein as opposed to those found in Article 15, except where noted.



            b.   Actions in Event of Failure to Take
Corrective Action



               If the owner of a building or property shall
fail to take prompt corrective action, the Administrator shall give the owner
written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known
address or by personal service, stating:



               i.   That the building or property is in
violation of the provisions of the FH Flood Hazard Overlay District;



               ii.   That a hearing will be held before the
Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten (10) days
after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be
heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence
pertaining to the matter; and,



               iii.   That following the hearing, the
Administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building;
or to remove fill as appears appropriate.



            c.   Order to Take Corrective Action



               If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice
prescribed above, the Administrator shall find that the building or
development is in violation of the provisions of the FH Flood Hazard Overlay
District, he shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the
owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than
sixty (60) calendar days, nor more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar
days.  Where the Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life
or other property, they may order that corrective action be taken in such
lesser period as may be feasible.



         4.   Special Exceptions



            The Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to
grant a special exception to the terms of the FH Flood Hazard Overlay
District in accordance with Section 5.12 of this Ordinance.  Special
exceptions may be granted for:



            a.   The repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure and that the special exception is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.



            b.   Functionally dependant facilities if
determined to meet the definition as stated in Subsection B herein, provided
that the findings of fact for such special exceptions as indicated in Section
5.12 have been met and provided that such facilities are protected by methods
that minimize flood damages.



            c.   The allowance of any other type of
development that would otherwise violate one (1) or more sections of the FH
Flood Hazard Overlay District.



            d.   In passing upon a request for a special
exception, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations,
all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this
Ordinance, and:



               i.   The danger that materials may be swept
onto other lands to the injury of others;



               ii.   The danger to life and property due to
flooding or erosion damage;



               iii.   The susceptibility of the proposed
facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on
the individual owner;



               iv.   The importance of the services
provided by the proposed facility to the community;



               v.   The necessity to the facility of a
waterfront location as defined under Subsection B herein as a functionally
dependant facility, where applicable;



               vi.   The availability of alternative
locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



               vii.   The compatibility of the proposed use
with existing and anticipated development;



               viii.   The relationship of the proposed use
to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



               ix.   The safety of access to the property
in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; and



               x.   The expected heights, velocity,
duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, as well as the costs of providing
governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance
and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems, and streets and bridges are expected at the site.



            e.   A written report addressing each of the above
factors shall be submitted with the application for a special exception.



            f.   Any applicant to whom a special exception is
granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be
built and that such construction below the Base Flood Elevation increases
risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a special exception to
construct a structure below the Base Flood Elevation will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per one
hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage.  Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all special exception actions, including
justification for their issuance.



            g.   The Administrator shall maintain the records
of all special exception actions and report any special exceptions granted by
the Board of Adjustment to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the
State of North Carolina upon request.



      E.   Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



         1.   General Standards



            In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following
provisions are required:



            a.   All new construction and substantial
improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure.



            b.   All new construction and substantial
improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage.



            c.   All new construction and substantial
improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damages.



            d.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing,
air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.  These include, but are not
limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, appliances
(washers, dryers, refrigerators, freezers, etc.), hot water heaters, and
electric outlets/switches.



            e.   All new and replacement water supply systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the system.



            f.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.



            g.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.



            h.   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as
contained in this Ordinance.



            i.   Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the
repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on
the effective date of this Ordinance and located totally or partially within
the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and



   provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of
the other requirements of this Ordinance.



            j.   New solid waste disposal facilities and
sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical
storage facilities shall not be permitted, except by special exception as
specified in Subsection (D)(4).  A structure or tank for chemical or fuel
storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment
plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood
Hazard Area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed
to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified according
to Subsection (D)(1)(c).



            k.   All subdivision proposals and other
development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.



            l.   All subdivision proposals and other
development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.



            m.   All subdivision proposals and other
development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.



            n.   All subdivision proposals and other
development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those
governmental agencies for which approval is required by Federal or State law,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments
of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



         2.   Specific Standards



            In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in Subsection (C)(2) or
Subsection (D)(2), the following provisions, in addition to Subsection (E)(1)
are required:



            a.   Residential Construction



               New construction and substantial improvement of
any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in Subsection B herein.



            b.   Non-Residential Construction



               New construction and substantial improvement of
any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in Subsection B herein.  Structures
located in A, AE and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed to the regulatory flood
protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the
regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of
buoyancy.  For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance
with Subsection I herein.  A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.  Such
certification shall be provided to the Administrator as set forth in
Subsection (D)(1)(c), along with the operational and maintenance plans.



            c.   Manufactured Homes



               i.   New or replacement manufactured homes
shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no
lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in
Subsection B herein.



               ii.   Manufactured homes shall be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement, either by engineer certification, or in accordance with
the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to NCGS
143-143.15.  Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation
of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the grade at the site,
the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered
foundation.  When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36)
inches in height, an engineering certification is required. 



               iii.   All enclosures or skirting below the
lowest floor shall meet the requirements as stated herein.



               iv.   An evacuation plan must be developed
for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or
substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within
floodprone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the
Administrator and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.



            d.   Elevated Buildings



               Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:



               i.   Shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access,
or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator).  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished
or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



               ii.   Shall be constructed entirely of flood
resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation;



               iii.   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE,
and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  To meet this
requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer
or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria;



                  •   A minimum of two (2) flood
openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



                  •   The total net area of all flood
openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;



                  •   If a building has more than one
(1) enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow
floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;



                  •   The bottom of all required flood
openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade;



                  •   Flood openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit
the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



                  •   Enclosures made of flexible
skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and,
therefore, do not require flood openings.  Masonry or wood underpinning,
regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires
flood openings as outlined above.



            e.   Additions/Improvements.



               i.   Additions and/or improvements to
pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with
any interior modifications to the existing structure are:



                  •   Not a substantial improvement,
the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages
and must not be any more non-conforming than the existing structure.



                  •   A substantial improvement, both
the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with
the standards for new construction.



               ii.   Additions to post-FIRM structures with
no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the
common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for
new construction.



               iii.   Additions and/or improvements to
post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination
with any interior modifications to the existing structure are:



                  •   Not a substantial improvement,
the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new
construction.



                  •   A substantial improvement, both
the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with
the standards for new construction.



               iv.   Where an independent perimeter
load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building,
the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and only the addition
must comply with the standards for new construction. 



            f.   Recreational Vehicles



               Recreational vehicles shall either:



               i.   Be on site for fewer than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use
(a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or



               ii.   Meet all the requirements for new
construction.



            g.   Temporary Non-Residential Structures



               i.   Prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to
the Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of
a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning notification.  The
following information shall be submitted in writing to the Administrator for
review and written approval;



                  •   A specified time period for
which the temporary use will be permitted.  Time specified may not exceed
three (3)  months, renewable up to one (1) year;



                  •   The name, address, and phone
number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary
structure;



                  •   The time frame prior to the
event at which a structure will be removed [i.e., minimum of seventy-two (72)
hours before landfall of a hurricane or immediately upon flood warning
notification];



                  •   A copy of the contract or other
suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the
structure; and



                  •   Designation, accompanied by
documentation, of a location outside the Special Flood Hazard Area, to which
the temporary structure will be moved.



            h.   Accessory Structures



               When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the
following criteria shall be met:



               i.   Accessory structures shall not be used
for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or
restroom areas);



               ii.   Accessory structures shall not be
temperature-controlled;



               iii.   Accessory structures shall be
designed to have low flood damage potential;



               iv.   Accessory structures shall be
constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;



               v.   Accessory structures shall be firmly
anchored in accordance with Subsection (E)(1);



               vi.   All service facilities such as
electrical shall be installed in accordance with Subsection (E)(1); and



                  •   Flood openings to facilitate
automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below
regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance with Subsection (E)(2).



                  •   An accessory structure with a
footprint of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet that satisfies the
criteria outlined above shall not require an elevation or floodproofing
certificate.  Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all
other accessory structures in accordance with Subsection (D)(1)(c).



      F.   Standards for Floodplains Without Established Flood
Elevations



         Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as
Approximate Zone A and established in Subsection (C)(2) where no Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in
addition to others herein cited shall apply:



         1.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a
distance of twenty (20) feet each side from top of bank or five (5) times the
width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with
supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



         2.   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be determined based on one (1) of the following
criteria set in priority order:



            a.   If Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is
available from other sources, all new construction and substantial
improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable
provisions of this Ordinance and shall be elevated or floodproofed in
accordance with standards in Subsection (E)(2).



            b.   All subdivision, manufactured home park and
other development proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if
development is greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50)
lots/manufactured home sites.  Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be
adopted by reference per Subsection (C)(2) to be utilized in implementing
this Ordinance.



            c.   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not
available from a Federal, State, or other source as outlined above, the
reference level shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation, as defined in Subsection B herein.



      G.   Standards for Riverine Floodplains With BFE But Without
Established Floodways or Non-Encroachment Areas.



         Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided but
neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are identified for a Special
Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following
requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:



         1.   Standards outlined in Subsections E(1) and E(2); and



         2.   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment
area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless
certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one (1) foot at any point within the community.



      H.   Floodways and Non-Encroachment Areas



         1.   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment
areas are located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in
Subsection (C)(2) herein.  The floodways and non-encroachment areas are
extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have
erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles.  The following
provisions, in addition to other standards outlined herein, shall apply to
all development within such areas:



            a.   No encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be
permitted unless it has been demonstrated that:



            b.   The proposed encroachment would not result in
any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood,
based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Administrator prior to
issuance of floodplain development permit, or



            c.   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)
has been approved by FEMA.  A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be
obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment.



         2.   If all requirements of Subsection H herein are
satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this Ordinance.



         3.   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except
replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, provided the following provisions are met:



            a.   The anchoring and the elevation standards of
Subsection (E)(2); and



            b.   The "no encroachment standard" of Subsection
H herein.



      I.   Standards For Areas of Shallow Flooding (Zone AO)



         Located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established
in Subsection (C)(2) herein, are areas designated as shallow flooding
areas.  These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood
depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not
exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate.  In
addition to Subsection (E)(1), all new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the following requirements:



         1.   The reference level shall be elevated at least as
high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in
feet, plus a freeboard of two (2) feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or
at least two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade plus a freeboard of
four (4) feet if no depth number is specified.



         2.   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of
elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in Subsection (H)(1)
so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.  Certification is required as per Subsection (D)(1)(c) and (E)(2)
herein.



         3.   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



7.9.4   Water Supply Watershed Overlay District



      A.   Authority and Enactment



         The City of Bessemer City hereby exercises its authority,
pursuant to Chapter 160A, Article 8, Section 171 of the North Carolina
General Statutes. 



      B.   Jurisdiction



         The provisions of the WS District shall apply within the
areas designated as a Public Water Supply Watershed by the N.C. Environmental
Management Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission") and shall
be defined and established on the Zoning Map. 



(NOTE: Following provisions set forth in NCGS 143-214.5(d), the
municipalities of Bessemer City, Cherryville, Dallas, Kings Mountain, High
Shoals, Ranlo, and Stanley (hereinafter known collectively as
"Municipalities") and Gaston County have entered into an agreements for the
County to enforce the provisions of the WS Overlay District within the
corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of each municipal unit. 
Responsibilities for each participant are set forth in adopted inter-local
agreements.)



      C.   Exceptions to Applicability



         1.   Nothing contained herein shall repeal, modify, or
amend any Federal or State law or regulation, or any ordinance or regulation
pertaining thereto, except any ordinance which these regulations specifically
replace; nor shall any provision of this Ordinance amend, modify, or restrict
any provisions of the County or Municipalities Code of Ordinances; however,
the adoption of this Ordinance shall and does amend any and all ordinances,
resolutions, and regulations in effect in the City at the time of the
adoption of this Ordinance that may be construed to impair or reduce the
effectiveness of this Ordinance or to conflict with any of its provisions.



         2.   It is not intended that these regulations interfere
with any easement, covenants or other agreements between parties.  However,
if the provisions of these regulations impose greater restrictions or higher
standards for the use of a building or land, then the provisions of these
regulations shall control.



         3.   Existing development, as herein defined, is not
subject to the requirements of the regulations of the WS District. 
Expansions to structures classified as existing development must meet the
requirements of the WS District; however, the built-upon area of the existing
development is not required to be included in the density calculations.



         4.   If a nonconforming lot of record is not contiguous
to any other lot owned by the same party, then that lot of record shall not
be subject to the development restrictions of the WS District, if it is
developed for single-family residential purposes.  Any lot or parcel created
as part of any other type of subdivision, that is exempt from the subdivision
regulations of this Ordinance, shall be subject to the land use requirements
(including impervious surface requirements) of this Ordinance, except that
such a lot or parcel must meet the minimum buffer requirements to the maximum
extent practicable.



      D.   Reserved



      E.   Repeal of Existing Watershed Ordinance



         The provisions of the WS District in part carries forward
by re-enactment, some of the Water Supply Watershed Ordinance of Gaston
County, adopted in December 1993 and it is not the intention to repeal but
rather to re-enact and continue in force such existing provisions so that all
rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are preserved and may be
enforced.  All provisions of said Watershed Ordinance that are not
re-enacted herein are hereby repealed.  All suits at law or in equity and/or
all prosecutions resulting from the violation of any ordinance provisions
heretofore in effect, which are now pending in any court of this State or of
the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption
of the regulations contained in the WS District, but shall be prosecuted to
their finality the same as if the regulations contained in this District had
not been adopted; and any and all violations of the existing Water Supply
Watershed Ordinance, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may
be hereafter filed and prosecuted; and nothing in these regulations shall be
so construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution
now pending and/or which may heretofore have been instituted or prosecuted.



      F.   Remedies



         1.   Persons in violation of the regulations contained
in the WS District shall be subject to penalties and violations as provided
for in Chapter 15.  In addition, the Commission may assess civil penalties
in accordance with NCGS 143-215.6(a).  Each day that the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.



         2.   If the Administrator finds that any of the
provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, the Administrator shall
notify the person responsible, in writing, of such violation, indicating the
nature of the violation, outlining corrective action to be taken to abate the
violation, and order said action be taken by a time and date certain.  The
Administrator shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land,
buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures, or of
additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done; or shall take any action authorized by this
Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.  If a ruling of the Administrator is questioned, the aggrieved
party(ies) may appeal such ruling to the Board of Adjustment in accordance
with Section 5.13 of this Ordinance.



      G.   Definitions



         The following are definitions of terms that are found in
Section 7.9.4 herein.  The application of such terms shall be limited to
Section 7.9.4.  If there is a conflict between a term defined herein and a
term also defined in Section 2.7, for purposes of Section 7.9.4, the
definition found herein shall apply.



         1.   Agricultural Use:  The use of waters for stock
watering, irrigation, and other farm purposes.



         2.   Applicant:  Any person, firm or corporation who
subdivided or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.



         3.   Best Management Practices (BMP):  A structural or
non-structural management-based practice used singularly or in combination to
reduce non-point source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water
quality protection goals. 



         4.   Buffer:  An area of natural or planted vegetation
through which stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff
does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff
and filtering of pollutants.  The buffer is measured landward from the
normal pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side
of streams or rivers.



         5.   Building:  Any structure having a roof supported
by columns or by walls, and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals or property.  The connection of two (2) buildings by means
of an open porch, breezeway, passageway, carport of other such open
structure, with or without a roof, shall not be deemed to make them one (1)
building. 



         6.   Built-upon Area:  Built-upon areas shall include
that portion of a development project that is covered by impervious or
partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel areas (e.g.,
roads, parking lots, paths), recreation facilities (e.g., tennis courts),
etc.  (Note: Wooden slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool are
considered pervious.)



         7.   Cluster Development:  Cluster development means
the grouping of buildings in order to conserve land resources and provide for
innovation in the design of the project, including minimizing stormwater
runoff impacts.  This term includes nonresidential development as well as
single-family residential and multifamily developments.  For the purpose of
this Ordinance, planned unit developments and mixed-use developments are
considered as cluster developments.



         8.   Critical Area:  The area adjacent to a water
supply intake or reservoir where risk associated with pollution is greater
than from the remaining portions of the Watershed.  The critical area is
defined as extending either one-half (1/2) mile from the normal pool
elevation of the reservoir in which the intake is located or to the ridge
line of the watershed (whichever comes first) or one-half (1/2) mile upstream
from the intake located directly in the stream or river (run-of-the river),
or the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes first).  Local
governments may extend the critical area as needed.  Major landmarks such as
highways or property lines may be used to delineate the outer boundary of the
critical area if these landmarks are immediately adjacent to the appropriate
outer boundary of the one-half (1/2) mile.



         9.   Customary Home Occupations:  Any use conducted
entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use
is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
residential purposes and does not change the character thereof.  Provided
further that no mechanical equipment is installed or used except as is
normally used for domestic or professional purposes, and that not over
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor space of any structure is used
for the occupation.  No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory
building except for the storage and service of a vehicle that is driven off
site, such as a service repair truck, delivery truck, etc.



         10.   Development:  Any land disturbing activity which
adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on
a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation
into the soil.



         11.   Dwelling Unit:  A building, or portion thereof,
providing complete and permanent living facilities for one (1) family.



         12.   Existing Development:  Those projects that are
built or those projects that at a minimum have established a vested right
under North Carolina zoning law as of the effective date of this Ordinance
based on at least one (1) of the following criteria:



            a.   Substantial expenditures of resources (time,
labor, money) based on a good faith reliance upon having received a valid
local government approval to proceed with the project, or



            b.   Having an outstanding valid building permit
as authorized by the General Statutes (NCGS 160A-385.1), or



            c.   Having an approved site specific or phased
development plan as authorized by the General Statutes (NCGS 160A-385.1).



         14.   Existing Lot (Lot of Record):  A lot which is
part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or a lot described
by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to
the adoption of this Ordinance.



         15.   Family:  One (1) or more persons occupying a
single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood
or marriage or adoption, no such family shall contain more than five (5)
persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed or living on
the premises may be on the premises without being counted as a family or
families.



         16.   Industrial Development:  Any nonresidential
development that requires an NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or
requires the use or storage of any hazardous material for the purpose of
manufacturing, assembling finishing, cleaning or developing any product or
commodity.



         17.   Landfill:  A facility for the disposal of solid
waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance with Chapter 130A Article 9
of the N.C. General Statutes.  For the purpose of this Ordinance this term
does not include composting facilities.



         18.   Lot:  A parcel of land occupied or capable of
being occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use,
together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.



         19.   Major Variance:  A variance from the minimum
statewide watershed protection rules that results in any one (1) or more of
the following:



            a.   The relaxation, by a factor greater than five
percent (5%), of any buffer, density or built-upon area requirement under the
high density option;



            b.   The relaxation, by a factor greater than ten
percent (10%), of any management requirement under the low density option; and



            c.   Any variation in the design, maintenance or
operation requirements of a wet detention pond or other approved stormwater
management system.



         20.   Minor Variance:  A variance from the minimum
statewide watershed protection rules that results in a relaxation, by a
factor of up to five percent (5%) of any buffer, density or built-upon area
requirement under the high density option; or that results in a relaxation,
by a factor of up to ten percent (10%), of any management requirement under
the low density option.



         21.   Nonconforming Lot of Record:  A lot described by
a plat or a deed that was recorded prior to the effective date of these water
supply watershed regulations (or their amendments) that does not meet the
minimum lot size or other development requirements of the statewide watershed
protection rules.



         22.   Nonresidential Development:  All development
other than residential development, agriculture and silviculture.



         23.   Plat:  A map or plan of a parcel of land which is
to be, or has been subdivided.



         24.   Protected Area:  The area adjoining and upstream
of the critical area of WS-IV watersheds.  The boundaries of the protected
area are defined as within five (5) miles of and draining to the normal pool
elevation of the reservoir or to the ridgeline of the watershed; or within
ten (10) miles upstream and draining to the intake located directly in the
stream or river or to the ridgeline of the watershed.



         25.   Residential Development:  Buildings for residence
such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes,
condominiums, townhouses, cottages, etc. and their associated outbuildings
such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos, etc. and customary home
occupations.



         26.   Residuals:  Any solid or semi-solid waste
generated from a wastewater treatment plant, water treatment plant or air
pollution control facility permitted under the authority of the Environmental
Management Commission.



         27.   Single Family Residential:  Any development
where:  1: No building contains more than one (1) dwelling unit; 2. Every
dwelling unit is on a separate lot; and, 3: Where no lot contains more than
one (1) dwelling unit.



         28.   Street (Road):  A right-of-way for vehicular
traffic that affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.



         29.   Structure:  Anything constructed or erected,
including but not limited to buildings, which requires location on the land
or attachment to something having permanent location on the land.



         30.   Subdivider:  Any person, firm or corporation who
subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.



         31.   Reserved



         32.   Reserved



         33.   Toxic Substance:  Any substance or combination of
substances (including disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon
exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or environment or indirectly by ingestion
through food chains, has the potential to cause death, disease, behavioral
abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions
(including malfunctions or suppression in reproduction or growth) or physical
deformities in such organisms or their offspring or other adverse health
effects.



         34.   Variance:  A permission to develop or use
property granted by the Board of Adjustment relaxing or waiving a water
supply watershed management requirement adopted by the Commission that is
incorporated into this Ordinance.



         35.   Water Dependent Structure:  Any structure for
which the use requires access to or proximity to or siting within surface
waters to fulfill its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boathouses, docks
and bulkheads.  Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat
supplies, parking lots and commercial boat storage areas are not water
dependent structures.



         36.   Watershed:  The entire land area contributing
surface drainage to a specific point (e.g. the water supply intake).



      H.   Subdivision Regulations



Irrespective of the subdivision regulations contained in Chapter 13, the
following provisions shall apply within any WS Water Supply Watershed
District:



         1.   No subdivision plat of land within a WS District
shall be filed or recorded by the Gaston County Register of Deeds until it
has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Likewise, the Clerk of Superior Court shall not order or direct the recording
of a plat if the recording of such plat would be in conflict with this
Ordinance.



         2.   The approval of a plat does not constitute or
effect the acceptance by the City, or the public of the dedication of any
street or other ground, easement, right-of-way, public utility line, or other
public facility shown on the plat and shall not be construed to do so.



         3.   All subdivisions of land within the City's
jurisdiction, after the effective date of this Ordinance shall require a plat
to be prepared, approved, and recorded pursuant to this Ordinance.



         4.   All proposed subdivisions shall be reviewed by the
Administrator to determine whether they lie within a WS District. 
Subdivisions that lie within a WS-IV watershed are subject to the provisions
of the WS District only when an erosion control plan is required under the
provisions of the Gaston County Soil and Erosion Control Ordinance.



         5.   Applications for subdivision approval shall be
submitted to the City in accordance with Chapter 13 of this Ordinance.  Any
subdivision plat submitted for review that lies within the boundaries of a WS
District and is subject to the WS District regulations shall be accompanied
by all applicable information as herein called for.  All applicable steps
needed for subdivision plat review and approval shall be followed as called
for in Chapter 13.



         6.   In addition to the information contained in Chapter
13, any final plat that lies in the WS District and is subject to the
provisions contained herein shall also contain the following certificate:



 


Certificate of Approval for Recording



I certify that the plat shown hereon complies with the WS District
regulations of Gaston County and is approved for recording in the Gaston
County Register of Deeds office.


____________________________

Administrator

NOTICE:  This property is located within a Water Supply Watershed -
development restrictions may apply.



 



      I.   Reserved



      J.   Reserved



      K.   Subdivision Standards and Required Improvements



In addition to the subdivision standards contained in Chapter 13, any plat
located in a WS District and subject to the regulations of said district
shall also be subject to the following regulations:



         1.   All lots shall provide adequate building space in
accordance with the development standards contained in Table 7.9.4-3.  Lots
that are smaller than the minimum required for residential lots may be
developed using built-upon area criteria in accordance with Table 7.9.4-3.



         2.   For the purpose of calculating built-upon area,
total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the
project is to be developed.



         3.   Stormwater Drainage Facilities:  The application
shall be accompanied by a description of the proposed method of providing
stormwater drainage.  The applicant shall provide a drainage system that
diverts stormwater runoff away from surface waters and incorporates best
management practices to minimize water quality impacts.



         4.   Erosion and Sedimentation Control:  The
application shall, where required, be accompanied by a written statement that
a Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan has been submitted to and approved
by Gaston County.



         5.   Roads constructed in critical areas and watershed
buffer areas.  Where possible, roads should be located outside of critical
areas and watershed buffer areas.  Roads constructed within these areas
shall be designed and constructed to minimize their impact on water quality.



      L.   Construction Procedures



         1.   No construction or installation of improvements
shall commence in a proposed subdivision until a preliminary subdivision plat
has been approved. 



         2.   No building or other permits shall be issued for
erection of a structure on any lot not on record at the time of adoption of
this Ordinance until all requirements of WS District have been met.  The
subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make
arrangements with the Administrator for adequate inspection.



      M.   Establishment of Watershed Areas



         The following water supply watershed districts are hereby
located.  Such districts may be individually depicted on the Zoning Map or
may be shown in the aggregate as being in the WS Water Supply Watershed
Overlay District.  The Administrator shall have copies of map, available for
reference by the general public, that clearly and accurately shows the
boundaries of each such district located within the planning jurisdiction of
the City.



      Long Creek WS-II-CA (Critical Area), referred to as: LCWSII-CA



      Long Creek WS-II-BW (Balance of Watershed), referred to as:
LCWSII-BW



      N.   Watershed District Regulations



The provisions listed below apply to the respective watershed districts, as
defined on the official Watershed Map.  Table 7.9.4-1 shows uses allowed in
each district.  Table 7.9.4-2 shows prohibited uses.  Table 7.9.4-3 shows
uses that minimum lot size and density and built upon requirements.



 


TABLE 7.9.4-1



ALLOWED USES IN WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED DISTRICTS




WATERSHED DISTRICT

 

ALLOWED USES




•   Long Creek WS-II CA (LCWSII-CA)



•   Long Creek WS-II BW (LCWSII-BW)



•   Indian Creek WS-II BW (ICWSII-BW)



•   Buffalo Creek BW (BCWSIII-BW)



•   Hoyles Creek WS-IV-CA (HCWSIV-CA)



•   Hoyles Creek WS-IV-PA (HCWSIV-PA)



•   Catawba River WS-IV-CA (CRWSIV-CA)



•   Catawba River WS-IV-PA (CRWSIV-PA)



•   Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-CA (MILWSIV-CA)



•   Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-PA (MILWSIV-PA)



•   South Fork River WS-IV-PA (SFRWSIV-PA)



•   South Fork River WS-IV-CA (SFRWSIV-CA)

 

•   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices
Guidelines related to Water Quality (15 NACA II.6101-.0209)




•   Long Creek WS-II CA (LCWSII-CA)



•   Long Creek WS-II BW (LCWSII-BW)



•   Indian Creek WS-II BW (ICWSII-BW)



•   Buffalo Creek BW (BCWSIII-BW)



•   Hoyles Creek WS-IV-CA (HCWSIV-CA)



•   Hoyles Creek WS-IV-PA (HCWSIV-PA)



•   Catawba River WS-IV-CA (CRWSIV-CA)



•   Catawba River WS-IV-PA (CRWSIV-PA)



•   Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-CA (MILWSIV-CA)



•   Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-PA (MILWSIV-PA)



•   South Fork River WS-IV-CA (SFRWSIV-CA)



•   South Fork River WS-IV-PA (SFRWSIV-PA)

 
•   Residential development



 



 


TABLE 7.9.4-1



ALLOWED USES IN WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED DISTRICTS (Cont'd)




WATERSHED DISTRICT

 

ALLOWED USES




•   Long Creek WS-II CA (LCWSII-CA)



•   Hoyles Creek WS-IV-CA (HCWSIV-CA)



•   Catawba River WS-IV-CA (CRWIV-CA)



•   Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-CA (MILWSIV-CA)



•   South Fork River WS-IV-CA (SFRWSIV-CA)

 

•   Non-residential development, excluding: 1. landfills and 2. sites
for land application of residuals or petroleum contaminated soils.




•   Buffalo Creek WS-III-BW (BCWSIII-BW)



•   Long Creek WS-II BW (LCWSII-BW)



•   Indian Creek WS-II BW (ICWSII-BW)

 

•   Nonresidential development, excluding:  1) discharging landfills.




•   Catawba River WS-IV-PA (CRWIV-PA)



•   Hoyles Creek WS-IV-PA (HCWSIV-PA)



•   South Fork River WS-IV-PA (SFRIV-PA)



•   Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-PA (MILWSIV-PA)

 

•   Nonresidential development




 



 


TABLE 7.9.4-2



PROHIBITED USES IN WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED DISTRICTS




WATERSHED DISTRICT

 

PROHIBITED USES




•   Long Creek WS-II CA (LCWSII-CA)



•   Hoyles Creek WS-IV-CA (HCWSIV-CA)



•   Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-CA (MILWSIV-CA)

 
•   Landfills

•   New residual applications


•   Uses Involving the storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a
spill containment plan is implemented



•   Long Creek WS-II BW (LCWSII-BW)

•   Indian Creek WS-II BW (ICWSII-BW)

•   Buffalo Creek WS-III-BW (BCWSIII-BW)
 
•   Discharging Landfills


•   Uses Involving the storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a
spill containment plan is implemented




•   Catawba River WS-IV-PA (CRWIV-PA)


•   Hoyles Creek WS-IV-PA (HCWSIV-PA)

•   South Fork River WS-IV-PA (SFRIV-PA)


•   Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-PA (MILWSIV-PA)

 

•   Uses Involving the storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a
spill containment plan is implemented



•   Catawba River WS-IV-CA (CRWIV-CA)


•   South Fork River WS-IV-CA (SFRWSIV-CA)

 
•   Landfills

•   New residual applications


•   Uses Involving the storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a
spill containment plan is implemented




 



 




TABLE 7.9.4-3



ALLOWED DENSITIES AND BUILT-UPON AREAS IN



WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED DISTRICTS




WATERSHED DISTRICT

 

MINIMUM LAND REQUIRED PER DWELLING UNIT2

 

MAXIMUM DENSITY (on a project-by- project basis)

 

MAXIMUM BUILT-UPON AREA1 (on a project-by- project basis)



Long Creek WS-II CA (LCWSII-CA)
 
Two acres (or 80,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)
 
1 Unit/ 2 Acres


Long Creek WS-II BW (LCWSII-BW)
 
One acres (or 40,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)2
 
1Units/Acre4
 
12%3


Indian Creek WS-II BW (ICWSII-BW)
 
One acres (or 40,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)2
 
1 Units/Acre4
 
12%3


Buffalo Creek WS-III-BW (BCWSIII-BW)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)2
 
2 Units/Acre4
 
24%3


Hoyles Creek WS-IV-CA (HCWSIV-CA)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)
 
2 Units/Acre4
 
24%


Hoyles Creek WS-IV-PA (HCWSIV-PA)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way) or one-third acre,
for projects without curb and gutter
 
2 Units/Acre4
 
24%, except 36% for projects without a curb and gutter system


Catawba River WS-IV-CA (CRWIV-CA)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)
 
2 Units/Acre4
 
24%


Catawba River WS-IV-PA (CRWIV-PA)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way) or one-third acre,
for projects without curb and gutter
 
2 Units/Acre
 
24%, except 36% for projects without a curb and gutter system


Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-CA (MILWSIV-CA)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)
 
2 Units/Acre4
 
24%




 



 


TABLE 7.9.4-3



ALLOWED DENSITIES AND BUILT-UPON AREAS IN



WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED DISTRICTS (Cont'd)




WATERSHED DISTRICT

 

MINIMUM LAND REQUIRED PER DWELLING UNIT2

 

MAXIMUM DENSITY (on a project-by- project basis)

 

MAXIMUM BUILT-UPON AREA1 (on a project-by- project basis)



Mountain Island Lake WS-IV-PA (MILWSIV-PA)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)
 
2 Units/Acre4
 
24%, except 36% for projects without a curb and gutter system


South Fork River WS-IV-CA (SFRWSIV-CA)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way)
 
2 Units/Acre4
 
24%


Catawba River WS-IV-PA (CRWIV-PA)
 
One-half acre (or 20,000 sf, excluding road right-of-way) or one-third acre,
for projects without curb and gutter
 
2 Units/Acre4
 
24%, except 36% for projects without a curb and gutter system









1   Total project area shall include acreage in the tract on which the
project is to be developed




2   Except for in an approved cluster subdivision.  Refer to Subsection O.



3   In addition, new development and expansions to existing development
may occupy ten percent (10%) of the balance of the watershed area with up to
seventy percent (70%) built-upon area when approved as a special intensity
allocation (SIA).  The Administrator is authorized to approve SIAs
consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.



4   Refer to Subsection AA herein for information on the High Density
Option



      O.   Cluster Development



         Cluster development is allowed in all Watershed Areas under
the following conditions:



         1.   All built-upon area shall be designed and located
to minimize stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize
concentrated stormwater flow.



         2.   The remainder of the tract shall remain in a
vegetated or natural state.  The title to the open space area shall be
conveyed to an incorporated homeowners association for management, to a local
government for preservation as a park or open space; or to a conservation
organization for preservation in a permanent easement.  Where a property
association is not incorporated, a maintenance agreement shall be filed with
the property deeds.



      P.   Buffer Areas Required



         1.   A minimum one hundred (100) foot vegetative buffer
is required for all new development activities that employ the high density
option; otherwise, a minimum thirty (30) foot vegetative buffer for
development activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on
the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic
maps or as determined by local government studies.  Desirable artificial
stream banks or shoreline stabilization is permitted.



         2.   No new development is allowed in the buffer except
for water dependent structures, other structures such as flag poles, signs
and security lights which result in only diminutive increases in impervious
area and public projects such as road crossings and greenways where no
practical alternative exists.  These activities should minimize built-upon
surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters and maximize the
utilization of stormwater Best Management Practices.



      Q.   Rules Governing the Interpretation of Watershed Area
Boundaries



         Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the WS
District boundaries, as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:



         1.   Where district boundaries are indicated as
approximately following either street, alley, railroad or highway lines or
centerlines thereof, such lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.



         2.   Where district boundaries are indicated as
approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be
said boundaries.  However, a surveyed plat prepared by a registered land
surveyor may be submitted to the City as evidence that one (1) or more
properties along these boundaries do not lie within the watershed area.



         3.   Reserved



         4.   Where the district boundaries lie at a scaled
distance more than twenty-five (25) feet from any parallel lot line, the
location of watershed area boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale
appearing on the Zoning Map.



         5.   Where the district boundaries lie at a scaled
distance of twenty-five (25) feet or less from any parallel lot line, the
location of watershed area boundaries shall be construed to be the lot line.



         6.   Where other uncertainty exists, the Administrator
shall interpret the Zoning Map as to location of said boundaries. 



      R.   Application of Regulations



         1.   No building or land shall hereafter be used and no
development shall take place except in conformity with the regulations herein
specified for the WS District in which it is located.



         2.   No area required for the purpose of complying with
the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included in the area required for
another building.



         3.   If a use or class of use is not specifically
indicated as being allowed in a WS District, such use or class of use is
prohibited.



      S.   Existing development



         1.   Existing development as defined for purposes of the
WS District may be continued and maintained subject to the provisions
provided herein.  Expansions to structures classified as existing
development must meet the requirements of the WS District, however, the
built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be included in
the built-upon area calculations.



         2.   Uses of Land:  This category consists of uses
existing at the adoption date of this Ordinance, where such use of the land
is not permitted to be established hereafter in the WS District in which it
is located.  Such uses may be continued except as follows:



            a.   When such use of land has been changed to an
allowed use, it shall not thereafter revert to any prohibited use.



            b.   Such use of land shall be changed only to an
allowed use.



            c.   When such use ceases for a period of at least
one (1) year, it shall not be reestablished.



         3.   Reconstruction of Buildings or Built-upon Areas: 
Any existing building or built-upon area, not in conformance with the
restrictions of this Ordinance, that has been damaged or removed may be
repaired and/or reconstructed, provided:



            a.   Repair or reconstruction is initiated within
twelve (12) months and completed within two (2) years of such damage.



            b.   The total amount of space devoted to
built-upon area may not be increased unless stormwater control that equal or
exceed the previous development are provided.



            c.   There are no restrictions on rebuilding or
reconstruction of single-family residential development.



      T.   Watershed Protection Permit



         1.   Except where a single family residence is
constructed on a lot of record, prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, no building or built-upon area shall be erected, moved, enlarged
or structurally altered, nor shall any building permit be issued nor shall
any change in the use of any building or land be made until a Watershed
Protection Permit has been issued by the Administrator.  No Watershed
Protection Permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of
this Ordinance.  Issuance of a Watershed Protection Permit may be done
simultaneously with issuance of a Zoning Permit, so long as the procedures
and submittal requirements of Section 5.3 (Zoning Permit) and this Section
are both met.



         2.   A complete Watershed Protection Permit application
and supporting documentation shall be filed with the Administrator.



         3.   Prior to issuance of a Watershed Protection Permit,
the Administrator may consult with qualified personnel for assistance to
determine if the application meets the requirements of this Ordinance.



         4.   A Watershed Protection Permit shall expire if the
applicant does not obtain a Building Permit or Watershed Occupancy Permit for
such use within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance.



      U.   Building Permit Required



No building permit required under the North Carolina State Building Code
shall be issued for any activity until a Watershed Protection Permit has been
issued.



      V.   Watershed Protection Occupancy Permit



         1.   The Administrator shall issue a Watershed
Protection Occupancy Permit (herein after referred to as "Occupancy Permit")
certifying that all requirements of the WS District have been met prior to
the occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered or moved and/or
prior to the change of use of any building or land.  The occupancy permit
shall also be issued in the same manner for stormwater control devices, at
completion and acceptance of the device.



         2.   If the occupancy permit is denied, the
Administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, stating the reasons for
denial.



         3.   No building or structure, which has been erected,
moved, or structurally altered, may be occupied until the Administrator has
approved and issued an Occupancy Permit.



      W.   Public Health, in General



         No activity, situation, structure or land use shall be
allowed within the watershed that poses a threat to water quality and the
public health, safety and welfare.  Such conditions may arise from
inadequate on-site sewage systems which utilize ground absorption; inadequate
sedimentation and erosion control measures; the improper storage or disposal
of junk, trash or other refuse within a buffer area; the improper management
of stormwater runoff; or any other situation found to pose a threat to water
quality.



      X.   Administrator



         1.   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to
administer and enforce the provisions of the WS District as follows:



            a.   The Administrator shall issue permits as
prescribed herein.  A record of all permits shall be kept on file and shall
be available for public inspection during regular office hours of the
Administrator.



            b.   The Administrator shall keep records of all
applicable amendments to this Ordinance (as they pertain to the WS Overlay
District) and shall provide copies of all amendments upon adoption to the
Water Quality Section of the Division of Environment Management.



            c.   The Administrator shall keep records of the
jurisdiction's use of the provision that a maximum of ten percent (10%) of
the non-critical area of WS-II- and WS-III watersheds and for local
governments that do not choose to incorporate the high density option, ten
percent (10%) of the protected area of WS-IV watersheds may be developed with
new development at a maximum of seventy percent (70%) built-upon surface
area.  Records for each watershed shall include the total acres on
non-critical watershed area, total acres eligible to be developed under this
option, total acres approved for this development option, and individual
records for each project with the following information:  location, number
of developed acres, type of land use, and stormwater management plan (if
applicable).



            d.   The Administrator is granted the authority to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, exercising in the
fulfillment of his responsibility the full police power of the City.  The
Administrator, or his duly authorized representative, may enter any building,
structure, or premises, as provided by law, to perform any duty imposed upon
him by this Ordinance.



            e.   The Administrator shall keep a record of
variances to the terms of the WS District.  This record shall be submitted
for each calendar year to the, Water Quality Section of the Division of
Environmental Management on/or before January 1st of the following year and
shall provide a description of each project receiving a variance and the
reasons for granting the variance.



            f.   The Administrator shall notify the respective
municipality of permits, occupancy permits, modifications and amendments to
these regulations, variance requests, appeals to the decision of
Administrator (as it pertains to the WS District), and other matters relating
to the enforcement and administration of this provisions of this Ordinance
relative to the WS District within their respective territory located in any
watershed.



            g.   The Administrator shall monitor land use
activities within the WS Districts to identify situations that may pose a
threat to water quality.  The Administrator may consult with any public
agency or official and request recommendations.  When the Administrator
finds a threat to water quality and the public health, safety and welfare, he
shall institute any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain, correct or
abate the condition and/or violation.



         2.   The Board of Adjustment, in accordance with Section
5.13 of this Ordinance, shall hear appeals to any decision made by the
Administrator.



      Y.   Changes and Amendments to the Watershed Protection
Ordinance



         Amendments to this Ordinance as it pertains to the WS
District shall be processed in the same manner as all other Ordinance
amendments per Chapter 14 of this Ordinance.  Under no circumstances,
however, shall the governing board adopt any such amendment that would cause
this Ordinance to violate the watershed protection rules as adopted by the
Commission.  All such amendments shall be filed with the N.C. Division of
Environmental Management, N.C. Division of Environmental Health, and the N.C.
Division of Community Assistance.



      Z.   Variances



         The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to authorize,
in specific cases, minor variances from the terms of this Ordinance as will
not be contrary to the public interests, where owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of this Ordinance will result in practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
In addition, the City shall notify and allow a reasonable comment period for
all other local governments having jurisdiction in the designated watershed
where the variance is being considered.  The process for applying for a
variance shall be as provided in Section 5.14 of this Ordinance, except as
herein provided.



         1.   Applications for a variance shall be made on the
proper form and shall include the following information:



            a.   A site plan, drawn to a scale of one (1) inch
to fifty (50) feet or larger.  The Administrator may approve for submission
site plans at smaller scales on a project-by-project basis.  The site plan
shall be neatly drawn and indicate:



               i.   The property lines of the parcel and
size of parcel;



               ii.   Any existing or proposed structures;



               iii.   Parking areas and other built-upon
areas;



               iv.   Surface water drainage;



               v.   North arrow and vicinity map;



               vi.   Name and address of person who
prepared the plan; and



               vii.   Date of the original drawing, and
accurate record of later revisions.



            b.   A complete and detailed description of the
proposed variance, with any other pertinent information to support the
applicant's position during consideration by the Board of Adjustment.



            c.   The Administrator shall give written notice
describing the variance being requested to each local government having
jurisdiction in the watershed, and the entity using the water supply for
consumption.  Such notice shall include a description of the variance being
requested.  Local governments receiving notice of the variance request may
submit comments to the Administrator prior to a decision by the Board of
Adjustment.  Such comments shall become a part of the record of proceedings
of the Board of Adjustment.



         2.   The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance, if it
has evaluated the application for a variance and determined that:



            a.   The variance is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the Ordinance and preserves its spirit.



            b.   The variance is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the Ordinance and preserves its spirit.



            c.   There are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the application of the strict letter of the
Ordinance.  In order to determine that there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships, the Board shall find that the five (5) following
conditions exist:



               i.   If the applicant complies with the
provisions of the Ordinance, he/she can secure no reasonable return from, nor
make reasonable use of his/her property.  Merely proving that the variance
would permit a greater profit to be made from the property shall not be
considered adequate to justify the Board in granting a variance.  Moreover,
the Board of Adjustment shall consider a variance that is the minimum
possible deviation from the terms of the Ordinance that will make possible
the reasonable use of his/her property.



               ii.   The hardship results from the
application of the Ordinance to the property, rather than from other factors
such as deed restrictions or other hardship.



               iii.   The hardship is due to the physical
nature of the applicant's property, such as its size, shape or topography,
which is different from that of neighboring property.



               iv.   The hardship is not the result of the
actions of an applicant who knowingly or unknowingly violates the Ordinance,
or who purchases the property after the effective date of the Ordinance, and
then comes to the Board of Adjustment for relief.



               v.   The hardship is peculiar to the
applicant's property, rather than the result of conditions that are
widespread.  If other properties are equally subject to the hardship created
in the restriction, then granting a variance would be a special privilege
denied to others, and would not promote equal justice.



            d.   In the granting of the variance, the public
safety and welfare have been assured and substantial justice has been done. 



         3.   The Board shall not grant a variance if it finds
that doing so would in any respect impair the public health, safety or
general welfare.  These findings of the Board shall be recorded in the
permanent record of the case.



         4.   In granting the variance, the Board may attach
thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features
of the proposed building, structure, or use.  If a variance for the
construction, alteration or use of property is granted, such construction,
alteration or use shall be in accordance with the approved site plan.  The
Board of Adjustment shall refuse to hear an appeal or an application for a
variance previously denied, if it finds there have been no substantial
changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the appeal or application.



         5.   A variance issued in accordance with this Section
shall be considered a watershed protection permit and shall expire if the
applicant does not obtain a building permit or watershed occupancy permit for
such use within six (6) months from the date of the decision.



         6.   Should the application request the granting of a
major variance, and if the Board of Adjustment decides in favor of granting
the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall prepare a preliminary record of
the hearing with all deliberate speed.  The preliminary record of the
hearing shall include:



            a.   The variance application;



            b.   The hearing notices;



            c.   The evidence presented;



            d.   Motions, offers of proof, objections to
evidence, and rulings on them;



            e.   Proposed findings and exceptions; and



            f.   The proposed decision, including all
conditions added to the permit.



         7.   The preliminary record shall be sent to the
Environmental Management Commission for its review as follows:



            a.   If the Commission concludes from the
preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that:



               i.   The property owner can secure no
reasonable return from, nor make any practical use of the property unless the
variance is granted; and



               ii.   The variance, if granted, will not
result in a serious threat to the water supply, then the Commission shall
approve the variance as proposed or approve the proposed variance with
conditions and stipulations. 



   The Commission shall prepare a decision and send it to the Board of
Adjustment.  If the Commission approves the variance as proposed, the Board
of Adjustment shall prepare a final decision granting the proposed
variance.  If the Commission approves the variance with conditions and
stipulations, the Board of Adjustment shall prepare a final decision
including such conditions and stipulations, granting the proposed variance.



            b.   If the Commission concludes from the
preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that:



               i.   The property owner can secure a
reasonable return from or make a practical use of the property without the
variance; or



               ii.   The variance, if granted, will result
in a serious threat to the water supply, then the Commission shall deny the
variance as proposed. 



   The Commission shall prepare a decision and send it to the Board of
Adjustment.  The Board shall prepare a final decision denying the variance
as proposed.



      AA.   High Density Option



         1.    General Provisions



            a.   When new development exceeds the
density/build-upon area, outlined in Table 7.9.4-3 for each respective
watershed, the Board of Adjustment may approve high-density development
proposals (increase in density and/or built upon area), only when engineered
stormwater controls devises are used.  Each engineered stormwater control
devise shall be designed and constructed to control runoff from the first
inch of rainfall with development shall not to exceed limits for the below
listed watershed designations:



         •   Long Creek WS-II-BW (LCWSII-BW): 30% built-upon
area



            b.   Each engineered stormwater control devise
shall be a site specific design, on a project by project basis, to meet the
requirements of this Ordinance, and shall require approval of the Board of
Adjustment and issuance of a High Density Development Permit.



         2.   Permit Application



            a.   A High Density Development Permit shall be
required for new development exceeding the requirements of the low-density
option. 



            b.   Application for a High Density Development
Permit shall be addressed and submitted to the Board of Adjustment through
the Administrator, on the appropriate form, which shall include:



               i.   A completed High Density Development
Permit Application signed by the owner of the property.  The signature of
the consulting engineer or other agent will be accepted on the application
only if accompanied by a letter of authorization;



               ii.   Two (2) reproducible copies of the
development plan within the drainage basin; application forms; and, detailed
information concerning built-upon area;



               iii.   Two (2) reproducible copies of the
plans and specifications of the stormwater control structure;



               iv.   Written verification that either an
erosion control plan is not required for the development or an erosion
control plan has been approved by the appropriate state or local agency; and



               v.   Permit application fees in accordance
with a fee schedule adopted by the governing board.



            c.   The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public
hearing in a quasi-judicial manner to consider issuance of a High Density
Development Permit.  Notice of the public hearing shall be as called for in
Section 4.5.10(B).  The public hearing shall be conducted per Section 4.5.11.



            d.   Prior to taking final action on any
application, the Board of Adjustment or the Administrator may provide an
opportunity to public agencies affected by the development proposal to review
and make recommendations on the application.  However, failure of the
agencies to submit their comments and recommendations shall not delay the
Board's action within the prescribed time limit. 



            e.   The Board of Adjustment shall either approve
or disapprove each application for a high-density development permit based on
the applicable criteria contained in this Ordinance and evidence gathered at
the public hearing.  First, consideration of a completed application shall
be at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board following its
receipt.  The Board shall take action on the application at its first
consideration or within sixty-five (65) days of its first consideration.



            f.   If the Board of Adjustment approves the
application based on its findings, such approval shall be indicated on the
permit and both copies of the site plan and both copies of the plans and
specifications of the stormwater control structure.  A high-density
development permit shall be issued after the applicant posts a performance
bond or other acceptable security as required in Subsection CC herein and
executes an Operation and Maintenance Agreement as required in Subsection
DD.  One (1) copy of the permit and one (1) copy of each set of plans shall
be kept on file at the Administrator's office.  The Administrator shall
deliver the original permit and one (1) copy of each set of plans to the
applicant.



            g.   If the Board disapproves the application
based on its findings, the reasons for such action shall be stated in the
minutes of the Board and presented to the applicant, in writing.  The
applicant may make changes and submit a revised plan.  All revisions shall
be submitted, reviewed and acted upon by the Board pursuant to the procedures
of this Section. 



            h.   The Board of Adjustment shall issue a High
Density Development Permit within sixty-five (65) days of its first
consideration upon finding that the proposal is consistent with the
applicable standards set forth herein and each of the following conditions
are met:



               i.   The use will not endanger the public
health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to the
plan as submitted and approved;



               ii.   The use minimizes impacts to water
quality through the use of Best Management Practices, clustered development
and/or maximum setbacks for perennial waters;



               iii.   The use is vital to the continued
growth and economic development of the City.  The Board shall find a
development as vital if all of the following are met:



                  •   The development when completed
and fully occupied will increase the tax base of the County City by at least
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000);



                  •   The development will create or
retains at least five (5) full-time employment positions not including those
involved with the construction and development of the use; or



                  •   The development is an expansion
or affiliate of an existing development located within the watershed and
requires a location in close proximity to the existing facility.



               iv.   Consistent with the County industrial
site survey, the industrial use cannot be located on another site outside of
the designated water supply watershed;



               v.   The use is consistent with the
officially adopted land use plan for City. 



   If the Board of Adjustment finds that any one (1) of the above
conditions is not met, the Board shall deny the application.



            i.   In addition to any other requirements
provided by this Ordinance, the Board may designate additional conditions and
requirements to assure that the use will be harmonious with the area in which
it is proposed to be located and with the spirit of this Ordinance.  All
additional conditions shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting at which
the permit is granted, on all plans and on the permit certificate.  All
conditions so imposed shall run with the land and shall be binding upon the
applicant and the applicant's heirs, successors or assigns during the
continuation of the permitted use.



            j.   The Board shall issue a written ruling and
make copies available at the office of the Administrator.



            k.   If the Board approves the application based
on its findings, such approval shall be indicated on the permit and both
copies of the site plan and both copies of the plans and specifications of
the stormwater control structure(s).  A high-density development permit
shall be issued after the applicant posts a performance bond or other
acceptable security as required in Subsection CC and executes an operation
and maintenance agreement as required in Subsection DD.  A copy of the
permit and one (1) copy of each set of plans shall be kept on file at the
Administrator's office.  The original permit and one (1) copy of each set of
plans shall be delivered to the applicant either by personal service or
registered mail, return receipt requested.



      BB.   Stormwater Control Structures



         1.   All stormwater control structures shall be designed
by a North Carolina registered professional with qualifications appropriate
for the type of system required; these registered professional are defined as
professional engineers, landscape architect, to the extent that the General
Statutes, Chapter 89A allow and land surveyors, to the extent that the design
represents incidental drainage within a subdivision, as provided in NCGS
89(C)-3(7).



         2.   All stormwater controls shall use wet detention
ponds as a primary treatment system unless alternative stormwater management
measures, as outlined herein are used.  Wet detention ponds shall be
designed for specific pollutant removal according to modeling techniques
approved by the North Carolina Division of Environmental Management. 
Specific requirements for these systems shall be in accordance with the
following design criteria:



            a.   Wet detention ponds shall be designed to
remove eighty-five percent (85%) of total suspended solids in the permanent
pool and storage runoff from a one (1)-inch rainfall from the site above the
permanent pool;



            b.   The designed runoff storage volume shall be
above the permanent pool;



            c.   The discharge rate from these systems
following the one (1)-inch rainfall design storm shall be such that the
runoff does not draw down to the permanent pool level in less than two (2)
days and that the pond is drawn down to the permanent pool level within at
least five (5) days;



            d.   The mean permanent pool depth shall be a
minimum of three (3) feet;



            e.   The inlet structure shall be designed to
minimize turbulence using baffles or other appropriate design features;



            f.   Vegetative filters shall be constructed for
the overflow and discharge of all stormwater wet detention ponds and shall be
at least thirty (30) feet in length.  The slope and width of the vegetative
filter shall be determined so as to provide a non-erosive velocity of
flow-through the filter for a ten (10) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm with
a ten (10)-year, one (1)-hour intensity with a slope of five percent (5%) or
less.  Vegetation in the filter shall be natural vegetation, grasses or
artificially planted wetland vegetation appropriate for the site
characteristics.



         3.   Alternative stormwater management systems,
consisting of one (1) treatment option or a combination of treatment options,
may be used.  The design criteria for approval shall be eight-five percent
(85%) average annual removal of Total Suspended Solids.  Also, the discharge
rate shall meet one (1) of the following criteria:



            a.   The discharge rate following the one (1)-inch
design storm shall be such that the runoff draws down to the pre-storm design
stage within five (5) days, but not less than two (2) days; or,



            b.   The post development peak discharge rate
shall equal the pre-development rate for the one (1)-year, twenty-four
(24)-hour storm.



         4.   In addition to the vegetative filters herein
required, all land areas outside of the pond shall be provided with a ground
cover sufficient to restrain erosion within thirty (30) days after land
disturbance.  Upon completion of the stormwater control structure, a
permanent ground cover shall be established and maintained as part of the
maintenance agreement described in Subsection CC.



         5.   A description of the area containing the stormwater
control structure shall be prepared and filed consistent with the
requirements as herein stated as a separate deed with the Gaston County
Register of Deeds, along with any easements necessary for general access to
the stormwater control structure.  The deeded area shall include the pond,
stormwater control structure, vegetative filters, all pipes and water control
structures, berms, dikes, etc. and sufficient area to perform inspections,
maintenance, repairs and reconstruction.



         6.   Qualifying areas of the stormwater control
structure may be considered pervious when computing total built-upon area. 
However, if the structure is used to compute the percentage built-upon area
for one (1) site, it shall not be used to compute the built-upon area for any
other site or area.



      CC.   Posting of Financial Security Required



All new stormwater control structures shall be conditioned on the posting of
adequate financial assurance for the purpose of maintenance, repairs or
reconstruction necessary for adequate performance of the stormwater control
structures.



         1.   Financial assurance shall be in the form of the
following:



            a.   Security Performance Bond or other
security:  The permit applicant shall obtain either a performance bond from
a surety bonding company authorized to do business in North Carolina; an
irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible into
cash at face value payable to the City of Bessemer City or placed in escrow
with a financial institution in the County.  The bond or other instrument
shall be in an amount equal to equal to 1.25 times the total cost of the
stormwater control structure, as estimated by the applicant and approved by
the Board of Adjustment.  The total cost of the stormwater control structure
shall include the value of all materials such as piping and other structures;
seeding and soil stabilization; design and engineering; and, grading,
excavation, fills etc.  The costs shall not be prorated as part of a larger
project, but rather under the assumption of an independent mobilization.



            b.   Cash or Equivalent Security Deposited After
the Release of the Performance Bond:  Consistent with Subsection (a) above,
the permit applicant shall deposit with the City either cash or other
instrument approved by the Board of Adjustment that is readily convertible
into cash at face value.  The cash or security shall be in an amount equal
to fifteen percent (15%) of the total cost of the stormwater control
structure or the estimated cost of maintaining the stormwater control
structure over a ten (10) year period, whichever is greater.  The estimated
cost of maintaining the stormwater control structure shall be consistent with
the approved operation and maintenance plan or manual provided by the
developer per Subsection DD.  The amount shall be computed by estimating the
maintenance cost for twenty-five (25) years and multiplying this amount by
two-fifths or 0.40.



         2.   The permit applicant shall enter into a binding
Operation and Maintenance Agreement between the City and all interests in the
development.  Said Agreement shall require the owning entity to maintain,
repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the stormwater control structure in
accordance with the operation and management plan or manual provided by the
developer.  The Administrator shall file the operation and maintenance
Agreement with the Gaston County Register of Deeds.



         3.   Default Under the Performance Bond or Other
Security:  Upon default of the permit applicant to complete and/or maintain
the stormwater control structure as spelled out in the performance bond or
other security, the City may obtain and use all or any portion of the funds
necessary to complete the improvements based on an engineering estimate. 
The City shall return any funds not spent in completing the improvements to
the owning entity.



         4.   Default Under the Cash Security:  Upon default of
the owning entity to maintain, repair and, if necessary, reconstruct the
stormwater control structure in accordance with the operation and maintenance
agreement, the City shall obtain and use all or any portion of the cash
security to make necessary improvements based on an engineering estimate. 
Such expenditure of funds shall only be made after exhausting all other
reasonable remedies seeking the owning entity to comply with the terms and
conditions of the operation and maintenance agreement.  The City shall not
return any of the deposited cash funds.



      DD.   Maintenance and Upkeep



         1.   An operation and maintenance plan or manual shall
be provided by the developer for each stormwater control structure,
indicating what operation and maintenance actions are needed, what specific
quantitative criteria will be used for determining when those actions are to
be taken and, consistent with the operation and maintenance agreement, and
who is responsible for those actions.  The plan shall clearly indicate the
steps that will be taken for restoring a stormwater control structure to
design specifications if a failure occurs.



         2.   Landscaping and grounds management shall be the
responsibility of the owning entity.  However, vegetation shall not be
established or allowed to mature to the extent that the integrity of the
control structure is diminished or threatened, or to the extent of
interfering with any easement or access to the stormwater control structure.



         3.   Except for general landscaping and grounds
management, the owning entity shall notify the Administrator prior to any
repair or reconstruction of the stormwater control structure.  All
improvements shall be made consistent with the approved plans and
specifications of the stormwater control structure and the operation and
maintenance plan or manual.  After notification by the owning entity, the
Administrator shall inspect the completed improvements and shall inform the
owning entity of any required additions, changes or modifications and of the
time period to complete said improvements.  The Administrator may consult
with a professional engineer or other qualified person designated by the
Board of Adjustment.



         4.   Amendments to the plans and specifications of the
stormwater control structure and/or the operation and maintenance plan or
manual shall be approved by the Board of Adjustment.  Proposed changes shall
be prepared by a North Carolina registered professional engineer or landscape
architect (to the extent that the North Carolina General Statutes allow) and
shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Administrator prior to
consideration by the Board of Adjustment.



         5.   If the Board of Adjustment approves the proposed
changes, the owning entity of the stormwater control structure shall file
sealed copies of the revisions with the Administrator.



         6.   If the Board of Adjustment disapproved the changes,
the proposal may be revised and resubmitted to the Board of Adjustment as a
new proposal.  If the proposal has not been revised and is essentially the
same as that already reviewed, it shall be returned to the applicant.



         7.   If the Board of Adjustment finds that the operation
and maintenance plan or manual is inadequate for any reason, the Board shall
notify the owning entity of any required changes and shall prepare and file
copies of the revised agreement with the Gaston County Register of Deeds, the
Administrator and the owning entity.



      EE.   Application and Inspection Fees



         1.   Processing and inspection fees shall be submitted
in the form of a check or money order made payable to the City of Bessemer
City.  Application and inspections fees are non-refundable, except in the
case where the application is withdrawn prior to any work being conducted by
the City.  Applications shall be returned if not accompanied by the required
fee.



         2.   A permit and inspection fee schedule, as approved
by the governing board, shall be posted with the Administrator.  Applicable
fees may be amended from time to time to reflect the operational costs of the
program.  Changes in the fee structure shall be posted in the same manner as
the original fee schedule.



         3.   Inspection fees shall be valid for sixty (60)
days.  An inspection fee shall be required when improvements are made to the
stormwater control structure consistent except in the case when a similar fee
has been paid within the last sixty (60) days.



      FF.   Inspections and Release of the Performance Bond



The Administrator shall inspect the stormwater control structure, after the
owning entity notifies the Administrator that all work has been completed. 
At this inspection, the owning entity shall provide:



         1.   The signed deed, related easements and survey plat
for the stormwater control structure ready for filing with the Gaston County
Register of Deeds;



         2.   A certification sealed by a North Carolina
registered professional engineer or landscape architect (to the extent that
the North Carolina General Statutes allow) and stating that the stormwater
control structure is complete and consistent with the approved plans and
specifications.



         3.   The Administrator shall present the materials
submitted by the developer; the inspection report; and recommendations to the
Board of Adjustment at its next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration.



         4.   If the Board approves the inspection report and
accepts the certification, deed and easements, the Administrator shall file
the deed and easements with the Gaston County Register of Deeds, release up
to seventy-five percent (75%) of the value of the performance bond or other
security and issue a Watershed Protection Occupancy Permit for the stormwater
control structure.



         5.   If deficiencies are found, the Board shall direct
that improvements and inspections be made and/or documents corrected and
resubmittal be made to the Board.



         6.   No sooner than one (1) year after the filing date
of the deed, easements and maintenance agreement, the developer may petition,
the Board of Adjustment to release the remaining value of the performance
bond or other security.  Upon receipt of said petition, the Administrator
shall inspect the stormwater control structure to determine whether the
controls are performing as designed and intended.  The Administrator shall
present the petition, inspection report and recommendations to the Board of
Adjustment.



         7.   If the Board approves the report and accepts the
petition, the developer shall deposit with the Board of Adjustment a cash
amount equal to that described in Subsection CC after which, the Board shall
release the performance bond or other security.



         8.   If the Board does not accept the report and rejects
the petition, the Board shall provide the developer with instructions to
correct any deficiencies and all steps necessary for the release of the
performance bond or other security.



         9.   A Watershed Protection Occupancy Permit or
Occupancy Permit under the Building Code shall not be issued for any building
within the permitted development until the Board of Adjustment has approved
the stormwater control structure.



         10.   All stormwater control structures shall be
inspected at least on an annual basis to determine whether the controls are
performing as designed and intended.  Records of inspection shall be
maintained on forms approved or supplied by the Division of Environmental
Management.  Annual inspections shall begin within one (1) year of filing
date of the deed for the stormwater control structure.



         11.   In the event the Administrator discovers the need
for corrective action or improvements, the Administrator shall notify the
owning entity of the needed improvements, and the date by which the
corrective action shall be completed.  All improvements shall be made
consistent with the plans and specifications of the stormwater control
structure and the operation and maintenance plan or manual.  After
notification by the owning entity, the Administrator shall inspect and
approve the completed improvements.  The Administrator may consult with a
North Carolina registered professional engineer or landscape architect (to
the extent that the General Statutes 89A allow) designated by the Board of
Adjustment.



         12.   Appeals of any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Administrator may be made to and decided by the
Board of Adjustment consistent with Section 5.13.



(Res. passed 11-8-2010)



Table 7.1-1: Index of Uses



To view Table 7.1-1 Table of Uses, please click HERE.



   Editor's Note: This table is available in PDF for ease of printing and
display.



To view Table 7.1-1 Index of Uses, please click HERE.



   Editor's Note: This table is available in PDF for ease of printing and
display.



(Res. passed 6-13-2011; Res. passed 7-9-2012, Res. passed 12-10-2012; Res.
passed 12-10-2012; Res. passed 6-8-2015)



Table 7.1-2(A)
Lot and Building Standards Residential Zoning Districts



Minimum Lot Area (square feet) [4]



 

Standard
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
RLD
 
RS-20
 
RS-12
 
RS-8
 
RMF


Single-family Dwellings; Manufactured Homes; Family Care Homes; Rooming
House; Day Care Center, Class A
 
30,000 / 20,000 [1]
 
30,000 / 20,000 [1]
 
30,000 / 20,000 [1]
 
87,000
 
20,000
 
12,000
 
8,000
 
8,000


Two-family Dwelling; Bed and Breakfast Inn
 
40,000
 
40,000
 
40,000
 
87,000
 
30,000
 
18,000
 
12,000
 
12,000


Multi-family Development
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
 
-
 
43,560
 
43,560


Day Care Center, Class B and C
 
-
 
40,000
 
40,000
 
87,000
 
30,000
 
-
 
-
 
20,000


Infill Residential Development
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
10,000
 
6,000
 
4,000
 
4,000


All Other Uses [2][3]
 
43,560
 
43,560
 
43,560
 
87,000
 
43,560
 
43,560
 
43,560
 
43,560



 



[1]   Minimum lot area requirements shall be reduced to 20,000 sq. ft. in
RA, RB and RC zoning districts where the lot is served by at least one utility



[2]   Dimensional requirements listed for certain uses in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those listed herein.



[3]   There are no minimum/maximum dimensional requirements for Essential
Services, Class 1 and Parks.



[4]   Minimum lot area requirements are subject to Public Health
Department approval, which may require larger minimum lot areas on a
case-by-case basis.



Table 7.1-2(B)
Lot and Building Standards Residential Zoning Districts



Minimum Lot Width (feet) [3]

 

Standard
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
RLD
 
RS-20
 
RS-12
 
RS-8
 
RMF


Single-family Dwellings; Manufactured Homes; Family Care Homes; Rooming
House; Day Care Center, Class A
 
80
 
80
 
80
 
100
 
100
 
90
 
60
 
70


Two-family Dwelling; Bed and Breakfast Inn
 
80
 
80
 
80
 
100
 
100
 
90
 
60
 
70


Multi-family Dwellings;
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
100
 
-
 
-
 
100


Day Care Center, Class B and C
 
-
 
80
 
80
 
100
 
100
 
-
 
-
 
100


Traditional Neighborhood Developments (TND) (individual lots within)
 
None, except 40 for detached SF dwellings
 
None, except 40 for detached SF dwellings
 
None, except 40 for detached SF dwellings
 
None, except 40 for detached SF dwellings
 
None, except 40 for detached SF dwellings
 
None, except 40 for detached SF dwellings
 
None, except 40 for detached SF dwellings
 
None, except 40 for detached SF dwellings


All Other Uses [1) [2]
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100



 



[1]   Dimensional requirements listed for certain uses in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those listed herein.



[2]   There are no minimum/maximum dimensional requirements for Essential
Services, Class 1 and Parks.



[3]   As measured at the minimum front yardsetback.  For additional lot
width and road frontage requirements refer to Sections 9.5 and 13.15.3.



Table 7.1-2(C)
Lot and Building Standards Residential Zoning Districts



Minimum Front Yard Setback (feet) [3]

 

Standard
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
RLD
 
RS-20
 
RS-12
 
RS-8
 
RMF


Single-family Dwellings; Manufactured Homes; Family Care Homes; Rooming
House; Day Care Center, Class A
 

20

 
20
 
20
 
50
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Two-family Dwelling; Bed and Breakfast Inn
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20
 
20


Multi-family Dwellings;
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
30
 
-
 
-
 
30


Day Care Center, Class B and C
 
-
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
-
 
-
 
30
 
-


All Other Uses (1)[2]
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50



 



[1]   Dimensional requirements listed for certain uses in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those listed herein.



[2]   There are no minimum/maximum dimensional requirements for Essential
Services, Class 1 and Parks.



[3]   Refer to the definition of “front yard” in Section 2.7 to
determine how the front yard is to be measured on corner lots.



Table 7.1-2(D)
Lot and Building Standards Residential Zoning Districts



Minimum Side Yard Setback (feet) [3]

 

Standard
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
RLD
 
RS-20
 
RS-12
 
RS-8
 
RMF


Single-family Dwellings; Manufactured Homes; Family Care Homes; Rooming
House; Day Care Center, Class A
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
25
 
15[4]
 
12[4]
 
8[4]
 
8[4]


Two-family Dwelling; Bed and Breakfast Inn
 
15
 
15
 
15
 
25
 
15
 
12
 
8
 
8


Multi-family Dwellings;
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
15
 
-
 
-
 
15


Day Care Center, Class B and C
 
-
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
15
 
-
 
-
 
15


All Other Uses (1) [2]
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25



 



[1]   Dimensional requirements listed for certain uses in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those listed herein.



[2]   There are no minimum/maximum dimensional requirements for Essential
Services, Class 1 and Parks.



[3]   On corner lots, exterior side yard setbacks shall be the same as the
front setback or an additional 10 feet to the required side setback;
whichever is less.



[4]   Five (5) feet for internal lots within an infill residential
development



(Res. passed 6-13-2011)



Table 7.1-2(E)
Lot and Building Standards Residential Zoning Districts



Minimum Rear Yard Setback (feet)

 

Standard
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
RLD
 
RS-20
 
RS-12
 
RS-8
 
RMF


Single-family Dwellings; Manufactured Homes; Family Care Homes; Rooming
House; Day Care Center, Class A
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
50
 
30[3]
 
30[3]
 
30[3]
 
30[3]


Two-family Dwelling; Bed and Breakfast Inn
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
50
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30


Multi-family Dwellings;
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
30
 
-
 
-
 
30


Day Care Center, Class B and C
 
-
 
30
 
30
 
50
 
30
 
-
 
-
 
30


All Other Uses [1] [2]
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50
 
50



 



[1]   Dimensional requirements listed for certain uses in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those listed herein.



[2]   There are no minimum/maximum dimensional requirements for Essential
Services, Class 1 and Parks.



[3]   Twenty (20) feet on internal lots within an infill residential
development



Table 7.1-2(F)
Lot and Building Standards Residential Zoning Districts



Maximum Building Height (feet) [2]

 

Standard
 
R-1
 
R-2
 
R-3
 
RLD
 
RS-20
 
RS-12
 
RS-8
 
RMF




Single-family Dwellings; Manufactured Homes; Family Care Homes; Rooming
House; Day Care Center, Class A
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45


Two-family Dwelling; Bed and Breakfast Inn
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45


Multi-family Dwellings;
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
 
-
 
45
 
45


Day Care Center, Class B and C
 
-
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
-
 
-
 
45


Planned Residential Development (PRD)
 
3 Stories
 
3 Stories
 
3 Stories
 
-
 
3 Stories
 
3 Stories
 
3 Stories
 
3 Stories


Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND)
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.1.13(B)(3)
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.1.13(B)(3)
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.1.13(B)(3)
 
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.1.13(B)(3)
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.1.13(B)(3)
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.1.13(B)(3)
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.1.13(B)(3)


Planned Unit Development (PUD)
 
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.2.26(A)(2)
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.2.26(A)(2)
 
 
 
 
 
3-5 Stories; Refer to Section 8.2.26(A)(2)


All Other Uses (1) [2]
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45
 
45




 



[1]   Dimensional requirements listed for certain uses in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those listed herein.



[2]   Exceptions to height limitations are found in Section 9.19.



Table 7.1-3 (A) [1]
Lot and Building Standards Office Zoning Districts

 

Standard
 
TMU
 
OLC
 
O-1
 
OM




Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
3,000/5,000[2] [9]
 
5,000 [9]
 
5,000 [9]
 
5,000


Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
 
50 [8] [11]
 
70 [8] [11]
 
70 [8] [11]
 
70 [8]


Minimum Required Setbacks (ft.)
 


 


 


 





Front

 
20
 
30 [10]
 
30 [10]
 
30



Side

 
10
 
10 [10]
 
10 [10]
 
10



Rear

 
20 [5][10]
 
20 [5] [10]
 
20 [5] [10]
 
20 [5]


Maximum Building Height (ft.) [7] [12]
 
50 [6]
 
50 [6]
 
50 [6]
 
50 [6]




 



[1]   Dimensional uses for specific uses as shown in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those shown herein.



[2]   Five-thousand (5,000) square feet for all single-, two- or
multi-family dwellings; 3,000 square feet, for all other uses.



[3]   The front yard setback may be reduced according to Section 9.11.



[4]   Ten (10) feet if abutting a residential zoning district.



[5]   Thirty (30) feet if abutting a residential zoning district.



[6]   The maximum height may be increased to seventy-five (75) feet if
located 200’+ from a residentially zoned lot.  In the ’’OM’ district
the height may be increased to one-hundred twenty-five (125) feet if located
300’+ from a residentially zoned lot.



[7]   Exceptions to height limitations are found in Section 9.19.



[8]   Refer to Sections 9.5 and 13.15.3 for further road frontage
requirements. 



[9]   Minimum lot area for infill residential developments shall be
four-thousand (4,000) square feet



[10]   Minimum internal lotsetbacks in infill residential developments
shall be : Front- Twenty (20) feet; Side- Five (5) feet; Rear- Twenty (20)
feet



[11]   Forty (40) feet for detached single-family dwelling units in TND. 
Otherwise, no minimum lot width for uses in a TND.



[12]   Maximum building heights for PRDs, TNDs, and PUDs range from 3-5
stories.  Refer to Chapter 8 for additional information.



(Res. passed 6-13-2011)



Table 7.1-4(A) [1]
Lot and Building Standards Commercial Zoning Districts (Except CBD and UMU)

 

Standard
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
C-3




Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
5,000 [6]
 
5,000
 
5,000


Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
 
70 [5]
 
70 [5]
 
70 [5]


Minimum Required Setback
 
 
 



Front

 
30
 
30
 
30



Side

 
10
 
10
 
10



Rear

 
20 [2]
 
20 [2]
 
20 [2]


Maximum Building Height (ft.) [4] [7]
 
50 [3]
 
50 [3]
 
50 [3]




 



[1]   Dimensional uses for specific uses as shown in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those shown herein.



[2]   Thirty (30) feet if abutting a residential zoning district.



[3]   The maximum height may be increased to seventy-five (75) feet if
located 200’+ from a residentially zoned lot.  In the C-2 and C-3
districts the height may be increased to one-hundred twenty-five (125) feet
if located 300’+ from a residentially zoned lot.



[4]   Exceptions to height limitations are found in Section 9.19.



[5]   Refer to Sections 9.5 and 13.15.3 for further road frontage
requirements. 



[6]   Four-thousand (4,000) square feet for lots in infill residential
developments.



[7]   Maximum building heights range from 3-5 stories for traditional
neighborhood developments (TNDs), planned unit developments (PUDs) and
planned residential developments (PRD’s).  Refer to Chapter 8 for
additional requirements.



Table 7.1-4(B) [1]
Lot and Building Standards Commercial Zoning Districts-CBD and UMU

 

Standard
 
CBD
 
UMU




Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
None [10]
 
3,000/5,000[2] [10]


Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
 
None [9][11]
 
50 [9][11]


Minimum Required Setbacks (ft.)
 


 





Front

 
[3] [12}
 
0 [5] [12}



Side

 
None [4] [12}
 
20 [6][12}



Rear

 
None [4] [12}
 
[3] [12


Maximum Building Height(ft.) [8]
 
None
 
50 [7]




 



[1]   Dimensional uses for specific uses as shown in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those shown herein.



[2]   Five-thousand (5,000) square feet for all single-, two- or
multi-family dwellings; 3,000 square feet, for all other uses.



[3]   The front yardsetback shall be 0-30 feet, as measured from the edge
of the adjoining front sidewalk



[4]   None, except ten (10) feet when adjoining a lot not in the CBD, TMU
or UMU districts.



[5]   Ten (10) feet if abutting a residential zoning district.



[6]   Thirty (30) feet if abutting a residential zoning district.



[7]   The maximum height may be increased to seventy-five (75) feet if
located 200’+ from a residentially zoned lot.



[8]   Exceptions to height limitations are found in Section 9.19.



[9]   Refer to Sections 9.5 and 13.15.3 for further road frontage
requirements. 



[10]   One (1) acre for multi-family developments



[11]   Forty (40) feet for detached single-family lots within a
traditional neighborhood development (TND).



[12]   Infill Residential Developments-: Front- Twenty (20) feet; Side-
Five (5) feet; Rear- Twenty (20) feet



Table 7.1-5 [1]
Lot and Building Standards Industrial Zoning Districts

 

Standard
 
I-1
 
I-2
 
I-3
 
I-U




Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
None
 
None
 
None
 
None [2] [9]


Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
 
70 [8]
 
70 [8]
 
70 [8]
 
50 [8] [10]


Minimum Required Setbacks (ft.)
 


 


 


 





Front

 
50
 
50
 
50
 
[3] [11]



Side[4]

 
20[5]
 
20[5]
 
20[5]
 
10 [5] [11]



Rear

 
30
 
30
 
30
 
20 [5] [1]]


Maximum Building Height (ft.) [7]
 
50[6]
 
50[6]
 
50[6]
 
50 [6] [12]




 



[1]   Dimensional uses for specific uses as shown in Chapter 8 shall
supersede those shown herein.



[2]   One (1) acre for multi-family developments.



[3]   The front yardsetback shall be 0-20 feet, as measured from the edge
of the adjoining front sidewalk. 



[4]   The minimum setback requirements for exterior side lots shall be
increased by 10 ft.



[5]   Thirty (30) feet if abutting a residentially zoned lot.



[6]   The maximum height of the structure may be increased to (75) feet,
provided that the structure lies 200+ feet from a residentially zoned lot.



[7]   Exceptions to height limitations are found in Section 9.19.



[8]   Refer to Sections 9.5 and 13.15.3 for further road frontage
requirements.



[9]   Four-thousand (4,000) square feet for lots in an infill residential
development



[10]   Forty (40) feet for detached single-family residences in a
traditional neighborhood development (TND)



[11]   Infill Residential Developments-: Front- Twenty (20) feet; Side-
Five (5) feet; Rear- Twenty (20) feet



[12]   Maximum building heights range from 3-5 stories for traditional
neighborhood developments, planned residential developments  and planned
unit developments.  Refer to Chapter 8 for additional information.



CHAPTER 8:
SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS



8.1   Residential/Agricultural Principal Uses



8.2   Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses



8.3   Industrial/Distributional/Heavy Impact Principal Uses



8.4   Civic/Institutional Principal Uses



 



   If not otherwise listed, these regulations shall be applicable in all
districts in which the individual uses are allowed. For any use which
requires the issuance of a conditional use permit, the performance criteria
listed herein may be in addition to any other fair and reasonable conditions
placed on such use by City Council. Such conditions may impose greater
restrictions on a particular use than those that are listed herein.



Section 8.1   Residential/Agricultural Principal Uses



8.1.1   Agricultural Use, Class II



   For riding stable uses only.  All buildings, structures and facilities
(including riding rinks/rings but excluding pasture lands) designed for use
or occupancy of animals shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from
any lot line.



8.1.2   Assisted Living Center; Continuing Care Facility; Nursing Home



   A.   Any facility which is licensed to have greater than fifty (50)
residents shall maintain a side setback of at least twenty (20) feet and a
rear setback of at least forty (40) feet when the side or rear yard abuts a
residential district or a lot containing a principal residential use, unless
a greater setback is otherwise required for the zoning district in which it
is located.



   B.   Any facility on a lot that abuts a residentially zoned district
must install a Type B buffer along the adjoining property line. (See Section
11.3)



8.1.3   Day Care Center, Class A.



   A.   The facility must be staffed by at least one (1) person who
resides in the dwelling in which the day care center is located.



   B.   Outdoor play areas shall be located in the rear or side yards
only. In no case shall such play areas be located in the required rear or
side yard setbacks.



   C.   All  outdoor play areas shall be surrounded by a fence or wall
at least four (4) feet in height. Outdoor play areas shall not include
driveways, parking areas, or other land unsuitable for play use.



   D.   The day care center shall be located in a structure originally
designed and constructed as a single-family dwelling. Said structure shall be
the principal structure on the lot. The exterior of the structure (aside from
the allowed day care signage) shall not be altered in a manner that
diminishes its single-family dwelling characteristics.



8.1.4   Dwelling, Mixed Use



   A.   The dwelling unit and the commercial use shall occupy the same
principal structure.



   B.   Lot and yard requirements for this use shall be the same as
those for the nonresidential use.



   C.   Nonresidential uses shall be limited to those allowed in the
zoning district in which the structure is located.



   D.   A maximum of one dwelling unit may be located in the building
housing the nonresidential use.



   E.   In the CBD and C-1 districts, the structure must contain a
commercial use for a dwelling to also be located in the structure. 



8.1.5   Dwelling, Two-family



      Except in the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, two-family dwellings
on corner lots must have the architectural front of each dwelling unit facing
separate streets.  Street ingress and egress to each unit shall also be from
separate streets. The structure must meet the minimum front setbacks from
both streets, with the shorter road frontage being the front of the lot for
all other setbacks.



(Res. passed 3-8-2010)



8.1.6   Family Care Home



   A family care home shall be a use by right, except that no family care
home shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile of another family care home
unless a special exception is granted by the Board of Adjustment, in
accordance with Section 5.12, for such reduced separation.



8.1.7   Group Home



   A.   Each facility must have a minimum uncovered land area (equal to
the lot area less the square footage of all principal and accessory building
footprints) of five-thousand (5,000) or more square feet for up to twelve
(12) residents, and seven-hundred (700) square feet for each additional
resident;



   B.   No group care facility may be located closer to another such
facility than one-half (1/2) mile measured by a straight line, and not street
distances, in order to prevent the creation of a de facto social service
district and to avoid affecting the surround neighborhood. “Affecting”
means the point at which the number of group care facilities or residents
therein might become so large that it may alter the character of a
neighborhood. This subsection is also intended to protect existing group care
facilities from the possibility that an over-concentration of such facilities
might inadvertently create an institutional setting and hinder or negate the
purposes of such facilities.



8.1.8   Manufactured Home Park



   A.   A manufactured home located in a manufactured home park that
existed on the effective date of this Ordinance may be replaced by another
manufactured home in said manufactured home park within one-hundred eighty
(180) days of removal of the original manufactured home.  The replacement
manufactured home may only be of the Class A manufactured home variety only.



   B.   Said replacement manufactured home may be placed on a
preexisting manufactured home space provided that the front, side, and rear
setbacks for the manufactured home that existed prior to the replacement of
the manufactured are not reduced.



   C.   Manufactured homes shall be in compliance with all other
applicable local and state codes.



   D.   In no instance shall a manufactured home park that existed on
the effective date of this Ordinance be allowed to expand (i.e., increase in
the number of manufactured home spaces) subsequent to the adoption of this
Ordinance.



   E.   In no instance shall any new manufactured home parks be created
after the effective date of this Ordinance.



8.1.9   Maternity Home 



   F.   In the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, the use is permitted by
right for up to six (6) beds.  For a use with seven (7) or greater beds, a
conditional use permit shall be required, with a maximum number of beds being
no greater than twelve (12).



   G.   In the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, the structure containing
the use shall not exceed three-thousand five-hundred (3,500) square feet.



   H.   In the OLC, O-1 and C-1 zoning districts, the use is permitted
by right for up to thirty (30) beds.  For a use with greater than thirty
(30) beds, a conditional use permit shall be required.



8.1.10   Multi-Family Development



   A.   Multi-family Development Guidelines



      1.   Allowed Zoning Districts



   Multi-family developments may be placed in the RS-8, RMF, TMU, OLC,
O-1, CBD, UMU, C-1 and I-U Districts.  All multi-family developments must be
served by a public water and sewer system.



      2.   Maximum Residential Density



 

ZONING DISTRICT
 
MAXIMUM DENSITY (Units per Acre)




RS-8
 
6


RMF
 
None


TMU
 
None


OLC
 
None


O-1
 
None


CBD
 
None


UMU
 
None


C-1
 
None


I-U
 
None




 



      3.   Maximum Building Height



   Same as underlying zoning district



      4.   Minimum Gross Acreage



   One (1) acre



      5.   Common Open Space



   In all zoning district except for CBD, the following amount of common
open space shall be provided:



         ∙   Less than ten (10) units: no open space required



         ∙   10-49 units: a minimum of ten (10) percent of
gross acreage required



         ∙   50+ units:  a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of
gross acreage required



   All common open space shall be in accordance with Section 13.26.7 of
this Ordinance.



      6.   Approval Process



 

AREA OF TRACT
 
PIM REQUIRED
 
APPROVAL BODY


Less than 1 acres
 
None
 
Administrative Approval


1-3 acres
 
Yes
 
Administrative Approval; Evidence that Developer Conducted PIM (results of
PIM not binding in administrator’s approval)


Greater than 3 acres
 
Yes
 
Conditional Zoning; Results of Public Information Meeting (PIM) made public
to governing board; PIM results (if agreed to by both governing board and
developer, can be part of the approval process)



 



      7.   Off-street Parking Requirements



   Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 herein. 



      8.   Screening Requirements



   Screening shall be provided in accordance with Section 11.4. 



      9.   Lighting, Noise, Odor Requirements



   Lighting requirements shall be the same as provided in Section 9.13 of
this Ordinance.  Noise requirements shall be the same as provided in Section
9.23 of this Ordinance.  Odor control requirements shall be the same as
provided in Section 9.22 of this Ordinance. 



   B.   Multi-family Building Design Standards



      1.   All principal structures located within two-hundred (200)
linear feet of the front lot line shall be oriented parallel with the front
yard. (NOTE: The above referenced orientation requirements shall be waived if
screening in the form of a Type B or higher screen is provided in the front
yard. This regulation does not apply in the CBD zone.)  The Administrator
shall have the authority to waive or modify this requirement provided that
specific circumstances unique to the subject property would make meeting the
required width impractical or impossible.



      2.   The required side yard for the entire development [but no
more than fifteen (15) feet] and at least one-half (1/2) of the front yard,
or fifteen (15) feet, whichever is greater, shall be in natural plantings
(i.e., grass, shrubs, and trees). This requirement, however, shall not be
applicable in the CBD, UMU and TMU zones.  For example, if the required side
yard in a zoning district is twenty (20) feet and the required front yard is
forty (40) feet, then fifteen (15) feet of the side yard and twenty (20) feet
of the front yard shall be natural plantings.



      3.   If the interior side or rear yards of the multi-family
development abut a Residential (R) district (other than RMF), screening in
said yards in the form of a Type B or higher screen shall be provided. This
requirement shall not apply in the CBD, TMU and UMU zones or where a proposed
multifamily development abuts an existing multifamily development.



      4.   No off-street parking spaces may be placed in front yard
unless a Type B or higher screen is provided in the front yard to shield the
parking spaces from the adjoining street.  Notwithstanding, in no case may
greater than one-half (1/2) of the required off-street parking be placed in
the front yard.



      5.   A minimum separation of ten (10) feet shall be maintained
between one-story buildings within the multi-family development.



      6.   In the RS-8 zoning district only, a conditional use
permit shall be required for conversions of existing single- or two-family
dwelling into greater than two (2) dwelling units.  The Board of Adjustment,
in issuing the conditional use permit, shall have the authority to waive one
or more of the multi-family development requirements listed herein, in
association with the issuance of such conditional use permit, due to existing
conditions associated with the site in question.



      7.   A conditional use permit shall be required for any
building over three (3) stories in height.



      8.   At least fifty (50) percent of the front elevation of the
building shall be clad with brick, rock, decorative block, approved stucco
and other permitted masonry materials as determined by the Zoning
Administrator or approval body in instances where a conditional use permit or
conditional zoning is involved.



      9.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches that
vary from 6:12 to 12:12 (i.e., rise over run).



      10.   All newly constructed buildings shall have a minimum of
two (2) different roof elevations on any building with a length over
seventy-five (75) feet.



      11.   Each exterior front door that provides access to an
individual unit or any shared door [i.e., a door that provides access to more
than one (1) unit from the exterior)] shall contain one (1) or more of the
following architectural additions:  porch, cornice, overhang, arch, etc. to
provide protection from the elements to persons entering or leaving the
building or unit.  Each such element shall extend in or out horizontally for
a distance of at least three (3) feet.



      12.   There shall be a landscaped area at least four (4) feet
in width along the entire length of the front façade of each building. 
There shall be at least one  (1) shrub per six (6) linear feet of
building.  (NOTE:  This is not applicable in the TMU, UMU and CBD
districts.)



      13.   In lieu of the street tree requirements contained in
Section 11.4, trees shall be planted between the building and the adjoining
public street (at the periphery of the development) as follows:



         ∙   Two canopy trees and two understory trees shall be
planted for every one-hundred (100) linear feet of public street frontage.



         ∙   When the backs of dwelling units face a street
right-of-way, the number of plantings required above shall be increased by
fifty (50) percent. 



      14.   No building wall that faces an adjacent public street
shall have a blank, uninterrupted length exceeding seventy-five (75) feet. 
“Interruptions” as hereby used shall include changes in plane by more
than one (1) foot or changes in texture or masonry patterns.  This shall
apply to any building that is greater than 100 feet in length.  For
buildings that have a length less than one hundred (100) feet, one
interruption shall be required within thirty (30) feet on either side of the
center of the building.



      15.   Refer to Section 9.18.1(F) for sidewalk requirements and
Section 9.18.2 for greenstrip requirements.



8.1.11   Planned Residential Development (PRD)



   A.   Planned Residential Development Guidelines



      1.   Allowed Zoning Districts



      Planned residential developments may be placed in the R-1, R-2,
R-3, RS-20, RS-12, RS-8, RMF, TMU, OLC, O-1, CBD, UMU, C-1 and I-U
Districts.  All PRDs must be served by a public water and sewer system.



      2.   Maximum Residential Density



 

ZONING DISTRICT
 
MAXIMUM DENSITY (Units per Acre)




R-1
 
3,5 (1)


R-2
 
3,5 (1)


R-3
 
3,5 (1)


RS-20
 
3,5 (1)


RS-12
 
5


RS-8
 
8


RMF
 
12


TMU
 
12


OLC
 
12


O-1
 
12


CBD
 
12


UMU
 
12


C-1
 
12


I-U
 
12




 



(1) Three (3) units/acre outside the Urban Standards Overlay District; Five
(5) units/acre within the Urban Standards Overlay District



      3.   Maximum Building Height



      Three (3) stories



      4.   Allowed/Required Housing Types



      Each PRD must contain at least two (2) of the following housing
types (except that in no instance shall a PRD consist entirely of
townhouses/rowhouses and multi-family dwellings):



         ∙   Single-family residential units (excluding
manufactured homes)



         ∙   Lot line house



         ∙   Patio house



         ∙   Village house



         ∙   Atrium house



         ∙   Duplex



         ∙   Twin House



         ∙   Townhouse



         ∙   Rowhouse



         ∙   Multi-family dwellings



   Outside the Urban Standards Overlay District, a majority of the housing
units must be of the single-family (detached) variety (i.e., other than
townhouses/rowhouses and multi-family dwellings).



      5.   Minimum Gross Acreage



      Five (5) acres, except:



         ∙   Fifty (50) acres in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 districts
if townhouses, rowhouses or multi-family units are provided.



         ∙   Thirty (30) acres in the RS-20, RS-12, or RS-8
districts if townhouses, rowhouses, or multi-family units are provided



      6.   Common Open Space



      At least twenty (20) percent of the gross acreage of the PRD
shall consist of common open space per Section 13.26.7.



      7.   Approval Process for a PRD



      See subdivision approval process in Chapter 13



      8.   Off-street Parking Requirements



      The requirements of Chapter 10 shall prevail except as herein
provided. 



      9.   Screening Requirements



      There are no mandated screening requirements within the PRD. 
Screening shall be provided at the periphery of the PRD when such use, if it
were not located in the PRD, would have been required to provide screening in
accordance with Section 11.4. 



      10.   Sidewalk/Greenstrip Requirements



      Refer to Section 9.18.1(E) for sidewalk requirements and Section
9.18.2 for greenstrip requirements.



      11.   Lighting, Noise, Odor Requirements



      Lighting requirements shall be the same as provided in Section
9.13 of this Ordinance.  Noise requirements shall be the same as provided in
Section 9.23 of this Ordinance.  Odor control requirements shall be the same
as provided in Section 9.22 of this Ordinance. 



      12.   Street Requirements



         a.   Streets within the PRD should have a design speed
of thirty (30) miles per hour and a posted speed of twenty-five (25) miles
per hour.  Higher design and posted speeds may be allowed on major
boulevards that provide through access to the PRD and adjoining developments



         b.   All streets (including alleys) within the PRD shall
be publicly maintained.  All streets (but not including alleys) shall be
designed to have on-street parking on at least one (1) side of the road. 
The street network within the PRD and with adjacent streets outside the PRD
shall be interconnected to the greatest degree feasible and practical.



         c.   Alleys in the PRD shall have a minimum paved
surface of sixteen (16) feet and a minimum right-of-way width of twenty-four
(24) feet.  Alleys shall meet all other applicable NCDOT design and
construction, except that alleys shall not be required to have curb and
gutter and shall not be required to have an inverted crown for drainage.



         d.   Cul-de-sacs shall be limited in number within the
PRD and shall not be used to avoid street connections.  Cul-de-sacs shall be
no greater than two-hundred fifty (250) feet in length.



         e.   Block lengths shall be no less than five-hundred
(500) and no greater than eight-hundred (800) feet in length.



         f.   Street trees shall be provided per Section 11.4 in
all PRDs.



      13.   Required Design Team Parties



      An applicant for a PRD approval shall certify in writing at the
time of application that a member of each of the following profession will be
used in the planning and design process for the proposed development.  The
site plan submitted for approval of the PRD shall bear evidence that one (1)
or more representatives from each such profession was involved in the
designing of the PRD:



         ∙   Project planning and design by a licensed North
Carolina architect or landscape architect.



         ∙   Site engineering by a North Carolina Registered
Engineer



   B.   PRD Building and Lot Standards



   All design standards of the Urban Standards Overlay District shall
prevail.  In addition, the following design standards shall apply:



      1.   Free-standing Multi-family Buildings



         a.   Front build-to lines shall be 0-15 feet behind the
sidewalk.



         b.   Building facades shall be parallel to the adjoining
street



         c.   Trash dumpsters are to be located to the rear of
the building.



         d.   The primary pedestrian entrance into the building
shall be from the adjoining front yard sidewalk.



         e.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; glass, wood,
cement fiberboard, or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative
metal roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval body, in
instances where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is involved,
shall have the authority to approve building materials not specifically
listed but similar in appearance and texture to those herein listed.



         f.   Multi-family buildings shall have porches that form
a predominant aspect of the building design.  Porches shall constitute at
least fifteen (15) percent of the front façade of each apartment unit in the
building.



         g.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches
that vary from 6:12 to 12:12 (i.e. rise over run).



         h.   Multi-family residences shall be separated from
detached residential uses within the PRD by a street or greenway.  If not
possible, residential uses adjacent to the multi-family residences shall have
substantially similar and compatible architectural facades



      2.   Detached Single-family Residences



         a.   Garages may be attached or detached.  If detached,
they shall be in the rear yard only and designed to be entered into from the
front or rear and shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the edge
of the adjoining alley travel surface.  Refer to Figure 8.1.11-1 for an
illustration of this requirement. 



Figure 8.1.11-1









 



         b.   A common front build-to line on both sides of the
same block shall be maintained.  Variations in front yard setbacks may vary
by no greater than +/- 5 feet on any block.  Areas between the building and
the adjacent sidewalk shall be landscaped per Section 11.4(G).



         c.   Pedestrian access to the residence shall be from
the adjoining front yard sidewalk.



         f.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; glass, cement
fiberboard; wood, or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative metal
roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval body, in instances
where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is involved, shall have
the authority to approve building materials not specifically listed but
similar in appearance and texture to those herein listed.



         d.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches
that vary from 6:12 to 12:12 (i.e. rise over run).



         e.   Front porches, where provided, shall be a minimum
of eight (8) feet in depth. 



         f.   Building facades shall be generally parallel to
front property line. 



         g.   Front loaded garages are allowed and shall be set
back at least twelve (12) feet from the front building plane of the structure
(inclusive of the porch).  Refer to Figure 8.1.11-1 for an illustration of
this requirement.



         h.   Accessory structures including mailboxes, newspaper
boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses, and flag poles may be located in any front,
side or rear yard.  Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in the rear
yard only.  Accessory structures greater than fifty (50) square feet in area
and shall be comprised of materials similar as the principal structure. 
Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in compliance with Section 9.9 of
this Ordinance.



      3.   Attached Residences



         a.   A common front build-to line on both sides of the
same block shall be maintained.  Variations in front yard setbacks may vary
by no greater than +/- 5 feet on any block.  Areas between the building and
the adjacent sidewalk shall be landscaped per Section 11.4(G).



         b.   Building facades shall be generally parallel to
front property line. 



         c.   Pedestrian access to the residence shall be from
the adjoining street.



         g.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; cement
fiberboard; glass, wood, or wood materials, or similar materials. 
Decorative metal roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval
body, in instances where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is
involved, shall have the authority to approve building materials not
specifically listed but similar in appearance and texture to those herein
listed.



         d.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches
that vary from 6:12 to 12:12 (i.e. rise over run).



         e.   Attached residences shall be separated from
detached residential uses in the PRD by a street or greenway.  If not
possible, residential uses adjacent to the attached residences shall have
substantially similar and compatible architectural facades.



         f.   Front loaded garages are allowed and shall be set
back at least twelve (12) feet from the front building plane of the structure
(inclusive of the porch).  Refer to Figure 8.1.11-1 for an illustration of
this requirement.  Detached garages may be located in the rear yard only and
designed to be entered into from the rear yard.  The garages shall be set
back at least twenty (20) feet from the edge of the adjoining alley travel
surface. 



         g.   Accessory structures including mailboxes, newspaper
boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses, and flag poles may be located in any front,
side or rear yard.  Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in the rear
yard only.  Accessory structures greater than fifty (50) square feet in area
shall be comprised of the same exterior materials as the principal
structure.  Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in compliance with
Section 9.9 of this Ordinance



8.1.12   Residential Development, Infill



   A.   Infill Development Guidelines



      1.   Allowed Zoning Districts



      An infill residential development must meet each of the following
requirements:



         ∙   Infill residential developments may only be
located in the Urban Standards Overlay District, and then only in the RS-20,
RS-12, RS-8, RMF, TMU, OLC, O-1, CBD, UMU, C-1 and I-U Districts.  All
infill residential development must be served by a public water and sewer
system. 



         ∙   An infill residential development shall be located
on a site that is: (1) on a (CATS or Gaston) transit line; or, (2) on a
principal or minor arterial; or, (3) in an area that lies within a
one-quarter (1/4) mile walking distance (and where sidewalk is provided
within such quarter-mile) of a CBD district; or, (4) within such quarter-mile
walking distance to a shopping center, office park, industrial park, or
individual commercial, office, or industrial use, any of which contains
one-hundred thousand (100,000) or more square feet gfa.



      2.   Minimum Lot Size



      Four thousand (4,000) square feet or one-half (1/2) the minimum
lot size in the underlying zoning district, whichever is greater.



      3.   Maximum Building Height



      Same as in the underlying zoning district



      4.   Allowed Housing Types



      Infill residential developments shall be limited to the following
residential types:



         ∙   Single- family detached residential units
(excluding manufactured homes)



         ∙   Lot line house



         ∙   Patio house



         ∙   Village house



         ∙   Atrium house



         ∙   Twin House



      5.   Gross Acreage (per infill residential development)



         ∙   Minimum: One (1) acre; Maximum: Five (5) acres



         ∙   In no instance may a second infill subdivision be
carved out of the same tract of land (or portions thereof) within any five
(5) year continuous period.



      6.   Minimum Setbacks



      For yards on lots located at the periphery of the infill
residential development, the normal required minimum yard for a single-family
residential use for the underlying zoning district shall be required. 
Otherwise, for all other yards within the interior of the development, the
following minimum setbacks shall be required:



         Front Yard- Twenty (20) feet



         Side Yard- Five (5) feet



         Rear Yard- Twenty (20) feet



      For lot line houses and twin houses, there shall be a minimum
principal building separation on adjacent lots of ten (10) feet.



      7.   common open space



      If ten (10) or more housing units are provided within an infill
residential development, common open space, in accordance with Section
13.26.7, shall be provided in the infill residential development.  No common
space shall be required for infill developments with less than ten (10) units.



      8.   Approval Process



      See subdivision approval process in Chapter 13



      9.   Off-street Parking Requirements



      The requirements of Chapter 10 shall prevail. 



      10.   Screening Requirements



      There are no mandated screening requirements within the infill
residential development.  Screening shall be provided at the periphery of
the infill residential development, when such use, if it were not located
within the infill residential development, would have been required to
provide screening in accordance with Section 11.4. 



      11.   Accessory Structure Requirements



      Accessory structure requirements shall be the same as provided in
Section 9.9 of this Ordinance, except as provided herein.



      12.   Lighting, Noise, Odor Requirements



      Lighting requirements shall be the same as provided in Section
9.13 of this Ordinance.  Noise requirements shall be the same as provided in
Section 9.23 of this Ordinance.  Odor control requirements shall be the same
as provided in Section 9.22 of this Ordinance. 



      13.   Street Requirements



         ∙   All streets within the infill residential
development shall be publicly maintained and built to all applicable design
standards (except as herein provided), except privately maintained streets
are allowed if they are less than three-hundred (300) feet in length and
serve less than ten (10) units are allowed.



         ∙   Standard curb and gutter is to be provided on all
streets within the Urban Standards Overlay District.  Outside the Urban
Standards Overlay District, valley curb and gutter may be used.  For streets
internal to the infill residential development, two (2) street sections may
be used:  Streets will either: 1. Have a minimum pavement width of eighteen
(18) feet and a right-of-way width of twenty-six (26) feet (with sidewalks);
or, 2. Have a minimum pavement width of twenty-four (24) feet, as measured
from back to back of curb, and a minimum right-of-way width of forty (40)
feet (without sidewalks).  Sidewalks, if provided, shall meet the
construction requirements of Section 9.18.1(C). 



         ∙   A minimum two (2) foot utility easement must be
provided on each side of the street adjacent to the right-of-way.



         ∙   Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets can be no greater
than three-hundred (300) feet in length.



   B.   Infill Residential Building Standards



   All design standards of the Urban Standards Overlay District shall
prevail.  In addition, the following design standards shall apply:



      1.   Garages may be attached or detached.  If detached, they
shall be in the rear yard only. 



      2.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from public
streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick veneer; stone
or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; glass, cement fiberboard; wood,
or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative metal roofs shall be
allowed.  The Administrator or approval body, in instances where a
conditional use permit or conditional zoning is involved, shall have the
authority to approve building materials not specifically listed but similar
in appearance and texture to those herein listed.



      3.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches that
vary from 6:12 to 12:12 (i.e. rise over run).



      4.   Front porches, where provided, shall be a minimum of
eight (8) feet in depth. 



      5.   Building facades shall be generally parallel to the
adjoining public street.  Pedestrian access to each unit may be from the
front or rear yard. 



      6.   Accessory structures including mailboxes, newspaper
boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses, and flag poles may be located in any front,
side or rear yard.  Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in the rear
yard only.  Accessory structures greater than fifty (50) square feet in area
and shall be comprised of materials similar as the principal structure.



      7.   If a twin home is located on a corner lot, the
architectural front of each home must face a different street



8.1.13   Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND)



   A.   TND  Guiding Principles



   The following is a summary of the guiding principles of a TND. 



      1.   Principle of Public Realm



         ∙   Well-designed places; terminal vistas



         ∙   Non-residential buildings near or at the sidewalk



         ∙   Lots are typically smaller and narrower than in
conventional subdivisions



         ∙   Rear access alleys allowed



      2.   Principle of Transportation System



         ∙   Connected web of streets



         ∙   Cul-de-sacs are to be avoided and, where
permitted, are short in length



         ∙   Curved as well as straights streets may be provided



         ∙   Short blocks



         ∙   Sidewalks are located on both sides of the street



         ∙   Two or more points of ingress and egress are
provided for the TND



      3.   Principle of Mixed Use



         ∙   TNDs always contains a mixture of dwelling types
(e.g., single-family detached, single-family attached, multi-family,
dwellings atop of commercial uses, etc.)



         ∙   Denser housing is found near a designated “TND
Center”



         ∙   Civic uses are encouraged within the TND



         ∙   Similar types of buildings should face each other
on opposite sides of the street



      4.   Principles of Architecture



         ∙   Commercial buildings should be of the
“shop-front” variety that cater to the pedestrian



         ∙   Other non-residential uses within the TND should
also be designed so as to cater to the pedestrian



      5.   Principles of the TND Center



         ∙   Each TND must have at least one neighborhood
center (i.e., TND Center) as a focal point of the community.



         ∙   The TND center is “ideally” located in the
geographic center…although there may need to be some variation to this
theme to insure that the center is viable.  In certain instances, a nearby,
established, and pedestrian-oriented center located outside the TND may serve
as an alternative.



         ∙   The TND Center shall consist of one or more uses
that serve the residents of the TND and can include retail, office and civic
uses. 



         ∙   With limited exceptions (i.e., financial
institutions, ATMs), commercial uses should not be automobile oriented



      6.   Principles of Open Space



         ∙   Compact development should result in preservation
of open space



         ∙   TNDs always have public open spaces such as
greens, village squares, parks and/or playgrounds



         ∙   Smaller open space areas should be distributed
throughout the TND



         ∙   Pre-existing natural features should be retained
(to the greatest degree feasible) and be incorporated into the TND



   B.   TND Development Guidelines



      1.   Allowed Zoning Districts



      TNDs may be placed in the R-1, R-2, R-3, RS-20, RS-12, RS-8, RMF,
TMU, OLC, O-1, CBD, UMU, C-1 and I-U Districts.



      2.   Maximum Residential Density



      None



      3.   Maximum Building Height (based on TND component)



         ∙   Village Residential- Three (3) stories



         ∙   Central Residential- Three (3) stories



         ∙   TND    Center- Five (5) stories, except three
(3) stories in all R-1, R-2, R-3, RS-20 and RS-12 districts as well as any
TND not located in the Urban Standards Overlay District.  Any TND having
buildings with a height of greater than three (3) stories shall be located in
a TND having a gross acreage of greater than fifty (50) acres. 



      5.   Minimum Lot Width



      None, except forty (40) feet on any lot containing a detached
single-family dwelling unit



      6.   Minimum TND Tract Area



      Ten (10) acres



      7.   Required TND Components



      Each TND shall contain the following four components:



         ∙   TND Center- This is the “Main Street” of the
TND and may be located within the center of the TND itself, or on the
internal periphery of the TND along a major road emanating from an existing
adjacent thoroughfare.  Non-residential uses may include retail, office,
civic and certain “high-tech, low-impact” manufacturing uses. 
Residences may also be located in freestanding buildings or on top of
non-residential buildings.  Civic uses may be located anywhere in the TND
Center or in other portions of the TND. [NOTE:  Civic uses may serve TND
residents only (swimming pools, meeting centers) or the community as a whole
(church, school).  For TNDs located on tracts of less than twenty-five (25)
acres, the TND Center can consist entirely of civic uses that serve the TND
residents only.]  If an established pedestrian-accessible town center (i.e.,
retail area, equal or greater in size to that which would have been required
in the TND itself) lies within twenty-four hundred (2,400) linear feet (as
measured by walking distance) from seventy-five (75) percent of the
residential units contained in the TND, the TND Center requirement within the
TND may be waived.



   There may be more than one designated TND Center within the TND;
however, there shall be at least one (1) designated “primary TND Center”
that accommodates a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the total acreage
designated as “TND Center”.



         ∙   Central Residential- This shall consist of
higher-density residential development, along with civic uses, that lies
adjacent (i.e., within ¼ mile walking distance from the edge of the primary
TND Center) to the TND Center.  Residential dwellings can include those of
the attached and detached variety that are a maximum of three (3) stories in
height. 



         ∙   Village Residential- The remaining developed
portion of the TND shall consist of “village residential” uses that are
limited to detached dwelling units. 



         ∙   Open Space- Greenways, Parks, Greens, Village
Squares, etc (but not sidewalks or greenstrips), that meet the requirements
of Section 13.26.7.



Figure 8.1.13-1









 



      7.   TND Layout Requirements



         ∙   Open Space:  Open space shall be provided on a
minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross acreage of the TND.  Such open
space shall be in accordance with Section 13.26.7 of this Ordinance and shall
be of such variety so as to be readily accessible to all residents of the TND



         ∙   TND Center:  The TND Center shall constitute from
ten to twenty-five (10-25) percent of the gross acreage of the TND.



         ∙   Central Residential:  There is no maximum acreage
standard for the Central Residential portion of the TND.



         ∙   Village Residential:  There is no maximum acreage
standard for the Central Residential portion of the TND.  If all of the
residential acreage lies within a one-quarter (1/4) mile walking distance
from the primary TND Center, there shall not be a required “Village
Residential” component to the TND and the residential component of the TND
can be satisfied entirely by the “Central Residential” component.



      8.   Approval Process for a TND



      See subdivision approval process in Chapter 13



      9.   Uses Allowed Within the TND



 

USE
 
DEVELOPMENT STATUS (1)
 
ADDITIONAL SUPPLEMENTAL CONDTIONS [2)




Dwelling, Mixed Use
 
Use by right
 
8.1.4


Multi-family Development
 
Use by right
 
8.1.10


Dwelling, Single-family
 
Use by right
 


Family Care Home
 
Use by right
 
8.1.6


Offices, including Medical Services (up to 99,999 sf per building)
 
Use by right
 


Bed and Breakfast Inn (without restaurant)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.12


Bed and Breakfast Inn (which may only be located in the TND Center portion of
the TND)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.12


Restaurants (no fast food; no drive-through)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.30


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Indoor
 
Use by right
 
8.2.2


Amusement and Sporting Facility (Outdoor)
 
Conditional Use
 
8.2.3


Animal Hospital (indoor)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.4


Auction House (indoor only)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.7


Art Gallery
 
Use by right
 


ATM
 
Use by right
 
8.2.6


Business Services
 
Use by right
 


Bus or Train Terminal, Passenger
 
Use by right
 
8.2.13


Day Care Center, Class B
 
Use by right
 
8.2.19


Day Care Center, Class C
 
Conditional Use
 
8.2.19


Grooming Services
 
Use by right
 


School for the Arts
 
Use by right
 


Light Retail (up to 50,000 sf gfa)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.31


Convenience Store (not open between Midnight and 5:00 AM)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.17


Laundromat (not open between Midnight and 5:00 AM)
 
Use by right
 


Manufactured Goods, Class I
 
Conditional use
 
8.3.6


Auditoriums/Assembly Hall/Community Center (less than 500 seats)
 
Use by right
 




 



Auditoriums/Assembly Hall/Community Center (500+seats)
 
Conditional Use
 
8.4.2


Church/Place of Worship
 
Use by right
 
8.4.6


Essential Services, Class 1
 
Use by right
 


Essential Services, Class 2
 
Use by right
 
8.4.8


Essential Services, Class 4
 
Use by right
 
8.4.9


Fraternal and Service Organization Meeting Facilities
 
Conditional use
 
8.4.11


Library
 
Use by right
 


Park
 
Use by right
 
8.4.14


Parking Lot
 
Use by right
 
8.2.27


Post Office
 
Use by right
 


Schools (Elementary, Middle and Senior High)
 
Use by right
 
8.4.17


Stadium
 
Conditional Use
 
8.4.20


Transit Station
 
Conditional Use
 




 



(1) If a use located in the TND is subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit, and if such use were shown on the site plan originally approved
for the TND through the conditional zoning process or through issuance of a
conditional use permit, issuance of a conditional use permit for such use
shall not be needed.  In instances where such use was not indicated on and
approved as part of the site plan for the conditional rezoning of the
property for the TND, or if the TND were approved administratively, a
conditional use permit would need to be issued for such use.



(2) Additional specifications for building design and layout specifications
for buildings located in the TND are indicated elsewhere in this Section.



      10.   Allowed Housing Types



 



 
TND CENTER
 
CENTRAL RESIDENTIAL
 
VILLAGE RESIDENTIAL


SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (excluding manufactured homes)
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Allowed


Lot Line House
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Allowed


Patio House
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Allowed


Village House
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Allowed


Atrium house
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Allowed


Duplex
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Allowed


Twin House
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Allowed


Townhouse or Rowhouse
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Allowed


Multi-family [with up to three (3) stories]
 
Allowed
 
Allowed
 
Not Allowed


Multi-family [with more than three (3) stories]
 
Allowed (1)
 
Not Allowed
 
Not Allowed




 



(1) Allowed only in TNDs with agross acreage of fifty (50) acres or greater
and located within the Urban Standards Overlay District.  Notwithstanding,
such type use shall not be allowed in a R-1, R-2, R-3, RS-20 or RS-12 zoning
districts.



      11.   Off-street Parking Requirements



      The requirements of Chapter 10 shall prevail except the location
of off-street parking shall be as provided for herein based on the building
type (i.e., uses within the TND Center must have their parking located
entirely within the TND Center.)  Parking decks, if used, shall be of the
Option “B” and “C” variety as contained in Sections 10.9.2 and 10.9.3
of this Ordinance.   



      12.   Screening Requirements



      There are no mandated screening requirements within the TND. 
Screening shall be provided at the periphery of the TND when such use, if it
were not located in the TND, would have been required to provide screening in
accordance with Section 11.4. 



      13.   Accessory Structure Requirements



      Accessory structure requirements shall be the same as provided in
Section 9.9 of this Ordinance, except as herein provided.



      14.   Lighting, Noise, Odor Requirements



   Lighting requirements shall be the same as provided in Section 9.13 of
this Ordinance.  Noise requirements shall be the same as provided in Section
9.23 of this Ordinance.  Odor control requirements shall be the same as
provided in Section 9.22 of this Ordinance. 



      15.   Street Requirements



         i.   Streets within the TND should have a design speed
of thirty (30) miles per hour and a posted speed of twenty-five (25) miles
per hour.  Higher design and posted speeds may be allowed on major
boulevards that provide through access to the TND and adjoining developments



         ii.   All streets (including alleys) within the TND
shall be publicly maintained.  All streets (but not including alleys) shall
be designed to have on-street parking on at least one (1) side of the road. 
The street network within the TND and with adjacent streets outside the TND
shall be interconnected to the greatest degree feasible and practical.



         iii.   Alleys in the TND shall have a minimum paved
surface of sixteen (16) feet and a minimum right-of-way width of twenty-four
(24) feet.  Alleys shall meet all other applicable NCDOT design and
construction, except that alleys shall not be required to have curb and
gutter and shall not be required to have an inverted crown for drainage.



         iv.   Cul-de-sacs shall be limited in number within the
TND and shall not be used to avoid street connections.  Cul-de-sacs shall be
no greater than  two-hundred fifty (250) feet in length.



         v.   All primary entrances into the TND shall terminate
at a terminal vista.



         vi.   Block lengths shall be no less than five-hundred
(500) and no greater than eight-hundred (800) feet in length.



      16.   Sidewalk/Greenstrip Requirements



      Refer to Section 9.18.1(D) for sidewalk requirements and Section
9.18.2 for greenstrip requirements.



      17.   Street Tree Requirements



      Street trees shall be provided on all streets per Section 11.4.



   C.   TND Building and Lot Standards



      All design standards of the Urban Standards Overlay District
shall prevail. Refer to Section 9.18.1(D) for provisions relating to
sidewalks.  In addition, the following design standards shall apply:



      1.   Non-Residential Buildings in the TND Center



         a.   Buildings facing each other on the same side of the
same street shall maintain a common front build-to line of from zero to
fifteen (0-15) feet.  The Administrator may allow for minor deviations from
the build-to line to allow for exterior amenities such as outdoor dining
areas, customer drop-off points, etc. Refer to Figure 8.1.13-2 for an
illustration of this requirement.



Figure 8.1.13-2









 



         b.   Building facades shall be parallel to the adjoining
street



         c.   Off-street parking shall be to the rear of
buildings.



         d.   Off-street parking areas shall be inter-connected,
wherever possible.



         e.   Trash dumpsters are to be located to the rear of
the building.



         f.   Buildings are to be served with rear-loading alleys.



         g.   Primary pedestrian entrance into the building shall
be from the adjoining front yard sidewalk.



         h.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick, brick veneer,
stone or stone veneer, stucco or artificial stucco; cement fiberboard; glass,
wood, or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative metal roofs shall
be allowed.  The Administrator or approval body, in instances where a
conditional use permit or conditional zoning is involved, shall have the
authority to approve building materials not specifically listed but similar
in appearance and texture to those herein listed.



         h.   Street level windows shall be provided and shall be
transparent.  Mirror or reflective glass shall not be allowed.



      2.   Free-standing Multi-family Buildings



         a.   Front build-to lines shall be zero to fifteen
(0-15) feet behind the sidewalk.



         b.   Building facades shall be parallel to the adjoining
street



         c.   Trash dumpsters are to be located to the rear of
the building.



         d.   The primary pedestrian entrance into the building
shall be from the adjoining front yard sidewalk.



         e.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; glass, wood,
cement fiberboard, or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative
metal roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval body, in
instances where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is involved,
shall have the authority to approve building materials not specifically
listed but similar in appearance and texture to those herein listed.



         f.   Outside the TND Center, multi-family buildings
shall have porches that form a predominant aspect of the building design. 
Porches shall constitute at least fifteen (15) percent of the front façade
of each apartment unit in the building.



         g.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches
that vary from 186:12 to 1212:12 (i.e. rise over run).



         h.   Multi-family residences shall be separated from
detached residential uses within the TND by a street or greenway.  If not
possible, residential uses adjacent to the multi-family residences shall have
substantially similar and compatible architectural facades



      3.   Detached Single-family Residences



         a.   Garages may be attached or detached.  If detached,
they shall be in the rear yard only and designed to be entered into from the
front or rear and shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the edge
of the adjoining alley travel surface.  Refer to Figure 8.1.13-3 for an
illustration of this requirement.  Up to one accessory dwelling unit may be
placed above the garage.  Such dwelling unit shall be exempt from any
additional off-street parking requirements.



Figure 8.1.13-3









 



         b.   A common front build-to line on both sides of the
same block shall be maintained.  Variations in front yard setbacks may vary
by no greater than +/- 5 feet on any block.  Areas between the building and
the adjacent sidewalk shall be landscaped per Section 11.4(G).



         c.   Pedestrian access to the residence shall be from
the adjoining front yard sidewalk.



         d.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; glass, cement
fiberboard; wood, or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative metal
roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval body, in instances
where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is involved, shall have
the authority to approve building materials not specifically listed but
similar in appearance and texture to those herein listed.



         e.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches
that vary from 6:12 to 12:12 (i.e. rise over run) (i.e., rise over run)



         f.   Front porches, where provided, shall be a minimum
of eight (8) feet in depth.



         g.   Building facades shall be generally parallel to
front property line.



         h.   Front loaded garages are allowed outside the TND
Center portion of the TND.  Such garages shall be set back at least twelve
(12) feet from the front building plane of the structure (inclusive of the
porch).  Refer to Figure 8.1.13-3 for an illustration of this requirement.



         i.   Manufactured homes shall not be allowed.



         j.   Accessory structures including mailboxes, newspaper
boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses, and flag poles may be located in any front,
side or rear yard.  Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in the rear
yard only.  Accessory structures greater than fifty (50) square feet in area
and shall be comprised of materials similar as the principal structure.



      4.   Attached Residences



         a.   A common front build-to line on both sides of the
same block shall be maintained.  Variations in front yard setbacks may vary
by no greater than +/- 5 feet on any block.  Areas between the building and
the adjacent sidewalk shall be landscaped per Section 11.4(G). Building
facades shall be generally parallel to front property line. 



         b.   Pedestrian access to the residence shall be from
the adjoining street.



         c.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; cement
fiberboard; glass, wood, or wood materials, or similar materials. 
Decorative metal roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval
body, in instances where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is
involved, shall have the authority to approve building materials not
specifically listed but similar in appearance and texture to those herein
listed.



         d.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches
that vary from 6:12 to 12:12 (i.e. rise over run).



         e.   Attached residences shall be separated from
detached residential uses in the TND by a street or greenway.  If not
possible, residential uses adjacent to the attached residences shall have
substantially similar and compatible architectural facades.



         f.   Garages may be attached or detached.  If detached,
they shall be in the rear yard only and designed to be entered into from the
front or rear and shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the edge
of the adjoining alley travel surface.  Refer to Figure 8.1.13-3 for an
illustration of this requirement.  Front loaded garages are allowed outside
the TND Center portion of the TND.  Such garages shall be set back at least
twelve (12) feet from the front building plane of the structure (inclusive of
the porch). 



         g.   Accessory structures including mailboxes, newspaper
boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses, and flag poles may be located in any front,
side or rear yard.  Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in the rear
yard only.  Accessory structures greater than fifty (50) square feet in area
shall be comprised of the same exterior materials as the principal structure.



      5.   Civic Buildings



         a.   A minimum ten (10) foot front yard setback shall be
observed.  Areas between the building and the adjacent sidewalk shall be
landscaped per Section 11.4(G).  Off-street parking in the front yard shall
be prohibited.



         b.   Building facades shall be generally parallel to
front property line. 



         c.   Pedestrian access to the principal buildings shall
be from the adjoining front yard sidewalk.



         d.   Off-street parking areas shall be inter-connected,
wherever possible.



         e.   Trash dumpsters are to be located to the rear of
the building.



         h.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick, brick veneer,
decorative concrete block, pre-cast or field poured tilt concrete panels with
texture; stone or stone veneer, flush architectural metal panels; stucco or
artificial stucco; glass, wood, or wood materials, or similar materials. 
Decorative metal roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval
body, in instances where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is
involved, shall have the authority to approve building materials not
specifically listed but similar in appearance and texture to those herein
listed.



         f.   Street level windows shall be provided and shall be
transparent.  Mirror or reflective glass shall not be allowed.



         g.   Flat roofs may be permitted, provided a parapet is
provided that screens all rooftop equipment from the view of pedestrians and
motorists from the view below.



Section 8.2   Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses



8.2.1   Adult Establishment 



   This section applies to any new adult establishment, and any
expansions, additions, and alterations thereof an existing adult
establishment and said business shall conform to the requirements set forth
in this ordinance.



   A.   Adult establishments have negative secondary impacts upon:
adjacent neighborhoods; residential neighborhoods; churches; schools; day
care centers; public parks; or when adult establishments are concentrated. 
Special regulation of these establishments is necessary to ensure that their
adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhood.  The requirements of this section are therefore
established.



   B.   This section shall apply to all “Adult Establishments” as
defined in NC Gen. Stat. 14-202.10 and shall also apply to adult video stores
as defined in this Statute.



   C.   Adult establishments shall be permitted subject to the
following requirements, except where requirements in other applicable
sections of the zoning ordinance are more restrictive:



      1.   Massage businesses shall be permitted in an I-1 and I-2
zones only.  This provision shall not pertain to massage therapists who are
licensed or registered medical professionals or other persons certified by a
state or nationally recognized organization; nor shall this apply to any
private or public fitness center or nonprofit community recreational fitness
and service organization, either of which provides massage therapy as a
service incidental to the operation of a fitness center.



      2.   No two (2) adult establishments may be located within
five-hundred (500) linear feet of each other.



      3.   No adult establishment may be located within one-thousand
(1,000) linear feet of the property line of any church/house of worship; any
public or private elementary, middle, junior high, or high school;
children’s camp; library; public park or playground; day care center
(except a day care center located within an industrial facility, i.e.
building), or two-hundred fifty (250) linear feet from the edge of a
residential zoning district.



      4.   The required distances shall be measured from the closest
edge of the property line occupied by an adult establishment to the closest
edge of the property line occupied by a church/house of worship; any public
or private elementary, middle, junior high, or high school; children’s
camp; library; public park or playground; day care center (except a day care
center located within an industrial facility, i.e. building); or residential
zoning district or another adult establishment.  Provided, however, that
when an adult establishment is located in a multi-tenant facility, the
distance shall be measured from the closest edge of the portion of the
facility occupied by such establishment.



      5.   No more than one (1) adult establishment shall be located
within the same structure or portion thereof.



      6.   Doors shall be prohibited on all private viewing booths
and the interior of the booth shall be constantly visible to the operator of
the establishment.



      7.   The patron entrance to all adult establishments shall be
in the front of the building.



      8.   No printed material, slide, video, photograph, written
text, live show, or other visual presentation shall be visible, nor shall any
live or recorded voices, music, or sounds be heard from outside the walls of
the establishment.  Windows shall be opaque preventing the view of the
interior of the building.



      9.   Irrespective of the sign area regulations contained in
Chapter 12, no freestanding signs for adult establishments shall be
permitted.  Additionally, signs attached to or applied to the building
(paint, stickers, etc.) shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the size of the
exterior surface wall fronting on a public vehicular area, but in no instance
shall exceed fifty (50) square feet.  Additionally, signs are limited to
text only; graphics shall not be allowed.  The text may not include the
following terms: “Nude,” “Topless,” “Erotic” or “XXX.”



      10.   The Board of Adjustment shall have no authority to
modify or grant variances from the separation distance requirements listed
herein.



      11.   After the effective date of these regulations, the
establishment of a residential zoning district or protected use subsequent to
the commencement of an adult establishment will not render the adult
establishment nonconforming.



8.2.2   Amusement and Sporting Facility, Indoor



   In any Office zoning district, only fitness gyms shall be allowed.



8.2.3   Amusement and Sporting Facility, Outdoor



   A.   All outdoor swimming facilities shall be located at least fifty
(50) feet from any adjoining lot line, except one-hundred (100) feet shall be
required if adjacent to a residential zoning district.



   B.   All outdoor accessory recreational uses (with the exception of
swimming pools) located on any lot must be located at least twenty (20) feet
from any side or rear lot line; fifty (50) feet shall be required if adjacent
to a residential zoning district. These distances shall serve as minimum
distances and shall be increased for particular uses as mandated elsewhere in
this Ordinance.



   C.   Lights shall be extinguished after regular hours of
operation.  Illumination of sporting events shall be permitted after this
time only to conclude a scheduled event that was unable to conclude before
this time due to unusual circumstances.



   D.   The following requirements apply to fairgrounds only:



      1.   All outdoor recreation facilities and vending stands
shall be located at least five-hundred (500) linear feet from a residential
district. Otherwise, all buildings or structures, whether permanent or
temporary, may not be located within one-hundred (100) feet of any lot line.



      2.   Access to the site shall be provided by principal or
minor arterials only, as depicted on the most currently adopted version of
the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



   E.   The following requirements apply to firing ranges only:



      1.   For outdoor firing ranges, shooting areas shall be
located at least five-hundred (500) linear feet from any property line



      2.   The distance from any firing point, measured down range
in the direction of fire to the nearest property line of the property on
which the range is located shall be at least one half-mile (2,640 feet) at
the time of initial construction.



      3.   A projectile-proof backstop, consisting of concrete,
steel, earth, or any combination, at least fifteen (15) feet above the target
line must be erected and maintained behind all target areas.



   F.   The following requirements apply to golf driving ranges only:



      1.   Fencing, netting, trees, berms, or other control measures
shall be provided around the perimeter of the driving or playing areas so as
to prevent golf balls from going onto adjacent properties. Such devices,
where applicable, may be counted towards any required screening provided.



      2.   The minimum lot depth from the tees to the end of the
driving area shall be one thousand (1,000) feet or the end shall be
controlled with netting and/or berms to prevent golf balls from leaving the
property.



   G.   The following requirements apply to recreational fish lakes or
ponds only:



      1.   Electronic sound amplification shall not be permitted.



8.2.4   Animal Hospital (indoor only); Animal Hospital (with outdoor
kennel)



   A.   If the use shares interior walls with any other use, the animal
hospital structure shall be insulated and soundproofed, in order to minimize
all loud and disturbing noises that might disturb those persons in adjoining
structures or in the nearby vicinity.



   B.   For indoor animal hospitals only, if the lot containing the use
is located within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district, a
conditional use permit per Section 5.11 shall be required.



   C.   If the use has an outdoor kennel, it shall meet the
requirements of Section 8.2.5, with the exception of the minimum lot size
requirements.



8.2.5   Animal Kennel



   A.   Any structure which houses animals which is not fully enclosed,
and all animal runs shall each be located at least one-hundred (100) linear
feet from any lot line and three-hundred (300) linear feet from any
preexisting principal residential structure located on another lot.



   B.   An animal kennel may be an accessory use on a lot containing a
principal single-family residential use in the R-2 and R-3 districts subject
to the regulations contained herein.



   C.   Outdoor run areas shall be located in the rear yard only and
shall be enclosed by an opaque, decorative fence or masonry wall at least
eight feet in height.



   D.   In the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, a minimum lot area of
three (3) acres shall be required.



   E.   In the C-2 and C-3 zoning districts, a minimum lot area of one
(1) acre shall be required.



8.2.6   Automatic Teller Machine (ATM)



   A.   Freestanding ATM structures shall be visible from a public
street for security reasons.



   B.   A freestanding ATM must be located outside all required
setbacks.



8.2.7   Auction House



   In the CBD, UMU, C-1 and IU zoning districts and in all TNDs, if all
principal and accessory structures for the use exceed twenty-five thousand
(25,000) square feet GFA, a conditional use permit shall be required.  In
these same zoning districts the use shall be indoor only.



8.2.8   Automobile Body Shop; Automobile Detail Shop; Automobile Repair
Shop 



   A.   All storage of equipment and materials shall be placed on the
lot containing the use and shall not be on any adjacent street or lot.



   B.   All painting and/or external repair of damaged vehicles and all
"auto body work", shall be done behind closed doors in a properly ventilated,
indoor area.



   C.   All outdoor storage of damaged or wrecked vehicles shall be
screened in accordance with Section 9.16. 



   D.   Any use which also has an automobile towering and wrecking
service as an accessory use must meet the requirements contained in Section
8.2.10.



   E.   Any use with over seven (7) spaces designated for vehicles
waiting for repair must screen such spaces from any public road in accordance
with Section 9.16.



   F.   Maximum allowed front and side yard parking shall be equivalent
to three (3) parking spaces per garage bay.  Additional parking spaces shall
be located in the rear yard only and shall be substantially screened from any
public street before issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



   G.   In the IU zoning district, if the lot containing the use is
located within one-hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district or the
use has towing and wrecking as an accessory use, a conditional use permit
shall be required.



8.2.9   Automobile Service Station



   A.   No above grade equipment for the vehicular service of gasoline,
oil, or other petroleum product, shall be located closer than twenty-five
(25) feet to any public right-of-way and ten (10) feet to any exterior
property line or within any required setback, whichever is greater. Pump
island canopies shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to a public
right-of-way in the front yard or extend within any required side or rear
yard setback.



   B.   In the Urban Standards Overlay District only, fuel stations
shall accommodate no more than ten (10) customers simultaneously in the front
yard.  For corner lots, both yards fronting the adjoining road shall be
considered the front yard for purposes of this requirement.



   C.   In the IU zoning district, if the lot containing the use has
more than thirteen (13) fueling pumps and is located within one-hundred (100)
feet of a residential zoning district or the use has towing and wrecking as
an accessory use, a conditional use permit shall be required



8.2.10   Automobile Towing and Wrecker Service



   A.   All principal and accessory towing and wrecker services uses
must meet the requirements contained herein.



   B.   Any outdoor vehicle storage area shall be located a minimum of
one-hundred (100) linear feet from any street right-of-way and two-hundred
(200) linear feet from any residential zoning district. 



   C.   If the lot containing the use is located within three-hundred
(300) feet of a residential zoning district, a conditional use permit shall
be required. 



   D.   All damaged and wrecked vehicles must be parked in delineated
parking spaces.



   E.   If the vehicle storage area is greater than twenty-five (25)
parking spaces then a conditional use permit is required.



   F.   Vehicle storage facilities shall not be located at an elevation
whereby the storage is visible from a public street after the required
screening is in place.



   G.   In all residential zoning districts, whenever a storage area
faces a public street, the following requirements shall apply:



   H.   All screening requirements must be sufficiently opaque to
materially screen the storage area at the time the certificate of occupancy
is issued. (See Sections 11.3 and 11.6)



8.2.11   Automobile, Truck, Boat, Motorcycle, Manufactured Home and
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Rental [with three (3) or more automobiles,
trucks, etc. are for sale on a regular basis)



   A.   See Section 11.5.E for outdoor vehicle display areas
landscaping requirements.



   B.   All outdoor vehicle display areas shall be paved.



   C.   No vehicles may be displayed or stored on or within required
buffer yards, including required street yards.



   D.   Paved areas reserved for the storage or display of vehicles for
sale shall not be required to be striped for individual vehicle spaces.
However, off-street parking for employees and patrons shall be required to
conform to the design provisions of Chapter 10.



8.2.12   Bed and Breakfast Inn with Restaurant; Bed and Breakfast Inn
without Restaurant



   A.   In any residential district, breakfast shall be the only meal
served and shall be served only to guests. In any office or commercial
district, meals to non-guests may be served, including lunch and/or dinner.



   B.   Off-street parking, equal to that required for the bed and
breakfast inn and for a restaurant shall be provided. Separate signage for
both uses, however, shall not be permitted.



   C.   Off-street parking in the side and rear yards shall be screened
with a minimum Type A buffer yard (see Section 11.3) if the lot containing
the use adjoins a residential zoning district, except the R-2 and R-3 zoning
districts. Parking shall be placed on the lot in a manner designed to have
the least physical impact on adjoining residential uses.



8.2.13   Bus or Train Terminal, Passenger



   The site shall be located so as to have buses directly accessing
thoroughfares as depicted on the most currently adopted version of the local
thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan to avoid traveling
through any abutting residential neighborhoods.



8.2.14   Camping and Recreational Vehicle Park



   A.   All spaces for camping and recreational vehicles shall be
located at least one-hundred (100) linear feet from any adjoining lot line.



   B.   Notwithstanding any other screening requirements, the
campground shall be sufficiently wooded to provide an opaque natural buffer
between the campground, all adjacent lots, and all adjacent public roads at
the time a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use.



   C.   Accessory uses, limited to usage by campground patrons, may
include laundry facilities and the selling of convenience items (snacks,
beverages, etc.).



8.2.15   Car Wash, Automatic Class I and II; Car Wash Self Service



   A.   Vacuuming, drying and polishing facilities may not be located
in the front yard.  In addition, such facilities shall not be located in any
required yard or buffer area adjacent to a residential zoning district.



   B.   Vehicular entrances and exits shall not face any lot in a
residential zoning district, except the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts.
This shall not apply in the case of lots containing such automobile washes
that are separated from such residentially zoned lots by a principal or minor
arterial.



   C.   All vehicular accessible areas on the lot shall be at least
fifty (50) feet from any adjoining residentially zoned lot, except in cases
where such lot lies directly across a principal or minor arterial.



   D.   If a self-service car wash is located adjacent to a
residentially zoned district, a conditional use permit shall be required.



8.2.16   Club, Private (without adult entertainment); Food Catering
Facility (with onsite dining areas)



   If the lot containing the use is located within one-hundred (100) feet
of a residential zoning district, a conditional use permit shall be required.



8.2.17   Convenience Store



   A.   The following uses shall be considered accessory to Convenience
Stores: Car Washes, Automatic Class I & II; Gasoline pumps and canopies;
Restaurants located within the Primary Building; Sales of prepackaged
beverages, snack foods, tobacco products, and other retail merchandise; and
rental of video tapes and video cassette recorders.  All such accessory uses
will not require additional parking.  In no case shall such accessory uses
be allowed additional signage.



   B.   In the UMU and C-1 districts, access to the site shall be
provided by at least one principal or minor arterial, as depicted on the most
currently adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive
transportation plan.



   C.   No above grade equipment for the vehicular service of gasoline,
oil, or other petroleum product, shall be located closer than twenty-five
(25) feet to any public right-of-way and 10 feet to any exterior property
line or within any required setback, whichever is greater. Pump island
canopies shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to a public
right-of-way in the front yard or extend within any side or rear required
setbacks.



   D.   In the Urban Standards Overlay District only, fuel stations
shall accommodate no more than ten (10) customers simultaneously in the front
yard.  For corner lots, both yards fronting the adjoining road shall be
considered the front yard for purposes of this requirement.



   E.   Vacuuming facilities may be located outside the building, but
may not be located within any required yard or buffer area adjacent to a
residential district.



   F.   The sale of fuel at convenience stores shall be prohibited in
TNDs.



8.2.18   Country Club; Golf Course



   Accessory uses including restaurants, retail shops selling golf related
items, and other accessory uses normally associated with a county club or
golf course may be allowed.



8.2.19   Day Care Center, Class B; Day Care Center, Class C



   A.   Outdoor play areas shall be located in the rear or side yards
only. In no case shall such play areas be located in a required side yard
setback.



   B.   All outdoor play areas are to be surrounded by a fence or wall
at least four (4) feet in height.



   C.   See Section 10.6 for staging area requirements.



   D.   For Class C Day Care Centers only, access to the site shall be
provided by principal or minor arterials only, as depicted on the most
currently adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive
transportation plan.



   E.   Accessory daycares to churches are allowed as a use by right in
residential zoning districts for up to fifty (50) pre-school children, after
school care children, handicapped persons or senior citizens unrelated by
blood or marriage, and not the legal wards or foster children of the
attendant adult.  In residential zoning districts, such day cares with over
fifty (50) attendees will require the issuance of a conditional use permit;
in all other zoning districts these day cares will be treated the same as a
Class C day care center.



   F.   The City Council may issue a conditional use permit in
accordance with Section 5.11.  In addition, the following findings of fact
will have to be met:



      1.   Traffic and noise likely to be generated by the facility
shall not be disruptive to any adjacent residentially developed properties.



      2.   The foregoing shall be applicable in the residential
districts only.



8.2.20   Flea market, Indoor and Outdoor



   A.   For outdoor flea markets only, the lot shall be at least 300
linear feet from any lot located in a residential district, except lots
located in RS-A, RS-B and RS-C. 



   B.   Any flea market shall be on a lot of at least five (5) acres
that fronts and has direct access from a minor arterial road or higher
classification as depicted on the most currently adopted version of the local
thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



8.2.21   Food Catering Facility



   For any use with banquet facilities, a conditional use permit shall be
required if the lot containing the use is located within one-hundred (100)
feet of a residentially zoned district.



8.2.22   Health and Behavioral Care Facility



   A.   If the facility exceeds ten-thousand (10,000) square feet gfa
in the OLC, O-1 and C-1 zoning districts, a conditional use permit shall be
required.



   B.   Any facility which serves more than fifty (50) clients shall
maintain a side setback of at least twenty (20) feet and a rear setback of at
least forty (40) feet when the side or rear yard abuts a residential
district, unless a greater setback is otherwise required for the zoning
district in which it is located.



8.2.23   Hotel; Motel



   A.   Retail uses, lounges, and restaurants may be located as an
accessory use within any motel or hotel.



   B.   In the IU district, only conversion hotels (i.e., conversion of
a building into a hotel from another use) shall be allowed.



   C.   In the TMU, OLC, UMU and C-1 zoning districts, only hotels with
fewer than twenty-five (25) rooms shall be allowed.



8.2.24   Nursery (garden)



   A.   Structures associated with the use shall be at least fifty (50)
feet from any interior lot line and a Type A landscaping buffer shall be
installed along all interior lot lines.



   B.   Mulch and gravel piles, etc., must be located out of the front,
rear and side setbacks. If the mulch and gravel piles, etc. are stored in the
front yard, they must be permanently screened from the adjoining public road
with either an opaque landscaping screen or a wooden fence.  Such screen
must have a minimum height of six (6) feet.



8.2.25   Office Uses With Greater Than 100,000 GFA in the UMU and IU
districts



   Office buildings greater than one-hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet GFA are only allowed as a use by right for conversions in the UMU and IU
zoning districts; otherwise, such uses shall be a conditional use in the UMU
and IU zoning districts.



8.2.26   Planned Unit Development



   A.   PUD DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES



      1.   Allowed Zoning Districts



      Multi-family developments may be placed in the R-2, R-3, RMF,
TMU, OLC, O-1, CBD, UMU, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2 and I-U Districts.  All
PUDs must be served by a public water and sewer system and must have access
onto a principal or minor arterial.



      2.   Maximum Building Height



      All buildings shall have a maximum building height of five (5)
stories, provided that buildings shall be no greater than three (3) stories
in height in PUDs on sites of less than fifty (acres).



      3.   Minimum Gross Acreage



      Ten (10) acres



      4.   Residential Component



      In any residential zoning district in which a PUD is allowed,
such PUD shall have residential uses that make up a minimum of 60% of the
gross acreage of the development.



      5.   Common Open Space



      At least ten (10) percent of the gross acreage of the PUD shall
be preserved as common open space.  This shall include all common areas [at
least one-half (1/2) of which shall be grassed or landscaped] that are
readily accessible by residents and users of the PUD.  At least one-half
(1/2) of the required common open space shall consist of improved common
areas, such as plazas, courtyards and other improved pedestrian-accessible
areas specifically designed to accommodate residents and visitors.  Such
areas can include benches, fountains, play equipment and venues for outdoor
vending stands. 



      All common open space shall otherwise be in accordance with
Section 13.26.7 of this Ordinance.



      6.   Approval Process for a PUD



      See subdivision approval process in Chapter 13



      7.   Off-street Parking Requirements



      The requirements of Chapter 10 shall prevail except location of
off-street parking shall be as provided for herein based on the building
type.  Parking decks, if used, shall be of the Option “B” and “C”
variety as contained in Sections 10.9.2 and 10.9.3 of this Ordinance. 
Streets within the PUD are strongly encouraged to be designed to accommodate
on-street parking. 



      8.   Screening Requirements



      There are no mandated screening requirements within the PUD. 
Screening shall be provided at the periphery of the PUD, when such use, if
not located in the PUD, would have been required to provide screening in
accordance with Section 11.4.



      9.   Accessory Structure Requirements



      Accessory structures shall be in compliance with Section 9.9 of
this Ordinance, except where otherwise provided herein.



      10.   Lighting, Noise, Odor Requirements



      Lighting requirements shall be the same as provided in Section
9.13 of this Ordinance.  Noise requirements shall be the same as provided in
Section 9.23 of this Ordinance.  Odor control requirements shall be the same
as provided in Section 9.22 of this Ordinance. 



      11.   Required Design Team Parties



      An applicant for a PUD approval shall certify in writing at the
time of application that a member of each of the following professions will
be used in the planning and design process for the proposed development. 
The site plan submitted for approval of the PUD shall bear evidence that one
or more representatives from each such profession was involved in the
designing of the PUD:



         ∙   Project planning and design by a licensed North
Carolina architect or landscape architect.



         ∙   Site engineering by a North Carolina Registered
Engineer



      12.   Uses Allowed in the PUD



      Uses within a PUD are limited to those listed below.  Except as
specifically provided, uses are further limited to those allowed in the
underlying zoning district.  Refer to Table 7.1-1. 



 

USE
 
DEVELOPMENT STATUS (1)
 
Additional Supplemental Conditions (2)




Development, Multi-family
 
Use by right
 
 


Dwelling, Single-family
 
Use by right
 


Offices, including Medical Services
 
Use by right
 
8.2.25


Restaurants (no fast food; no drive-through)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.29


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Indoor
 
Use by right
 
8.2.2


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Outdoor
 
Conditional Use
 
8.2.3


Animal Hospital (indoor)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.4


Auction House (indoor only)
 
Use by right
 
8.2.7


Art Gallery
 
Use by right
 


ATM
 
Use by right
 
8.2.6


Business Services
 
Use by right
 


Bus or Train Terminal, Passenger
 
Use by right
 
8.2.13


Day Care Center, Class B
 
Use by right
 
8.2.19


Day Care Center, Class C
 
Conditional Use
 
8.2.19


Grooming Services
 
Use by right
 


School for the Arts
 
Use by right
 


Hotel/Motel
 
Conditional Use
 
8.2.23


Light Retail
 
Use by right
 
8.2.30


Convenience Store
 
Conditional use only if open between midnight and 5:00 AM, otherwise use by
right
 
8.2.17


Laundromat
 
Conditional use only if open between  midnight and  5:00 AM, otherwise use
by right
 


Manufactured Goods, Class I
 
Conditional use
 
8.3.6


Auditoriums/Assembly Hall/Community Center (less than 500 seats)
 
Use by right
 


Auditoriums/Assembly Hall/Community Center (500+seats)
 
Conditional Use
 
8.4.2


Essential Services, Class 1
 
Use by right
 


Essential Services, Class 2
 
Use by right
 
8.4.8


Essential Services, Class 4
 
Use by right
 
8.4.9


Financial Institution
 
Use by right
 


Flex space
 
Use by right
 
8.3.2


Fraternal and Service Organization Meeting Facilities
 
Conditional use
 
8.4.11


Library
 
Use by right
 


Park
 
Use by right
 
8.4.14


Parking Lot
 
Use by right
 
8.2.26


Post Office
 
Use by right
 


School (Elementary, Middle and Senior High)
 
Use by right
 


School, Vocational
 
Conditional Use
 


School for the Arts
 
Use by right
 


Stadium
 
Conditional Use
 
8.4.20


Transit Station
 
Conditional Use
 




 



(1) If a use located in the PUD is subject to the issuance of a conditional
use permit and if such use were shown on the site plan originally approved
for the PUD through the conditional zoning process or through issuance of a
conditional use permit, issuance of a conditional use permit for such use
shall not be needed.  In instances where such use was not indicated on and
approved as part of the site plan for the conditional rezoning of the
property for the PUD, or if the PUD were approved administratively, a
conditional use permit would need to be for issued for such use.



(2) Additional specifications for building design and layout specifications
for buildings located in a PUD are indicated elsewhere in this Section.



      13.   Street Requirements



      Streets within the PUD should have a design speed of thirty (30)
miles per hour and a posted speed of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
Higher design and posted speeds may be allowed on major boulevards that
provide through access to the PUD and adjoining developments.



      Except for major boulevards that provide access and channel
traffic throughout the PUD, all streets (including alleys, where provided)
within the PUD shall be publicly maintained. 



      Alleys in the PUD shall have a minimum paved surface of sixteen
(16) feet and a minimum right-of-way width of twenty-four (24) feet.  Alleys
shall meet all other applicable NCDOT design and construction, except that
alleys shall not be required to have curb and gutter and shall not be
required to have an inverted crown for drainage.



      14.   Sidewalk/Greenstrip Requirements



      Refer to Section 9.18.1(H) for sidewalk requirements and Section
9.18.2 for greenstrip requirements.



      15.   Street Tree Requirements



      Street trees in accordance with Section 11.4 shall be required on
all streets within the PUD, irrespective of the underlying zoning district.



   B.   BUILDING AND LOT STANDARDS



   Except as provided herein, all design standards of the Urban Standards
Overlay District shall prevail.  Additional design standards are also shown
below for the various types of buildings that may be found a PUD.



      1.   Commercial Buildings



         a.   Buildings facing each other on the same side of the
same street shall maintain a common front build-to line.  The Administrator
may allow for minor deviations from the build-to line to allow for exterior
amenities such as outdoor dining areas, customer drop-off points, etc.



         b.   Building facades shall be parallel to the adjoining
street



         c.   Off-street parking areas shall be inter-connected,
wherever possible.



         d.   Trash dumpsters are to be located to the rear of
the building.



         e.   Buildings may be served with rear-loading alleys.



         f.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick, brick veneer,
stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; cement fiberboard; glass,
wood, or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative metal roofs shall
be allowed.  The Administrator or approval body, in instances where a
conditional use permit or conditional zoning is involved, shall have the
authority to approve building materials not specifically listed but similar
in appearance and texture to those herein listed.



         g.   Street level windows shall be transparent.  Mirror
or reflective glass shall not be allowed.



         h.   Roofs may either be flat or pitched.  Flat roofs
may be permitted, provided a parapet is provided that screens all rooftop
equipment from the view of pedestrians and motorists from the view below. 
If pitched, principal roofs of the building must have pitches that vary from
186:12 to 1212:12 (i.e. rise over run).



      2.   Free-standing Multi-family Buildings



         a.   Front build-to lines shall be 0-15 feet behind the
sidewalk.



         b.   Building facades shall be parallel to the adjoining
street



         c.   Trash dumpsters are to be located to the rear of
the building.



         d.   Primary pedestrian entrance into the building shall
be from the adjoining front yard sidewalk.



         e.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; glass, wood,
cement fiberboard, or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative
metal roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval body, in
instances where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is involved,
shall have the authority to approve building materials not specifically
listed but similar in appearance and texture to those herein listed.



         f.   Roofs may either be flat or pitched.  Flat roofs
may be permitted, provided a parapet is provided that screens all rooftop
equipment from the view of pedestrians and motorists from the view below. 
If pitched, principal roofs of the building must have pitches that vary from
6:12 to 12:12 (i.e., rise over run).



      3.   Detached Single-family Residences



         a.   Garages may be attached or detached.  If detached,
they shall be in the rear yard only and designed to be entered into from the
front or rear and shall be set back at least 20 feet from the edge of the
adjoining alley travel surface.  Refer to Figure 8.2.26-1 for an
illustration of this requirement. 



Figure 8.2.26-1









 



         b.   A common front build-to line on both sides of the
same block shall be maintained.  Variations in front yard setbacks may vary
by no greater than +/- 5 feet on any block.  Areas between the building and
the adjacent sidewalk shall be landscaped per Section 11.4(G).



         c.   Pedestrian access to the residence shall be from
the adjoining front yard sidewalk.



         d.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; glass, cement
fiberboard; wood, or wood materials, or similar materials.  Decorative metal
roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator shall have the authority to
approve building materials not specifically listed but similar in appearance
and texture to those herein listed.



         e.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches
that vary from 186:12 to 1212:12 (i.e. rise over run).



         f.   Front porches, where provided shall be a minimum of
eight (8) feet in depth. 



         g.   Building facades shall be generally parallel to
front property line. 



         h.   Front loaded garages shall be set back at least
twelve (12) feet from the front building plane of the structure (inclusive of
the porch).  Refer to Figure 8.2.26-1 for an illustration of this
requirement.



         i.   Manufactured homes shall not be allowed.



         j.   Accessory structures including mailboxes, newspaper
boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses, and flag poles may be located in any front,
side or rear yard.  Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in the rear
yard only.  Accessory structures greater than fifty (50) square feet in area
and shall be comprised of similar exterior materials as the principal
structure.



      4.   Attached Residences



         a.   A common front build-to line on both sides of the
same block shall be maintained.  Variations in front yard setbacks may vary
by no greater than +/- 5 feet on any block.  Areas between the building and
the adjacent sidewalk shall be landscaped per Section 11.4(G).  Building
facades shall be generally parallel to front property line. 



         b.   Pedestrian access to the residence shall be from
the adjoining street.



         c.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick or brick
veneer; stone or stone veneer; stucco or artificial stucco; cement
fiberboard; glass, wood, or wood materials, or similar materials. 
Decorative metal roofs shall be allowed.  The Administrator or approval
body, in instances where a conditional use permit or conditional zoning is
involved, shall have the authority to approve building materials not
specifically listed but similar in appearance and texture to those herein
listed.



         d.   Principal roofs of the building must have pitches
that vary from 6:12 to 12:12 (i.e. rise over run).



         e.   Attached residences shall be separated from
detached residential uses in the PUD by a street or greenway.  If not
possible, residential uses adjacent to the attached residences shall have
substantially similar and compatible architectural facades.



         f.   Garages may be detached and must be located in the
rear yard only and designed to be entered into from the rear yard.  The
garages shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the edge of any
adjoining alley travel surface.  Front loaded garages shall be set back at
least twelve (12) feet from the front building plane of the structure
(inclusive of the porch).  Refer to Figure 8.2.26-1 for an illustration of
this requirement.



         g.   Accessory structures including mailboxes, newspaper
boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses, and flag poles may be located in any front,
side or rear yard.  Otherwise, accessory structures shall be in the rear
yard only.  Accessory structures greater than fifty (50) feet in area shall
be comprised of the same exterior materials as the principal structure.



      5.   Civic Buildings



         a.   A minimum ten (10) foot front yard setback shall be
observed.  Areas between the building and the adjacent sidewalk shall be
landscaped per Section 11.4(G).  Off-street parking in the front yard shall
be prohibited.



         b.   Building facades shall be generally parallel to
front property line. 



         c.   Off-street parking areas shall be inter-connected,
wherever possible.



         d.   Trash dumpsters are to be located to the rear of
the building.



         e.   Building elevations fronting and/or visible from
public streets shall be clad with any of the following: brick, brick veneer,
decorative concrete block, pre-cast or field poured tilt concrete panels with
texture; stone or stone veneer, flush architectural metal panels; stucco or
artificial stucco; glass, wood, or wood materials, or similar materials. 
The Administrator or approval body, in instances where a conditional use
permit or conditional zoning is involved, shall have the authority to approve
building materials not specifically listed but similar in appearance and
texture to those herein listed.



         f.   Street level windows shall be transparent.  Mirror
or reflective glass shall not be allowed.



         g.   Flat roofs may be permitted, provided a parapet is
provided that screens all rooftop equipment from the view of pedestrians and
motorists from the view below.



8.2.27   Paintball Facility



   A.   No portion of the operation activities shall be located closer
than one-hundred (100) linear feet from any exterior lot line, and
one-hundred fifty (150) feet to any residentially zoned lot line.  At a
minimum, indoor facilities shall adhere to the underlying zoning district
setback requirements.



   B.   A facility shall be placed on a parcel of land consisting of at
least five (5) acres.



   C.   The use shall not be permitted to locate adjacent or contiguous
to any existing place of worship, day care or school.



   D.   A public address system is permitted, provided that the
speakers and other such audible equipment are pointed in a downward and
inward direction, so as to be away from adjoining properties.



   E.   A lighting system is permitted, provided that the light
fixtures and other such equipment are pointed in a downward and inward
direction, so as to be away from adjoining properties. 



   F.   Any paintball facility requiring fifty (50) or more parking
spaces shall be located on a principal or minor arterial as depicted on the
Gaston Urban Area Thoroughfare Plan.



   G.   Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m.
only.



8.2.28   Parking Lot (Principal Use)



   A.   In all residential zoning districts only satellite parking lots
are allowed. (See Section 10.7)



   B.   In all zoning districts except for the C-2, C-3 and Industrial
zoning districts, lots shall be limited to one-half (1/2) acre or less in
size.



   C.   No portion of any such lot shall be located closer than
five-hundred (500) feet to any portion of another such lot.



8.2.29   Racetrack, Large; Racetrack, Small



   A.   For outdoor motor vehicle racetracks, no portion of the use
shall be located closer than seven hundred fifty (750) feet to any existing
principal structure on any abutting lot.



   B.   A minimum lot are of forty (40) acres shall be required.



   C.   Large racetracks must have frontage on a principal or minor
arterial as depicted on the most currently adopted version of the local
thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



8.2.30   Restaurant with Drive Through



   Drive-thru entrances and exits onto a public street must be located at
least 200 feet from an intersection (or greater) as called for in Section
9.24.



   If the lot containing the use is located within one-hundred (100) feet
of a residential zoning district, a conditional use permit shall be required.



8.2.31   Restaurant without Drive Through



   Restaurants having any outside amphitheater, stage, sports equipment,
playing field or court, or any provision for live or recorded acoustic or
amplified entertainment outside of the building, shall comply with the
following standards:



   A.   The use shall be located no closer than one-hundred (100) feet
from any residential zoning district.



   B.   The Administrator may establish a closing time for any outside
facility that is earlier than the closing time of the activities that occur
entirely within the building if the lot containing the use is within
one-hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned district.



8.2.32   Retail, Light



   A.   In the Office Districts (TMU, OLC, O-1 and O-M), a light retail
establishment less than fifteen-thousand (15,000) square feet GFA shall be a
use by right; uses larger than this size shall require a conditional use
permit.



   B.   In the O-M District, the only retail light establishments
allowed are medical supply, optician, pharmacy and florist.



   C.   For light retail uses of between fifty-thousand but less than
one-hundred-thousand (50,000-99,999) square feet GFA, access to the site
shall be provided by one or more principal or minor arterials, as depicted on
the most currently adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or
comprehensive transportation plan.



   D.   For light retail uses with greater than one-hundred (100,000)
square feet GFA, access to the site shall be provided by either (1) two
principal or (2) one principal and one minor arterial, as depicted on the
most currently adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or
comprehensive transportation plan.



   E.   For light retail uses with greater than one-hundred (100,000)
square feet GFA, the following requirements apply:



      1.   Reuse/Compartmentalization.  As part of the conditional
use permit review process, any large retail establishment constructed after
the adoption of these regulations shall be designed to include specific
elements for adaptation to multi tenant re-use.  Such elements may include
but are not limited to the following:



         a.   Compartmentalized constructions include plumbing,
electrical service, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning



         b.   Building design shall also allow for the interior
subdivision of the structure into separate tenancies. 



         c.   Facades shall be readily adaptable to multiple
entrances.



         d.   Parking lot schemes shall be designed to enable
users of any future tenants to readily walk from their vehicles to the
storefront



         e.   Other design elements that facilitate the
multi-tenant re-use of the building.



      2.   Demolition Bond.  Any large retail establishment that is
constructed after the adoption of these regulations shall be required to have
a demolition bond submitted to and accepted by the City Council as part of
its conditional use permit.  Such permit shall be prepared by and signed to
a demolition professional licensed to do business in North Carolina and shall
be equal to one-hundred twenty-five (125%) of the then present cost of
demolishing the large retail establishment.  Such permit shall be good for a
period of ten (10) years following approval of the conditional use permit for
the large retail establishment.  At the end of the ten-year period, such
permit shall be null and void as shall the conditional use permit unless a
new demolition bond (in an amount of 125% of the cost demolishing the large
retail establishment at that time) is approved by the City Council.  The
City reserves the right to use the proceeds from the bond to have the
structure that housed the large retail establishment demolished if such
structure remains vacant (i.e., is not used for retail purposes or any other
use for which a certificate of occupancy is required) for a period of five
(5) consecutive years.



8.2.33   Rodeo/Accessory Rodeo



   A.   All activities shall take place at least one hundred (100) feet
from any exterior lot line.



   B.   The use shall be placed on a parcel of land of at least f ten
(10) acres.  When the use is an accessory rodeo, a combination of contiguous
parcel(s) under the same ownership totaling ten (10) acres is permissible.



   C.   Food sales shall be provided for patrons of the rodeo and
accessory rodeo only.



   D.   A public address system is permitted, provided that the
speakers and other such audible equipment are pointed in a downward and
inward direction, so as to be away from adjoining properties.



   E.   A lighting system is permitted, provided that the light
fixtures and other such equipment are pointed in a downward and inward
direction, so as to be away from adjoining properties.



   F.   Accessory rodeos shall not exceed ten (10) shows per calendar
year. A show shall consist of an event taking place for not more than five
(5) consecutive days associated with the same event. 



   G.   Accessory rodeos are not required to have paved or graveled
parking or driveway areas, provided there is an established pasture and
farmland with adequate vegetative ground cover.  The accessory rodeo shall
have sufficient area to accommodate the required amount of parking per
Chapter 10.  The parking area shall remain in a well- maintained vegetative
state during the life of the operation.



   H.   Principal use rodeos shall be located on a principal or minor
arterial as depicted on the Gaston Urban Area Thoroughfare Plan.



   I.   Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m.
eastern standard time.



8.2.34   Shopping Center



   A.   Direct access to shopping centers with more than one-hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet GFA shall be served by at least one (1)
principal or minor arterial as depicted on the most currently adopted version
of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



   B.      For shopping center with greater than two-hundred fifty
thousand (250,000) square feet GFA, a traffic study based on ITE (Institute
of Transportation Engineering) rates or other comparable source analyzing the
proposed site's impact on the existing road network shall be provided.
Proposed roadway improvements serving the site should also be detailed.



   C.   Uses in a shopping center are limited to those that are allowed
in the underlying zoning district. Any use shown as a "conditional use" shall
require the issuance of a conditional use permit in a shopping center,
irrespective of the size of that shopping center.



8.2.35   Swimming Pool, Sales, Service and Supplies



   A pool dealer shall be permitted to erect up to three (3) functioning
model pools outdoors on the same site as the store. Said pools may be above
ground or in-ground types. A "functioning model pool" is one which is
operational and maintained in a clean appearance as if fit for swimming and
intended to be used as a sales display only and may also include a pool which
is covered with a winterizing cover between September 15 and April 15 of any
year. There are no restrictions on the number of model pools the pool store
may erect indoors.



   Any such model pool erected outdoors shall meet the enclosure
requirements for residential accessory pools found in Section 9.9(A)(11).



8.2.36   Tires Sales, New and/or Used



   All tires for outdoor display shall be placed on a display rack only. 
The maximum number of tires for outdoor display shall be limited to thirty
(20) at any one time. 



8.2.37     Pet Grooming Services



   A.   If the use shares interior walls with any other use, the pet
grooming structure shall be insulated and soundproofed, in order to minimize
all loud and disturbing noises that might disturb those persons in adjoining
structures or in the nearby vicinity.



   B.   Areas for outdoor pet activities are permitted but pets cannot
be housed outside or left unattended outside in an area unless that area
meets the requirements for outdoor kennel (Section 8.2.5).  The public and
private area around this business must be kept clean of animal waste.



   C.   For indoor pet grooming services only, if the lot containing
the use is located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning
district, a conditional use permit per Section 5.11 shall be required.



   D.   If the use has an outdoor kennel, it shall meet the
requirements of Section 8.2.5, with the exception of the minimum lot size
requirements.



(Res. passed 6-8-2015)



Section 8.3   Industrial/Distributional/Heavy Impact Principal Uses



8.3.1   Commercial Vehicle and Truck Storage



   A.   All vehicle and truck storage areas shall be screened from both
a public street (except for I-85) and any adjoining residentially zoned lot
with a Type C buffer yard.



   B.   Commercial vehicle and truck storage for solid waste and septic
tank trucks shall require issuance of a conditional use permit.



   C.   In the C-3 district, if the lot containing the use is greater
than ten (10) acres, a conditional use permit shall be required.



8.3.2   Flex space



   In the Urban Standards Overlay District, if a facility containing the
flex space use is later converted to a retail use, the facility must come
into compliance with all the requirements of Section 6.6.2.6.



8.3.3   Junkyard and Salvage Yard



   A.   Outside storage of all junked material shall be at least 100
feet from all lot lines.



   B.   All screening requirements must be sufficiently opaque to
materially screen the storage area at the time the certificate of occupancy
is issued.



8.3.4   Landfill, Land Clearing and Inert Debris (LCID) (Major)



   A.   Use separation



   There shall be a minimum separation of one-hundred (100) feet between
the fill area and any adjoining property line.  There shall also be a
three-hundred (300) feet minimum separation between this use and any
pre-existing principal residential structure located on a lot not containing
the landfill.



   B.   Required Screening 



   A minimum Type D screening shall be required along all property lines.



   C.   Access 



   Access to the landfill by the public shall be controlled with gates,
chains, fences, ditches and/or trees to prevent unregulated dumping.



   D.   Dust



   All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner that prevents dust
from leaving the property.



   E.   Operation



      1.   No filling is permitted in the 100 year-flood way. 
Filling in the 100-year flood plain is permitted only if a flood development
permit has been issued.



      2.   No filling is permitted in minor drainage ways unless the
drainage has been piped or otherwise diverted in accordance with approved
plans; and



      3.   No filling is permitted in utility easements.



      4.   Landfills may only operate from 8:00 a.m. until sunset
Monday through Saturday only.



      5.   Landfills shall not operate within one-hundred (100) feet
of an exposed body of water or mineshaft opening.



   F.   Maximum Time Period 



   Landfills are limited to a maximum period of operation of three (3)
years from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, provided
that the City Council, upon request, may grant one (1) or more one (1) year
renewals.



   G.   Closure



   The landfill site shall permanently close when it has been filled or
reached capacity.  In addition, once it has been determined that the site
has reached capacity, closure procedures must be completed within ninety (90)
days. Landfills shall be closed with a minimum of one (1) foot of clean soil,
placed in a manner that will provide good positive drainage (no standing
water) with stabilized paths of travel for concentrated flows, with the
perimeter slopes, graded to a maximum slope of 3:1(i.e., three-to-one run to
rise), and all areas stabilized with vegetation or by other approved means.



   H.   Erosion/Sedimentation Control 



   Provisions for the control of sedimentation and erosion shall be made
on all sites. When required by the State, an approved erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Administrator prior to
the issuance of the zoning permit. 



   I.   Site Recordation



   A plat map and/or metes and bounds legal description designating the
lot and landfill boundary area shall be recorded in the Gaston County
Register of Deeds prior to the issuance of a zoning permit by the
Administrator.



8.3.5   Landfill, Land Clearing and Inert Debris (LCID) (Minor)



   A.   Maximum Area



   The maximum area of Minor LCID shall be two (2) acres.



   B.   Maximum Time Period



   Landfills are limited to a maximum period of operation of three (3)
years from the date of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, provided
that the City Council may, upon request, grant one (1) or more one (1) year
renewals.



   C.   Use separation



   There shall be a minimum separation of one-hundred (100) feet between
the fill area and any adjoining property line.  There shall also be a
three-hundred (300) feet minimum separation between this use and any
pre-existing principal residential structure located on a lot not containing
the landfill.



   D.   Screening requirement



   A minimum Type B screening shall be required along all property/lot
lines.



   E.   Access



   Access to the landfill shall be controlled with gates, chains, fences,
ditches and/or trees to prevent unregulated dumping.



   F.   Dust



   All unpaved areas shall be maintained in a manner that prevents dust
from leaving the property.



   G.   Operation



      1.   No filling shall be permitted in the designated floodway
as indicated in an underlying FH Flood Hazard Overlay District (refer to
Section 6.6.2.1 for additional development specifications for the FH
district). 



      2.   No filling is permitted in minor drainage ways unless the
drainage has been piped or otherwise diverted in accordance with approved
plans;



      3.   No filling is permitted in utility easements;



      4.   Landfills may only operate from 8:00 a.m. until sunset
Monday through Saturday.



   H.   Closure



   The landfill site shall permanently close when the landfill site has
been filled or reached capacity.  In addition, once it has been determined
that the site has reached capacity, closure procedures must be completed
within ninety (90) days.  Closed landfill sites shall be covered with a
minimum of one (1) foot of clean soil, placed in a manner that will provide
good positive drainage (no standing water) with stabilized paths of travel
for concentrated flows, with the perimeter slopes, graded to a maximum slope
of 3:1 (i.e., three-to-one run to rise), and all areas stabilized with
vegetation or by other approved means;



   I.   Erosion/Sedimentation Control



   Provisions for the control of sedimentation and erosion shall be made
on all sites.  When required by the State, an approved erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Administrator prior to
the issuance of the zoning permit.



   J.   Site Recordation



   A plat map and/or metes and bounds legal description designating the
lot and landfill boundary area shall be recorded in the Gaston County
Register of Deeds prior to the issuance of a zoning permit by the
Administrator.



8.3.6   Machine, Metal and Woodworking Shop



   No accessory or principal structure shall be located within one-hundred
(100) feet from any adjacent property that is located in a residentially
zoned district. 



8.3.7   Manufactured Goods, Class 1



   A.   In the UMU, CBD and C-1 districts, and in TNDs, only
manufactured goods uses that are enclosed within a building, have no noxious
odors or noxious noise shall be allowed.  Tractor trailer/railcar deliveries
shall not be allowed. 



   B.   The total gross floor area of all principal and accessory
buildings in the UMU and CBD districts shall not exceed five-thousand (5,000)
square feet and in the C-1 district shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000)
square feet.



8.3.8   Manufactured Goods, Class 2



   No accessory or principal structure shall be located within 100 feet
from any adjacent property that is located in a residentially zoned
district. 



8.3.9   Manufactured Goods, Class 3



   A.   No accessory or principal structure shall be located within
two-hundred (200) feet from any adjacent property that is located in a
residentially zoned district. 



   B.   The following requirements apply to mining uses only:



      1.   The quarry and all its buildings, pits, and processing
equipment shall not be located within one-hundred (100) feet from any lot
line, and three-hundred (300) feet from any adjacent lot line that is located
in a residentially zoned district.



      2.   A nonclimbable fence, at least six (6) feet high, shall
be installed around the quarry and all of its operations as a safety device.
These fences must be constructed of wire mesh with openings not to exceed two
(2) inches by four (4) inches or equivalent and must be placed on the
interior side of screening and/or buffering devices; and



      3.   Access to the quarry shall not make use of any
non-arterial as depicted on the most currently adopted version of the local
thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



      4.   Any crushing of rock or processing of material shall be
done in such a way as to minimize the amount of air-borne dust created.



      5.   All unpaved storage areas shall be maintained in a manner
so as to limit dust from leaving the storage area.



      6.   A truck route plan shall be submitted showing routes to
the site from all four-lane highways. Such routes shall be designed to
minimize impacts on residential areas, schools or other uses that may be
negatively affected by truck traffic.



      7.   Two (2) copies of a completed mining application form and
an approved mining permit from the State Department of Environment, Health
and Natural Resources, Land Quality section, section shall be required prior
to issuance of a zoning permit by the Administrator.



      8.   An operation plan shall be submitted to the Administrator
prior to issuance of a zoning permit.  Such plan shall include the following:



         a.   The date proposed to commence operations and their
expected duration.



         b.   Proposed hours and days of operations.



         c.   Estimated type and volume of extraction.



         d.   Description of method of operation, including the
disposition of topsoil, overburden, and byproducts.



         e.   Description of equipment to be used in the
extraction process.



         f.   Any phasing of the operation and the relationship
among the various phases.



         g.   Operating practices to comply with the performance
standards applicable to the operation.



      9.   Rehabilitation:



         a.   Within one (1) year after the cessation of
production, all equipment and stockpiles that are incidental to such
operation shall be dismantled and removed by and at the expense of the owner.



         b.   The site shall be drained to prevent the
accumulation of standing water, and channelization of the drainage shall be
designed and controlled so as not to cause erosion or silting of neighboring
properties or public drainage ways, nor to appreciably increase the turbidity
of any natural water course, or to occlude any existing drainage course.



   C.   The following requirements apply to asphalt plants only:



      1.   The asphalt operation shall be enclosed by a nonclimbable
fence that is at least six (6) feet in height.



      2.   All unpaved storage areas shall be maintained in a manner
so as to limit dust from leaving the storage area.



      3.   A truck route plan shall be submitted showing routes to
the site from all four-lane highways. Such routes shall be designed to
minimize impacts on residential areas, schools or other uses that may be
negatively affected by truck traffic.



      4.   Rehabilitation:



         a.   Within one (1) year after the cessation of
production, all equipment and stock piles, incidental to such operation,
shall be dismantled and removed by and at the expense of the owner.



         b.   The site shall be drained to prevent the
accumulation of standing water, and channelization of the drainage shall be
designed and controlled so as not to cause erosion or silting of neighboring
properties or public drainageways, nor to appreciably increase the turbidity
of any natural water course, or to occlude any existing drainage course.



8.3.10   Mini-Warehouse



   A.   All externally accessible storage compartments within the
mini-warehouse shall front on a private drive having a minimum width of
fifteen (15) feet to ensure sufficient room for vehicular circulation,
loading, and parking.



   B.   Driveways providing ingress and egress to the site shall not
permit any parking or loading extending to within thirty (30) feet of the
adjoining street right-of-way.



   C.   All doors to storage units that front on a public road must be
screened with a Type A buffer yard.



   D.   Facilities can only be used for dead storage of materials or
articles and must not be used for assembly, fabrication, processing or repair.



   E.   The storage of hazardous, toxic, explosive substances, or any
other substance is prohibited.



   F.   In the C-2 district outside the Urban Standards Overlay
District, any side of a building facing a public street must be constructed
with a façade of brick, stone, wood, or split-faced block. An exception is
allowed for mini-warehouses located on corner lots provided that shrubbery of
low-growing evergreens are planted every five (5) feet along the frontage of
the secondary road.  In all other zoning districts, the building materials
shall not be reflective.



   G.   If the mini-warehouse facility has a locked and keyed entrance,
two (2) staging spaces must be located outside of the public right-of-way.



   H.   Open storage shall be prohibited.



   I.   The storage of operable boats, recreational vehicles and
similar uses must be in an enclosed building.



8.3.11   Outdoor Storage Yard (Contractor)



   If more than one (1) acre of outdoor storage area is provided, a
conditional use permit shall be required.



8.3.12   Portable Toilet Service



   No zoning permit shall be issued without proof that the applicant has
received all appropriate licenses and approvals from state and local agencies
for discharging into the public sewer system.



8.3.13   Truck Terminal



   A.   For all lots contain the use that are less than five (5) acres
in area, access shall be provided by a principal or minor arterial as
depicted on the most currently adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan
or comprehensive transportation plan.



   B.   For all terminals located on lots with five (5) or more acres,
access shall be provided by a principal arterial as depicted on the most
currently adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive
transportation plan.  In addition, a truck route plan shall be submitted
showing routes to the site from all four-lane highways. Such routes shall be
designed to minimize impacts on residential areas, schools or other uses that
may be negatively affected by truck traffic.



8.3.14   Warehouse



   A.   In the C-2 and I-U districts, warehouse with a gross floor area
of up to two-hundred fifty thousand (250,000) square feet shall be a use by
right; otherwise, a conditional use permit shall be required.



   B.   In the C-2 and I-U districts, access shall be provided by a
principal or minor arterial as depicted on the most currently adopted version
of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



8.3.15   Wood Waste Grinding Operation



   A.   In residential districts where allowed, the subject tract shall
contain at least ten (10) acres of land.  In non-residential districts where
allowed, the subject tract shall contain at least two (2) acres of land. 



   B.   All entrances and exits shall be paved as provided in Section
10.4 for a distance of fifty feet back from the edge of the paved street. 
Other areas within the tract designated or required for traffic circulation
shall be at a minimum graveled or covered with a similar dust reduction
material.  Storage areas for mulch, dirt, wood waste or other similar
materials need not be graveled.  Gravel or any other dust reduction material
used for traffic circulation must be maintained during the life of the
operation.



   C.   No grinder, screener, or other similar equipment shall be
located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential dwelling with the
exception of the owner’s or applicant’s own residential dwelling(s). The
detailed site plan shall include a footprint demonstrating where the
equipment will be located in relation to all dwellings located on adjoining
properties.



   D.   In residential districts where allowed, the operation shall
have a two hundred (200) foot setback from any property line of the subject
tract.  In non-residential districts where allowed, the operation shall have
at least a fifty (50) foot setback from any property line of the tract,
except when adjoining residential districts, in which a one-hundred (100)
foot setback shall be is required.   



   E.   Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.



Section 8.4   Civic/Institutional Principal Uses



8.4.1   Airports; Airstrip/Freight and Flying Service



   A.   All uses shall meet the standards and requirements imposed by
the Federal Aviation Administration and all other federal, state, or local
agencies having jurisdiction.



   B.   The lot containing the use shall not be located with three
hundred (300) foot distance of an existing residential structure.



8.4.2   Auditorium/Assembly Hall/Amphitheatre/Community Center (500 seats
or more)



   Access to the site shall be provided by a principal or minor arterial
only, as depicted on the most currently adopted version of the local
thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



8.4.3   Botanical Garden



   All maintenance and accessory structures and off-street parking
facilities shall be located no closer than three hundred (300) feet from any
property line unless separated from the property line by a Type B buffer yard.



8.4.4   Cemetery



   A.   Tombstones, crypts, monuments and mausoleums shall be located a
minimum of twenty (20) feet from any side or rear lot line and at least
thirty (30) feet from a street right-of-way. Greater setbacks shall be
observed if otherwise required by the zoning district in which the cemetery
is located.



   B.   Sales of crypts shall be allowed as an accessory use on
premises (for cemeteries as a principal use only).



   C.   All requirements contained herein also apply to any pet
cemetery.



8.4.5   Charitable Service Facility; Shelter for the Homeless



   A.   The lot containing the use shall not be located within
one-hundred (100) feet from any residentially zoned district.



   B.   No such facility shall be located within one-quarter (1/4) mile
of an existing shelter for the homeless.



   C.   The facility shall be contained within the building of and
operated by a government agency or nonprofit organization.



   D.   The facility operator(s) shall provide continuous on-site
supervision by an employee(s) and/or volunteer(s) during the hours of
operation.



8.4.6   Church/Place of Worship



   Any church/house of worship having a sanctuary capacity of five-hundred
(500) or more seats shall be located on and have direct access to a principal
or minor arterial as depicted on the most currently adopted version of the
local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



   Refer to Section 8.2.19(E) for additional requirements on day care
centers that are associated with churches/houses of worship.



8.4.7   Correctional Facility



   A.   The principal structure and any accessory use or structure
(excluding property boundary fencing) shall be located at least five-hundred
(500) feet from any property located in a residential zoning district.



   B.   That property boundary fencing shall not employ barbed wire,
razor wire, electrical fencing, or similar materials where abutting property
located in a residential district.



   C.   In addition to the security fencing, the landscaping
requirements for a Type B level buffer yard shall be provided on the exterior
of fencing wherever it is adjacent to a street or property in a residential
district. 



   D.   Any facility larger than five (5) acres shall have direct
access to a principal or minor arterial as depicted on the most currently
adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive
transportation plan.



8.4.8   Essential Services, Class 2



   Any lot containing a wastewater treatment plant shall not be located
with two-hundred (200) feet from any residentially zoned district.



8.4.9   Essential Services, Class 4



   Heliports shall be allowed within one-half mile from any public safety
stations with a conditional use permit.



8.4.10   Farmers Market



   In addition to the findings of facts in Section 5.11, ingress and
egress to the site shall not have a negative impact on any adjoining lot or
nearby street.



8.4.11   Fraternal and Service Organization Meeting Facility



   A.   In any non-residential district, if the lot contain the use is
located within one-hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned district, a
conditional use permit shall be required.



   B.   This use is not permitted in the RLD, RS-20, RS-12, RS-8 and
RMF districts if a restaurant, nightclub, alcoholic beverages or amplified
music is provided.



8.4.12   Heliport/Helistop



   A.   In the OM district, heliports are only allowed in association
with a hospital or other medical service provider.



   B.   All heliports will meet the standards and requirements imposed
by the Federal Aviation Administration and all other federal, state, or local
agencies having jurisdiction.



   C.   Non-emergency use (i.e., for use other than for public safety
or medical purposes) of private heliports between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. shall be prohibited. Emergencies for public safety or medical
purposes shall not be subject to this requirement.



   D.   Heliports located on top of buildings shall be exempt from any
height limitations (except those promulgated by the FAA).



8.4.13   Military Reserve Center



   All outdoor equipment shall be screened in accordance with Section 11.6.



8.4.14   Recreation Center and Sports Center



   Direct access to the site shall be provided by a principal or minor
arterial as depicted on the most currently adopted version of the local
thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan.



8.4.15   Recycling Deposit Station



   NOTE: The supplemental regulations below only apply to principal uses.



   A.   Any building or structure or any outdoor recycling bins shall
be located at least one-hundred (100) feet from any preexisting principal
residential structure.  This shall only apply to recycling deposit stations
that serve as principal uses and recycling deposit stations that are in the
form of manned trailers that serve as collection points for deposited clothes
and other household items.



   B.   No outdoor storage of goods to be recycled shall be permitted.



   C.   The station shall be kept free of litter, debris, and residue.



   D.   All drop-off containers and storage bins shall be durable,
waterproof, rustproof, covered, and secure from unauthorized entry, and shall
be clearly marked to indicate the type of material to be deposited therein.



8.4.16   School, Elementary, Middle and Senior High



   A.   Middle and senior high schools having an enrollment capacity of
three-hundred (300) students or greater shall have direct access to the site
provided by principal or minor arterials only, as depicted on the most
currently adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive
transportation plan.



   B.   All modular classrooms are subject to site plan review.



8.4.17   School, Vocational



   A.   Truck driving schools with outdoor maneuvering area shall be
allowed in the I-1 and  I-2 districts only.



   B.   In the event the school engages in commerce, that is, trainees
practice their developing skills with the public, then, the facility housing
these transactions must abide by the regulations on that trade or industry
found within this Ordinance. For example, if the school operates a repair
garage for the benefit of training students and that activity is in a free
standing facility, it must adhere to those regulations imposed upon
automotive repair shop as both a conditional and/or "permitted based on
standards" uses.



8.4.19   Solid Waste Transfer Station



   A.   Any principal or accessory structure must be located at least
three-hundred (300) feet from any residentially zoned lot or fifty (50) feet
from any other lot line.



   B.   There shall be no outdoor storage of waste products, unless
entirely enclosed in containers and storage bins that are durable,
waterproof, rustproof, covered, and secure from unauthorized entry.



   C.   The site shall be kept free of litter, debris, and residue.



8.4.20   Stadium



   A.   Stadiums shall be a use by right if accessory to a school, and
then must be located within one-quarter (1/4) of a mile from the school.
Otherwise, a stadium shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit. 



   B.   Access to the site shall be provided by principal or minor
arterials only, as depicted on the most currently adopted version of the
local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive transportation plan if seating for
more than one-thousand (1,000) persons is provided.



   C.   All principal structures (including bleachers) shall be located
a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet from all interior lot lines.



   D.   A Type B buffer yard or higher screen will be required between
said use and any abutting lot located in a residential district.



   E.   Off-street parking requirements need to be met if the stadium
is freestanding and not an accessory use to a school.



8.4.21   Tower, Radio and Television Broadcast



   A.   The tower must be located at least two-hundred (200) feet from
any residentially zoned lot or forty (40) feet from any other lot line.



   B.   Towers shall be setback a minimum of two-hundred fifty (250)
feet from any principal or minor arterial as depicted on the most currently
adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive
transportation plan.



   C.   Guy wire ground connections within thirty (30) feet of a
residentially zoned lot shall be surrounded by a five (5) foot high
chain-link fence located along the adjoining residential property line. Where
said fencing is within clear view of a residential lot, sufficient
landscaping shall be installed around the fence to screen the fence from the
residential lot within five (5) years.



   D.   Where a tower site is adjacent to a residentially zoned
district, access to each tower base shall be secured with an eight (8) foot
high wooden privacy fence with a three-strand barbed wire security top angled
outward.  When a tower site is adjacent to a residential district (except in
R-1, R-2 or R-3) and multiple towers exist, or are being installed on the
site, a nine (9) gauge, chain-link tower area perimeter fence (without a top
rail) shall be installed. Said tower area perimeter fence shall be at least
eight (8) feet in height and include a three (3) strand barbed wire security
top angled outward. The Administrator shall determine the location of all
fencing required by this section based on both security and aesthetics from
adjacent properties.



8.4.22   Tower, Telecommunication



   See Section 9.15.



8.4.23   Electronic Gaming Operation



   A.   No electronic gaming operation may be located within five
hundred (500) linear feet of the parcel line of a house of worship, daycare
center, library, public park, elementary, middle, or high school.



   B.   No two (2) electronic gaming operations may be located within
one thousand (1,000) linear feet of each other. The distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the closest point between the building
housing the electronic gaming operation and the building housing the dwelling
of another electronic gaming operation.



   C.   No electronic gaming operation shall have more than twenty-five
(25) gaming machines.



   D.   During hours of operation, electronic gaming operations shall
be open for direct, unobstructed access by all safety and enforcement
personnel. All entrance doors shall remain unlocked while patrons are on the
premises.



   E.   Windows or doors shall not be covered with signs or coatings to
render them opaque.



   F.   No flags, banner signs, or flashing lights shall be allowed at
any time.



   G.   Hours of operation:  Electronic gaming operations may only
operate and be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.



   H.   Electronic gaming operations may not operate or co-locate on
any premise with an ABC license.



   I.   Any electronic gaming operation that legally existed prior to
the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the regulations
contained in this subsection within 180 days from the effective date of this
ordinance, July 9, 2012.



(Res. passed 7-9-2012)



CHAPTER 9:
GENERAL PROVISIONS



9.1   Customary Home Occupations



9.2   Rural Home Occupations



9.3   Boundary Structures



9.4   Fences or Wall Permitted



9.5   Lot to Abut a Dedicated Street; Minimum Lot Widths



9.6   One Principal Building or Use Per Lot



9.7   Sight Distance Triangles



9.8   Height and Yard Exceptions



9.9   Accessory Structures and Uses



9.10   Private Residential Quarters



9.11   Uses and Structures Allowed in a Required Setback



9.12   Use of Manufactured Homes



9.13   Outdoor Lighting and Reflectivity



9.14   Special Grading Treatment Abutting Residential Districts



9.15   Communication Towers



9.16   Outdoor Storage and Display of Goods, Materials, Wastes and
Equipment



9.17   Automobile Repair in Residential Zoning Districts or on Lots Used
Primarily for Residential Purposes



9.18   Sidewalks/Greenstrips



9.19   Reserved



9.20   Hours of Operation



9.21   Uses with Outdoor Speakers



9.22   Odor



9.23   Access Management



Section 9.1    Customary Home Occupations



   A.   The following regulations shall apply to all “customary home
occupations” irrespective of the underlying general zoning district. 
Additional regulations for “rural home occupations” are found in Section
9.2.



   B.   Customary home occupations may be established in any principal
dwelling unit. Customary home occupations shall be incidental to a
residential unit and shall not be considered a substitute to traditional
retail establishments that rely on a substantial amount of walk-in traffic.
Customary home occupation requirements shown herein shall apply in addition
to all other applicable requirements of this Chapter for the district in
which such principal dwelling unit is located.



   C.   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate
to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the exterior
residential character of the dwelling.



   D.   No accessory structures or outside storage of materials or
equipment shall be allowed in connection with the customary home occupation.
Said requirement shall not be applicable to swimming instructions given in an
outdoor swimming pool.



   E.   Use of the dwelling for the home occupation shall be limited to
either twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the principal
structure or seven-hundred fifty (750) square feet, whichever is smaller.



   F.   The operator of the customary home occupation must reside on
the same lot as where the customary home occupation takes place.  Only
residents of the dwelling may engage in the customary home occupation with
the following exception: one nonresident, engaging in work ancillary to the
customary home occupation (e.g., a receptionist), may report to work at the
dwelling. Otherwise, no other nonresidents shall be allowed to report to work
at the dwelling to engage in the same or nearly the same customary home
occupation. 



   G.   No products, goods, materials, or equipment associated with the
customary home occupation shall be visible from any adjoining street or
properties. All such products, goods, materials or equipment shall be stored
within the residential dwelling unit.  On-premise sales of products are
limited to those made or reconditioned on the premises and those that are
necessary to the service being provided.



   H.   No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use
of the dwelling shall be permitted.



   I.   Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles (i.e.,
passenger automobiles, passenger vans and passenger pickup trucks) shall be
permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation. 
No more than two (2) vehicles shall be used in conjunction with the customary
home occupation.  Parking in association with the customary home occupation
shall only take place in the driveway or garage. 



   J.   Chemical, mechanical, or electrical equipment or any other
activity associated with the customary home occupation that creates odors,
light emission, noises, or interference in radio or television reception
detectable outside the dwelling (with the exception of swimming pool lessons)
shall be prohibited. 



   K.   Hours of operation shall be anywhere from 8:00 AM to 8:00 PM
only.



   L.   Instruction in music, dancing, and similar subjects shall be
limited to a maximum of two (2) students at a time (including the number of
persons waiting on the property to receive such instruction).



   M.   Signs for customary home occupations shall be as followed:



      1.   The sign shall be placed flush against the wall of the
principal dwelling unit;



      2.   The sign shall have a maximum area of four (4) square
feet;



      3.   No more than one (1) sign per customary home occupation
shall be allowed;



      4.   The sign shall not be illuminated.



   N.   In no instance may an automobile repair shop, automobile body
shop, small engine repair and services, retail sales operations, wholesale
sales operation with on-site delivery and storage of goods, be conducted as a
customary home occupation.



   O.   Permitted customary home occupations shall be limited to the
following:



      1.   Bakery (Retail)



      2.   Barber Shop



      3.   Beauty Shop



      4.   Bicycle Sales/Service



      5.   Blueprint and Drafting Service



      6.   Clock Shop



      7.   Computer and Data Processing Service



      8.   Detective Agencies



      9.   Florist, Retail



      10.   Florist, Wholesale



      11.   Food Catering Facility



      12.   Gunsmith



      13.   Insurance Agency



      14.   Key Shop



      15.   Locksmith



      16.   Photographic Studio



      17.   Real Estate Agency



      18.   Sewing, Cloth and Notions Store



      19.   Shoe Repair Shop



      20.   Sign Painting Shop



      21.   Tailor and Alterations Store



      22.   Tax Preparation Service



      23.   Travel Agency



      24.   Upholstery Shop



      25.   Watch and Clock Repair Shop



   P.   The Administrator shall have the authority to allow a customary
home occupation that is not listed above, provided the Administrator
determines that the use will be harmonious with all existing and potential
nearby residential uses and meets all of the performance criteria associated
with customary home occupations listed herein.



Section 9.3   Boundary Structures



   A.   Boundary structures are permitted in any zoning district
provided that no portion of the structure, including footings, extends into
or over any easement, right-of-way, or property line. The maximum height of a
boundary structure shall be twelve (12) feet including all columns, light
fixtures or other ornamentations, but excluding berms. A “boundary
structure” shall not be considered a “fence or wall” and shall not be
subject to the requirements of Section 9.4.



   B.   All boundary structures shall require the submittal of a site
plan in accordance with Section 5.2.



   C.   Boundary structures shall be subject to sight distance triangle
provisions contained in Section 9.7.



Section 9.4   Fences or Walls Permitted



   Except as otherwise noted, fences or walls [NOTE: A boundary structure
(as herein defined) shall not be considered a wall and shall be governed per
Section 9.3 above] are permitted in the various districts subject to the
following regulations:



9.4.1   Residential Districts



   A.   No fence or wall located in any required setback shall be built
to a height greater than four (4) feet (front yard) or eight (8) feet (rear
or side yard) above grade except as provided in Subsection (C).



   B.   Fence materials, color and/or texture not compatible in
appearance with the principal residential structure and/or the general
appearance of the neighborhood in which the lot is located may not be used
for fencing materials.  In no case shall a chain link fence be used in the
front yard.



   C.   Any fence or wall constructed within a sight distance triangle
must conform to the regulations contained in Section 9.7.



   D.   No fence or wall shall be constructed within a general drainage
or utility easement so as to block or materially impede the flow of
stormwater runoff.



   E.   Electric fences, except for livestock protection fences, shall
be prohibited. Invisible pet fences shall not be considered as an "electric"
fence.



(Res. passed 6-13-2011)



9.4.2   All Other Districts



   A.   Within all required setbacks the maximum height of a fence or
wall shall be twelve (12) feet except as provided in Subsection C herein.



   B.   No electrical fences except livestock protection fences shall
be permitted.  Invisible pet fences shall not be considered as an "electric"
fence.



   C.   Any fence or wall constructed within a sight distance triangle
must conform to the regulations contained in Section 9.7.



   D.   No fence or wall shall be constructed within a general drainage
or utility easement so as to block or materially impede the flow of
stormwater runoff.



   E.   Fences located in the front yard or visible from public view
shall be constructed of wood, iron, vinyl clad metal or material approved by
the Planning Director. In no case shall chain link fence be permitted in the
front yard.



(Res. passed 6-13-2011)



9.4.3   Correctional Facility; Public Utility Structures



   There shall be no maximum height for any fence located within the
required setback of any correctional facility or for any public utility
structure.



Section 9.5   Lot to Abut a Dedicated Street; Minimum  Lot Widths



   A.   No lot may be created after the effective date of this
Ordinance that does not have at least fifty (50) feet in all zoning
districts, except CBD, of publicly maintained street (or privately maintained
street approved through the subdivision regulations contained in Chapter 13)
except as follows:



      1.   Lots within a planned shopping center or office park or
other planned multi-tenant development of a nonresidential nature; or,



      2.   Lots within a condominium, townhome, patio home, or
planned residential development, traditional neighborhood development or
traditional infill development.



      3.   Easement lots as provided for in Section 13.15.3(C) of
this Ordinance



   B.   Newly created non-residentially zoned lots must have the
following minimum lot widths:



 

TABLE 9.5-1
Minimum Width of Newly Created Non-residentially Zoned Lots


 
Required Lot Width


Principal Arterial
 
200 feet


Minor Arterial
 
100/150* feet


Local Roads
 
See Tables 7.1-2 through 7.1-5



 



* A lot width of one hundred-fifty (150) feet is required on all lots located
at the intersection of two streets



   Table 9.5-1 shall also apply to newly created residentially zoned lots
that contain the following uses: Church/Places of worship, Library, Museum,
Stadium, School, College/University, Amusement and Sporting Facility,
Racetrack, Country Club, Golf Course and Camping and Recreational Vehicle
Park. 



   C.   A single-family dwelling (or manufactured home, where allowed)
may be constructed or placed on a lot that was platted and recorded on or
before the effective date of this Ordinance which does not abut a dedicated
street right-of-way provided the lot is given access to a dedicated street by
an easement at least thirty (30) feet in width for the use of the dwelling
established on such lot and further provided that such easement is maintained
in a condition passable for automobiles and service and emergency vehicles.
This easement may not be extended to provide access to any other lots nor to
any other residence not having frontage on a dedicated street.



Section 9.6   One Principal Building or Use Per Lot



   A.   No more than one principal building devoted to a residential
use shall be located on a lot, except as (i) part of a multifamily
development, or (ii) planned residential development, or (iii) as private
residential quarters per Section 9.10, or (iv) as a temporary manufactured
home as provided in Section 5.8.4(H), or (v) as a gameroom, as defined in
Section 2.7, and (vi) where otherwise specifically allowed in this Ordinance.



   B.   More than one principal building devoted to a nonresidential
use may be located on a lot provided that an access way at least eighteen
(18) feet wide is maintained from a public street to each building for use by
service or emergency vehicles. Each building on the lot shall otherwise be
separated from any other building by a distance of at least ten (10) feet.



Section 9.7    Sight Distance Triangles



   On corner lots in any zoning district, there shall be no obstruction to
vision, except for natural grade, between a height of two (2) feet and a
height of ten (10) feet measured above the average elevation of the existing
surfaces of the intersecting streets at their centerlines within the area
formed by joining points on the property lines measured as follows:



   A.   On property lines abutting streets with fifty (50) feet or less
in right-of-way width or local streets serving local traffic (i.e. streets
other than principal or minor arterials), the points on the property lines
shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the lot corner.



   B.   On property lines abutting streets with more than fifty (50)
feet in right-of-way width, the points on the property lines shall be at
least forty (40) feet from the lot corner.  Refer to Figure 9.7-1 and 9.7-2
for an illustration of these requirements.



Figure 9.7-1









 



Figure 9.7-2









 



   C.   Where the intersection involves two roads, one with a
right-of-way with greater than fifty (50) feet and the other with a
right-of-way of less than fifty (50) feet, the more stringent sight triangle
shall apply.  Refer to Figure 9.7-3 for an illustration of this
requirement. 



Figure 9.7-3









 



   D.   On roads that are maintained by NCDOT, NDCOT requirements shall
prevail.  Where the requirements between NCDOT and those listed herein
differ, the more restrictive shall apply.



Section 9.8   Height and Yard Exceptions



   A.   Building height requirements are indicated in Table 7.1-2(F). 
Exceptions to these requirements are as follows:



      1.   The height of telecommunication towers shall be as
provided in Section 9.15.



      2.    Roof structures not intended for human occupancy and
serving in an accessory capacity to the principal structure on the lot, such
as skylights, housing for elevators, stairways, water tanks, ventilating
fans, air conditioning equipment or similar equipment, steeples, spires,
belfries, and cupolas or chimneys, and radio and television antennae
(excluding communication towers) may exceed the maximum allowable heights as
provided in any of the zoning districts.



      3.   A parapet wall or cornice may extend up to five (5) feet
above the maximum building height for the zoning district in question.



   B.   Front yard requirements are indicated in Table 7.1-2(C). 
Exceptions to these requirements are as follows:



   On through lots, the required front and rear yard setbacks shall each
equal or exceed the greater required front or rear yard setback that would
normally be applied in that zoning district. For example, if a through lot
were located in a zoning district which normally required a thirty (30) foot
front setback and a thirty-five (35) foot rear setback, both front and rear
setbacks would each have to be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet. Accessory
structures may generally only be placed on through lots in the rear yard. The
front yard shall be determined based on the architectural front of the
proposed structure and other structures on the same block and side of the
street.  On through lots within commercial zoning districts, the required
front and rear yard setbacks may be reduced by ten (10) feet.  For example,
if a through lot were located in a commercial zoning district which normally
required a 30-foot front setback and a 20-foot rear setback, both front and
rear setbacks on a through lot may be reduced to a minimum of 20 feet. 
Where setback relief is granted opposing a residential lot, street trees
shall be installed along said property boundary according to Section 11.4. 
Notwithstanding the above, the setback provisions within the TH thoroughfare
overlay districts shall remain unchanged.



Section 9.9   Accessory Structures and Uses



   A.   Within any zoning district, accessory structures shall be
located as follows:



      1.   No portion of any accessory structure (except mailboxes,
newspaper boxes, walls, fences, birdhouses, flag poles, pump houses, bus
shelters and doghouses) shall be located within any front yard on lots less
than one (1) acre in area. Mailboxes, newspaper boxes, walls, fences,
birdhouses, flag poles, pump houses, and doghouses may be located in any
front, side or rear yard. Bus shelters may be located in any required front
yard setback.  On lots of one (1) acre in area or greater, accessory
structures may be located in the front yard, a minimum of one hundred fifty
(150) feet from the edge of the street right-of-way line.  Swimming pools,
pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall not
be located in any front yard, irrespective of lot size.



      2.   Accessory structures are allowed in any side yard,
although none are allowed in any required side yard setback except as
provided in Subsection 1 above.  Swimming pools, pumps, filters and pool
water disinfection equipment installations shall not be located in any
required side yard, irrespective of lot size.



      3.   Accessory structures are allowed in a rear yard or
required rear yard setback provided that no accessory structure (except as
provided in Subsection 1 above) shall be allowed within five (5) feet of any
principal structure and five (5) feet of any rear or side yard line. 



      4.   On any lot one-half (½) acre or less in area containing
a principal residential use, the maximum size of any accessory structures
(excluding outdoor swimming pools) shall not exceed one-half (½) the heated
ground floor area of the principal structure or seven hundred fifty (750)
square feet, whichever is less.



      5.   On a lot containing an area of greater than one-half (½)
acre, the maximum permitted area of accessory structures shall be computed by
taking three (3) percent of the area over one-half (1/2) acre (21,780 square
feet) and adding seven-hundred fifty (750) square feet or one-half (½) the
heated ground floor area of the principal residential dwelling, whichever is
greater.



      6.   Any building attached to a principal structure (e.g., via
a breezeway) will not be considered an accessory structure.  Any additions
to the principal structure shall be deemed “attached” to such structure
if the addition is in accordance with all applicable State Building Code
requirements 



      7.   On any lot one (1) acre of less in area containing a
principal residential use, the number of accessory structures (other than a
carport or garage) shall be limited to two (2).  On any lot greater than one
(1) acre in area containing a principal residential use, the number of
accessory structures (other than a carport or garage) shall be limited to
three (3). 



      8.   Exceptions to the setback requirements sited above may be
made per Section 5.15.1(B) of this Ordinance.  Notwithstanding, all swimming
pools, pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations
shall not be located in any front or required side yard. Such distances shall
be measured from the property line to the water's edge.



      9.   In no case may an accessory structure be placed in a
general drainage or utility easement without prior approval by the
Administrator.



      10.   With the exception of accessory structures in
association with an agricultural use, the height of an accessory structure
shall not exceed the height of the principal structure.



      11.   All outdoor in-ground swimming pools shall be enclosed
completely by a fence. All fence openings or points of entry into the pool
area enclosures shall be equipped with gates. The minimum height for fences
and gates shall be four (4) feet above the grade level. All gates shall be
equipped with self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate. All
materials shall be decay- or corrosion-resistant. The fence shall not have
openings greater than sixteen (16) square inches.



      12.   All above ground pools that are equipped with stairs to
access the pool shall have a gate with a height a minimum of four (4) feet. 
All gates shall be equipped with self-latching devices placed at the top of
the gate.



   B.   On any lot containing a principal residential use, no accessory
structure shall be permitted that involves or requires any external
construction features which are not primarily residential in nature or
character except for an accessory structure used in conjunction with a
mixed-use dwelling, temporary produce stand, agricultural use, or similar
nonresidential use that otherwise would be allowed on the property. Accessory
structures on lots containing a principal residential use shall not be made
of highly reflective metal materials.  Some examples of structures that
cannot be used as an accessory structure to a residential use include: school
buses, manufactured homes, tractor-trailers (with or without wheels), buses,
recreation vehicles, cargo containers, etc.



   C.   No accessory structure shall be constructed or placed on a lot
prior to the issuance of a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy for the
principal use or structure on the same lot.



   D.   Minor modifications to the size of accessory structures are
provided for in Section 5.15.1.B. 



   E.   Certain accessory uses have performance criteria that must be
met in order for that use to be conducted.  The following table lists those
accessory uses along with the location of the applicable performance
criteria.  Any accessory use that is listed as a “conditional use” in
Table 7.1-1 shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit per
Section 5.11.  If such use is listed in Table 7.1-1 as not being permitted
in a certain zoning district, that use (either as a principal or accessory
use) shall not be allowed in that zoning district.



 

USE
 
SECTION




Airport/Airstrip
 
8.4.1


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Indoors
 
8.2.2


Amusement and Sporting Facility, Outdoors:
 
8.2.3


Animal Kennel
 
8.2.5


ATM
 
8.2.6


Auditorium/Assembly Hall/Amphitheatre/Community Center (500 seats or more)
 
8.4.2


Automobile Body Shop/ Automobile Detail Shop/ Automobile Repair Shop
 
8.2.8


Automobile Towing and Wrecker Service
 
8.2.10


Automobile, Truck, Boat, Motorcycle, Manufactured Home and Recreational
Vehicle Sales and Rental
 
8.2.11


Car Wash, Automatic and Self Service
 
8.2.15


Cemetery
 
8.4.4


Day Care Center, Class A
 
8.1.3


Day Care Center, Class B and C
 
8.2.19


Family Care Home
 
8.1.6


Farmer’s Market
 
8.4.10


Gameroom
 
None


Heliport/Helistop
 
8.4.12


Home Occupation, Customary
 
9.1


Home Occupation, Rural
 
9.2


Junkyard and Salvage Yard
 
8.3.3


Landfill, Land Clearing and Inert Debris (minor)
 
8.3.5


Mini-Warehouse
 
8.3.9


Outdoor Storage Yard (Contractor)
 
8.3.10


Private Residential Quarters
 
9.10


Produce Stand
 
Use Temporary Use Standards in Section 5.8.4


Recycling Deposit Station 
 
8.4.16


Restaurant without Drive Through
 
8.2.29


Stadium
 
8.4.20


Tire Sales, New and/or Used
 
8.2.34


Tower, Radio and Television Broadcast
 
8.4.21


Tower, Telecommunication
 
9.15




 



Section 9.10   Private Residential Quarters



   Private residential quarters shall be permitted as an accessory use to
any single-family detached dwelling unit (excluding manufactured homes) in
accordance with the following requirements:



   A.   The same person shall own the accessory and principal dwelling
units. The owner of the principal dwelling unit shall live on-site.



   B.   A disabled person, family member, an occasional guest or
live-in servant shall occupy the accessory dwelling unit.



   C.   The private residential quarter shall not serve as a rental
unit (except in a Traditional Neighborhood Development).



   D.   The accessory dwelling unit may be attached to or be separate
from the principal dwelling unit. Except in a TND, the accessory dwelling
unit may be located in a separate accessory structure if the area of the lot
is at least one-hundred fifty (150) percent that of the required minimum lot
size for the zoning district in question.



   E.   If the accessory dwelling is in a detached structure, it shall
be served by the same driveway accessing the principal structure.
Manufactured homes may not be used for the accessory dwelling unit.



   F.   The ground floor area of the accessory unit shall be no greater
than fifty (50) percent of the ground floor area of the principal dwelling
unit, or seven-hundred fifty (750) square feet, whichever is less.



   G.   If the accessory dwelling unit is located in an accessory
structure, said structure shall be located in the rear or side yard. No such
structure shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet from any side or
rear lot line (except in a TND). The accessory structure housing the dwelling
unit shall not exceed the height of the principal dwelling.



   H.   No more than one (1) private residential quarters per lot shall
be allowed.



   I.   Any lot containing a private residential quarters shall have at
least two (2) off-street parking spaces.



Section 9.11   Uses and Structures Allowed in a Required Setback



   A.   No yard or lot existing at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance or any amendment subsequent thereto shall be reduced in size or
area below the minimum requirements set forth herein, except as the result of
street widening or other taking for public use or conveyance; or as provided
in Section 5.15.1; or as provided herein.



   B.   In any Residential zoning district, the required front yard for
a single- or two-family dwelling may be reduced if the front yards on nearby
developed lots are found to be less than that which is otherwise required in
the underlying zoning district. Said front yard may be reduced under the
following guidelines:



      ∙   The front yard setbacks for other single- and two-family
dwellings shall be determined on all other lots located on the same block,
facing the same street, within a Residential zoning district, and which lie
within two-hundred (200) linear feet from either side of the lot line from
the lot in question. The average of these existing front setbacks shall be
computed (measurements from at least two separate structures containing
dwelling units shall be required to make this computation). The required
front yard setback on the lot in question may be reduced to said average with
a maximum reduction of ten (10) feet being allowed.  Refer to Figure 9.11-1
below for an example of how this is to be interpreted.



Figure 9.11-1









 



Section 9.12    Use of Manufactured Homes



   A.   Manufactured homes may be used only as a place of residence
(i.e., as a dwelling unit). Use of a manufactured home for other uses
including, but not limited to, sales offices, school buildings, beauty shops,
banks, retail stores, accessory structures, etc. shall be prohibited.



   B.   A manufactured home, once constructed, shall always be
classified as such a use regardless of any external or internal renovations,
improvements, additions, or changes made. Notwithstanding, the class of a
manufactured home (i.e., class A, B, C, or D) may be changed according to the
corresponding modifications being made.



Section 9.13   Outdoor Lighting and Reflectivity



   This Section provides direction in controlling light spillage and glare
so as not to adversely affect motorists, pedestrians, and adjacent pieces of
property. Lighting intensities should be controlled to ensure that light and
glare are not directed at adjacent properties, neighboring areas, and
motorists. The following general provisions apply:



   A.   General Provisions



      1.   Light fixtures (not attached to buildings) must be
affixed to a decorative pole, which may be of metal, fiberglass, or
concrete.  Wooden poles are not permitted.



      2.   All fixtures must be either semi-cutoff or full-cutoff
fixtures only.  Full-cutoff light fixtures are shielded or constructed so
that no light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the
ninety (90) degree horizontal plane.  For semi-cutoff fixtures, no more than
five (5) percent of its light rays shall be emitted above the ninety (90)
degree horizontal plane.



      3.   The maximum height of the light source (light bulb),
detached from a building, shall be twenty (20) feet.



   B.   Outdoor Illumination of Buildings, Landscaping and Signs



   The following provisions apply to the outdoor illumination of
buildings, landscaping and signs:



      1.   Floodlights, spotlights or any other similar lighting
shall not be used to illuminate buildings or other site features unless they
are an integral architectural element that is designated on the development
plan. When approved, exterior lighting should be integrated with the
architectural character of the building.



         a.   The unshielded outdoor illumination of any building
or landscaping is prohibited. To avoid light spillage, only semi-cutoff or
full cutoff fixtures can be used.



         b.   External lighting fixtures used to illuminate a
sign must either be by directed ground lighting sign or mounted on the top of
the sign.



   C.   Prohibited Lighting and Fixtures



   The following are prohibited:



      1.   The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes.



      2.   Illuminated, highly reflective spotlights that hamper the
vision of motorists or bicyclists.



      3.   Flashing or blinking lights located in the right-of-way.



Section 9.14   Special Grading Treatment Abutting Residential Districts 



   A.   Special grading treatment is required where a nonresidential
use abuts a residential use or zone and differences in elevations of two (2)
feet or greater are proposed within twenty (20) feet of common property lines
for the purpose of development.  The following methods of grading treatment
are permitted to address this situation:



      1.   Grade the elevation differences to a maximum two to one
(2:1) slope and the installation of grass, plantings, landscaping, etc., as
necessary to prevent erosion.



   B.   Review and inspection of retaining walls and graded slopes are
required as follows:



      1.   Retaining walls five (5) feet in height or greater herein
required shall be designed and the plans signed and sealed by a professional
engineer or a registered architect licensed to practice in North Carolina.



      2.   Retaining walls and slopes herein required shall be
installed in accordance with all approved plans and whose installation must
be approved by the design engineer.



   C.   All retaining walls and graded slopes required by this section
shall be shown on a site plan for review as required by Section 5.2. Plan and
section details of proposed grading treatment shall be submitted as part of
the site plan review application.



Section 9.15   Communication Towers



   A.   In recognition of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the
intent of the City to allow communication providers the opportunity to locate
telecommunications towers and related facilities within the City and its
planning jurisdiction] in order to provide an adequate level of service to
its customers while protecting the health, safety, and welfare of its
citizens.  Wireless towers may be considered undesirable with other types of
uses, most notably residential uses, therefore special regulations are
necessary to ensure that any adverse affects to existing and future
development are mitigated.



   B.   Accordingly, the City finds that regulations related to
telecommunications towers are warranted and necessary to:



      1.   To direct the location of communication towers within the
jurisdiction of this Ordinance;



      2.   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential
adverse impacts of telecommunications towers;



      3.   To minimize visual impacts of telecommunications towers
through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative
camouflaging techniques;



      4.   To accommodate the need for telecommunication towers
serving residents and businesses of the City;



      5.   To promote the shared use/co-location of existing and new
communication towers as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers;



      6.   To consider the public health and safety aspect relating
to telecommunication towers; and avoid potential damage to adjacent
properties from tower failure and other occurrences through structural
standards and setbacks, engineering and careful siting of telecommunication
towers.



   C.   Refer to Table 7.1-1 for the zoning districts where
Telecommunications Towers and Facilities are allowed, provided that the
supplemental regulations contained herein and other applicable provisions set
forth elsewhere in Ordinance are met, and a conditional use permit, if
necessary, has been issued in accordance with Section 5.11.



   D.   Freestanding monopole towers, with a maximum height of
one-hundred ninety-nine and nine-tenths (199.9) feet are allowed by right in
C-3, I-1, I-2, and I-3, zoning districts provided all other applicable
provisions set forth herein and elsewhere in this Ordinance are met.  Towers
with a height of two-hundred (200) feet or greater and all lattice towers in
these zoning districts shall be subject to the issuance of a conditional use
permit.



   E.   Telecommunication towers can be denied on the basis of negative
influence on property values or on aesthetic concerns provided that there is
evidence to prove the impact on adjacent property owners will be
significant.  In accordance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the
City must clearly state the reasoning and available evidence of the impact on
adjacent property values if the request is denied on this basis. 



   F.   Telecommunication towers may be considered either principal or
accessory uses in any zoning district where a tower is allowed to be
located.  A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot
and/or parcel shall not alone preclude the installation of antennae or tower
on said lot or parcel.



   G.   The replacement of an existing tower, provided the original
tower height is not increased, shall be permitted by right in any zoning
district.  The replacement tower shall be located in the same footprint or
within one hundred (100) feet of the original tower (and on the same lot as
the original tower).  If the replacement tower is not located on the same
footprint, then the replacement tower shall meet the underlying zoning
district setbacks and applicable screening requirements. The dismantling
and/or removal of the original tower and its associated equipment shall be
removed and cleared from the site prior to a certificate of compliance being
issued from the City for the replacement tower.  Co-location requirements as
specified in Subsection H herein, shall apply to any replacement tower.



   H.   The following supplemental regulations shall apply to all
telecommunication towers, including :



      1.   If it is determined that telecommunications providers
cannot provide an adequate service level from co-locating an antennae on an
existing telecommunications tower, locating antennae on existing electrical
transmission towers or similar structures, or locating/camouflaging antennae
within an existing structure (as herein provided), telecommunications towers
and facilities shall be allowed as a conditional use subject to the following
regulations in addition to applicable requirements set forth in each zoning
district and elsewhere in this Ordinance:



         a.   In all Residential and Office Districts, all new
and proposed telecommunication towers shall be of a monopole design and
construction.  All monopoles shall be designed to “telescope” or
collapse inward unless documentation can be provided to prove that such
design is not feasible.



         b.   In all Business and Industrial districts, a
monopole that is designed to “telescope” or collapse inward is
preferred.  If the applicant can demonstrate that a monopole cannot provide
adequate service or structural integrity, then a lattice construction steel
structure tower is acceptable.  If a lattice tower is necessary, then it
must be one that is designed to collapse inward upon itself.



         c.   Newly proposed telecommunication towers are
prohibited in the SV Scenic View-Overlay Overlay district.



         d.   It is the intent of the City to encourage providers
to co-locate facilities in an effort to reduce the number of
telecommunication towers in Gaston County.  New telecommunication towers
shall be capable of supporting additional communications antennas.  Prior to
completing an application for a telecommunication tower, the applicant shall
provide to the City evidence of negotiation in good faith with other
providers to lease space at a reasonable cost and for reasonable terms, and
to publicize the fact that space is available on a lease basis as part of the
conditional use permit process. 



         e.   The maximum allowable height of a tower shall
normally be one-hundred ninety-nine and nine-tenths (199.9) feet.  No
increase to the height may be granted unless the applicant can prove the
maximum height will not provide an adequate service level (i.e. cannot
provide a reasonable level of service in the area).  The height of a tower
or structure shall be the vertical distance measured from the mean elevation
of the finished grade at the front of the structure to the highest point of
the structure. 



         f.   Where a telecommunication tower is located on a lot
with an existing principal use, the tower shall be located in the rear yard
only.  In addition, an access road of at least twelve (12) feet in width
shall be maintained by the property owner and/or the applicant from a public
street to the tower for use by service and emergency vehicles.



         g.   Towers are prohibited on the top of buildings or
structures in all the Residential and Office zoning districts as well as the
SV Scenic View Overlay District.  In Business and Industrial zoning
districts (except I-U) , towers may be placed on roofs or walls, with an
approved Conditional Use Permit, after submittal of a report by a qualified
and licensed professional engineer indicating the existing structure’s
suitability to accept the tower and the proposed method of affixing the tower
to the structure.  Complete details of all fixtures and couplings, and the
precise point of attachment shall be indicated.



         h.   Towers on roofs may be allowed when the tower
height:



         i.   Does not exceed more than thirty (30) of the height
of the building, or



         ii.   Is not more than fifty (50) feet above the
building/structure, whichever is less. Towers on roofs or walls shall be
screened, constructed, and/or colored to match the structure to which they
are attached.



         i.   The City recognizes that a telecommunications
facility (the original tower and antennae provider as well as any co-location
entities) cannot be prohibited nor can a conditional use permit be denied on
the basis of environmental or health concerns relating to radio emissions if
the telecommunications equipment and facility complies with the Federal Radio
Frequency Emission Standards.  The City  requires that each applicant
provide documentation proving that their telecommunications equipment
complies with the Federal Radio Frequency Emission Standards.



         j.   A minimum eight (8) foot high chain link fence is
required immediately around the telecommunications tower and any equipment
building(s) since the tower can be considered an attractive nuisance. 
Barbed wire, razor wire, or other similar types shall be used along the top
of the fence and access to the tower area and equipment buildings shall be
through a locked gate.  The Administrator may waive fencing requirements for
stealth towers and other types of structures if the fencing serves no useful
purpose.



         k.   Applicants building new towers shall plan the fence
and screening (as herein required) to accommodate all future providers on the
site such that the fence and screening materials surround the land designated
for all future equipment buildings and the tower



         l.   Landscape screening shall be required along the
outside area of the perimeter-fenced area(s) to mitigate the visual impacts
of the tower and equipment buildings from nearby viewers.  Landscape
materials shall consist of evergreen shrubs planted in accordance with a Type
D buffer (refer to Table and Figure 11.3.3-4.).  Evergreen shrubs used as
part of the screen should be of a size expected to reach a minimum of 6’ in
height at maturity.  Trees may be evergreen or deciduous.  All landscaping
shall be xeriscape (drought) tolerant or irrigated to ensure good health and
vitality. 



         Applicants building new towers shall plan the fence and
screening to accommodate all future providers on the site such that the fence
and screening materials surround the land designated for all future equipment
buildings and the tower.



         m.   The installation and maintenance requirements of
Section 11.1.2(E) shall apply to all landscaped materials associated with the
telecommunications tower.



         n.   Screening requirements shall not apply to
telecommunications providers who camouflage (stealth towers) towers or
antennas within another structure (such as a bell steeple), or co-locate on
an existing tower.  Nor shall screening apply when an antennae is to be
mounted on an electrical transmission tower or on structures such as a water
tower/tank, grain silos, etc. or similar structures.



         o.   The Administrator may waive any or all of the
screening requirements upon determining existing topography or existing
natural conditions on site will screen the property as effectively as the
required screening, provided that the spirit and intent of this subsection
are met. The Administrator may also waive screening on those sides of the
proposed tower that are located adjacent to undevelopable property. Such a
waiver may not be sought to relieve the screening requirement for towers to
be located adjacent to vacant properties or along any public right-of-way. 
Undevelopable property shall constitute any such property or land that is
unable to be used as a building site.



         p.   Minimum setback requirement, on all sides of the
property including road right-of-way, or leased area of a parcel, shall be
three-quarters (0.75) foot for every one (1) foot of actual tower height
(i.e. a 199.9 foot tower would require a 149.9 foot setback on all sides), or
the documented collapse zone, whichever is greater in all zoning districts in
which telecommunication towers are allowed.  This requirement shall not be
applicable to a telecommunication tower proposing to locate in the C-3 or any
Industrial zoning district, except I-U. These setback requirements are
established to prevent icefall materials and/or debris from tower failure or
collapse from damaging off site property.



         q.   The underlying zoning district shall determine
setbacks for free standing towers in the C-3 and Industrial districts, except
I-U. 



         r.   Setbacks for towers located within leased areas
shall be measured to the edge of the parcel in which the leased area is
located.



         s.   Minimum lot size requirements for telecommunication
towers locating in Residential, Office, and Commercial districts (except C-3)
and the I-U district shall be determined by the maximum setback possible for
a proposed tower.  The minimum lot size requirements for towers locating in
all other zoning districts shall be determined by the underlying zoning
districts. 



         t.   Telecommunications providers who are leasing a
portion of a lot for the proposed telecommunication tower shall obtain a
written signed certification from the property owner that no future
development or subdivisions of land of leased portions will be made within
the established setbacks of the telecommunication tower until such tower is
removed from the site (i.e., is abandoned and removed by the provider). 
This does not apply to telecommunication providers seeking to co-locate on an
existing tower.



         u.   Towers and related facilities must be removed by
the applicant and/or tower owner upon abandonment of the tower (i.e., no
longer used for its original intent) for a period of three-hundred sixty five
(365) consecutive days.  Such removal (clearing from site) shall take place
and be fully completed within ninety (90) days of the first day the tower was
declared to have been abandoned for 365 days.  It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant or tower owner to notify the City when the
tower has been abandoned for a period of 365 days.



         v.   Any planned increase in tower height to an existing
approved telecommunication tower requires the provider to apply for an
amendment to the original conditional use permit (if a conditional use permit
was originally issued for the tower).  Normal maintenance and repair of the
structure can be completed without the issuance of a new permit at the
discretion of the Administrator.  Planned height increases for towers which
were constructed prior to the adoption of this Ordinance or do not have a
conditional use permit on file with the City, shall be required to apply for
a conditional use permit, if such a permit were to have been required for the
original tower construction per Subsections A, B, C or D.



         w.   Applications by providers to use co-location space
on an approved existing tower shall be permitted by right provided that the
tower height is not in increased.  If the co-locator or owner of the tower
proposes to increase the tower’s height, this shall require the co-locator
or owner to apply for an amendment to the original conditional use permit (if
such a permit were issued), or apply for a new conditional use permit if the
height of the tower were such to trigger the need for a conditional use
permit per Subsections A, B, C or D. Co-location applicants must comply with
all requirements provided herein unless provided by the original conditional
use permit applicant.



         x.   Freestanding signs in association with the
telecommunications tower are prohibited.  Wall signs shall be limited to 1)
identification signage allowed on equipment structures or fences surrounding
the telecommunication tower/structure provided it does not exceed nine (9)
square feet in area for the purpose of identifying the owner of said tower,
and co-location availability, and 2)  “No trespassing” signs, “Danger
- High Voltage” signs, and other similar warning signs shall be installed
to discourage trespassing by unauthorized persons.  Signs shall be on
installed and/or mounted on the perimeter fence, and or on tower at the base
of the tower. 



         y.   The provider shall show proof of adequate insurance
coverage for any potential damage caused by or to the telecommunications
tower prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit, or an amendment to
that permit.  Once approved, documentation of adequate insurance must be
provided to the Administrator every twelve (12) months.



         z.   Outdoor storage of equipment or other related or
non-related items is prohibited.



         aa.   Associated telecommunication equipment buildings
located in any zoning district shall not be used as an employment center. 
This provision does not prohibit the periodic maintenance or periodic
monitoring of equipment and instruments.



         bb.   All applications for a Conditional Use Permit (or
amendment to the original Conditional Use Permit) for a telecommunication
tower must include the following information in addition to any other
applicable information contained in Section 5.11.2(B):



            i.   Identification of intended provider(s);



            ii.   Documentation by a registered engineer that
the tower has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate more than one
(1) user.  A statement about the general capacity of the tower in terms of
the number of additional providers, or co-locators, it is designed to
accommodate;



            iii.   A statement from the provider indicating
intent to allow shared use of the tower and how others will be accommodated;



            iv.   Documentation that all property owners
within a Residential district located within three-hundred (300) linear feet
of the edge of all sides of the property (for leased sites this means the
edge of the larger parcel in which the leased portion is located), as well as
adjacent property owners, have been notified by the applicant of the proposed
tower height and design.  Notification made to these property owners is also
required for amendments to existing Conditional Use Permits.



            v.   Documentation that the telecommunication
equipment complies with Federal Radio Frequency Emission Standards;



            vi.   Documentation from a professional RF
Engineer that towers over 199.9 feet are necessary for a minimal level of
service;



            vii.   A site plan(s) drawn to scale, identifying
the site boundary, tower(s), existing and proposed structures, including
equipment buildings, access, fencing area, fall radius and landscape
screening, detailing the type of landscaping, amount of plantings and
location, and longitude and latitude in degrees and minutes, indicating the
horizontal datum used [either North American Datum (NAD) 83 or  NAD 27];



            viii.   Documentation of monopole tower or lattice
tower collapse area, for newly proposed telecommunication towers.



            ix.   Expert testimony that demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the City that the provider has explored all means for stealth
tower locations and co-location opportunities. Evidence may consist of the
following:



               ∙   Existing or approved
telecommunications towers with available co-location space are not located
within the search area;



               ∙   Existing or approved towers or
structures are not of sufficient height to meet the provider’s
specifications;



               ∙   Existing or approved towers or
structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the
applicant’s proposed antennae;



               ∙   The provider’s proposed antenna
would cause objectionable radio frequency interference with existing or
planned antennae on an existing or planned tower, (i.e. the spacing
requirement between antennae cannot be met). 



               ∙   Existing or approved towers lack of
co-location space;



               ∙   Documentation that the provider has
sent copies of letter to owners of all existing towers within a one (1) mile
radius of the proposed site, inquiring whether or not their existing tower
could accommodate the proposed antennae without causing instability or radio
frequency interference;



               ∙   If it is determined that an existing
tower does not have the structural strength or integrity to support
additional antennae and associated equipment, then the proposed provider
shall provide documentation that the existing tower can not be structurally
strengthened to accommodate an additional user.



         cc.   In all zoning districts where telecommunication
towers are allowed except for the C-3 and Industrial (except I-U) districts,
any newly proposed tower shall be located at least one thousand (1,000) feet
from any other existing telecommunications tower.  The provider shall
provide on the proposed site plan any existing towers within the one thousand
(1,000) foot separation requirement.



         dd.   Towers shall not restrict or interfere with air
traffic or air travel to and from any existing or proposed public or private
airport.  All proposed towers shall comply with Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) standards.



   I.   The following supplemental regulations shall apply to
Telecommunications Antennae and Associated Equipment on Existing Towers and
Structures:



      1.   Provided the structural integrity of the structure/tower
is not compromised or diminished as determined or documented by a licensed
professional structural engineer, a telecommunication antenna and its
associated equipment buildings may locate on any existing tower, water
tank/tower, building, or similar structures by right in all zoning districts
so long as the addition does not increase the original height of the existing
structure. Such antennae shall be painted to match the color of the
building/structure or the background against which they are most commonly
seen. Notwithstanding, no antennae used for the purpose of cellular
telecommunication shall be mounted on any structure used solely for
residential purposes.



   J.   The following supplemental regulations shall apply to
co-location for newly proposed and replacement telecommunication towers:



      1.   The location of antennae and its associated equipment on
an approved telecommunications tower shall be permitted by right in all
zoning districts provided the tower’s height is not increased and the
structural integrity of the tower is not diminished or compromised as
determined and documented by a licensed professional structural engineer.



      2.   Newly proposed or replacement telecommunication towers up
to one hundred-fifty (150) feet shall be structurally designed and built to
accommodate two or more users.



      3.   Newly proposed or replacement telecommunication towers
which exceed one hundred-fifty (150) feet shall be structurally designed and
built to accommodate three or more users.



      4.   New telecommunication towers and replacement towers shall
provide enough ground site area to accommodate future providers’ ground
equipment buildings associated with future co-locates.



   K.   The following supplemental regulations shall apply to
freestanding monopoles towers up to 199.9’ (located in the C-3 and
Industrial districts, except I-U)



      1.   All monopole telecommunication towers shall be designed
to “telescope” or collapse inward unless documentation can be provided to
prove that such design is not feasible.   



      3.   It is the intent of the City to encourage providers to
co-locate facilities in an effort to reduce the number of telecommunication
towers in Gaston County.  New telecommunication towers shall be capable of
supporting additional communications antennas.  This will assist the City in
reducing the total number of towers in the County.  Accordingly, newly
proposed monopole telecommunication towers up to one hundred-fifty (150) feet
shall be structurally designed and built to accommodate two (2) or more
users.  Newly proposed monopole telecommunication towers exceeding one
hundred-fifty (150’) feet shall be structurally designed and built to
accommodate three (3) or more users.  New telecommunication towers shall
provide enough site and/or land area to accommodate future co-located
equipment, buildings, and other related equipment.



(NOTE:  Applicants building new towers shall plan the fence and screening,
as indicated in Subsection 8 below) to accommodate all future providers on
the site such that the fence and screening materials surround the land
designated for all future equipment buildings and the tower.)



      2.   Setbacks for freestanding towers in the C-3 and
Industrial districts  (except I-U) setbacks shall be determined by the
underlying zoning district regulations.  Setbacks for towers located within
leased areas shall be measured to the edge of the parcel in which the leased
area is located.



      3.   Minimum lot size requirement for freestanding towers in
the C-3 and Industrial districts (except I-U) setbacks shall be determined by
the underlying zoning district regulations.



      4.   Applications for a for a monopole telecommunication tower
must include the following information in addition to any other applicable
information contained elsewhere in this Ordinance:



         a.   Identification of intended provider(s);



         b.   Documentation by a registered engineer that the
tower has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate more than one (1)
user.  A statement about the general capacity of the tower in terms of the
number of additional providers, or co-locators, it is designed to accommodate;



         c.   A statement from the provider indicating intent to
allow shared use of the tower and how others will be accommodated;



         d.   Documentation that the telecommunication equipment
complies with Federal Radio Frequency Emission Standards;



         e.   A site plan(s) drawn to scale, identifying the site
boundary, tower(s), existing and proposed structures, including equipment
buildings, access, fencing area, fall radius and landscape screening,
detailing the type of landscaping, amount of plantings and location, and
longitude and latitude in degrees and minutes, indicating the horizontal
datum used (either NAD 83 and NAD 27);



         f.   Documentation of monopole tower or lattice tower
collapse area, for newly proposed telecommunication towers.



Section 9.16   Outdoor Storage and Display of Goods, Materials, Wastes and
Equipment



   A.   There shall be no overnight outdoor storage or display of
goods, materials, wastes or equipment in association with nonresidential uses
in any residential (except R-1, R-2 and R-3) zoning districts, any Office
zoning districts or the C-1 zoning district.  This prohibition shall not
include outdoor storage or display in connection with an Essential Service,
construction activity for which there exists a valid building permit or
contract from the appropriate public entity; outdoor in-service vending
machines; fresh produce; Christmas trees and other live plants; bagged ice in
sales freezers; firewood in sales bins; propane tanks in exchange racks; or
shopping carts intended for customer use. Newspaper racks shall be allowed in
all zoning districts.



   B.   The outdoor display, during normal business hours only, of
other goods for sale is permitted in any zoning district with the following
limitations:



      1.   Outdoor display area shall be limited to ten percent
(10%) of the ground floor sales area of the principal building.



      2.   Outdoor storage area shall not be located more than
twenty (20) linear feet from an external wall of the principal building.



      3.   Outdoor storage area shall not be located in any required
landscaping, screening or parking area.



Section 9.17   Automobile Repair in Residential Zoning Districts or on
Lots Used Primarily for Residential Purposes



   A.   Automobile repair conducted outdoors (i.e., outside of a
garage) on residentially zoned lots is limited to those vehicles registered
to the occupant of the dwelling and shall be limited to “routine
maintenance”. “Routine maintenance” includes work such as: oil changes,
tune-ups, transmission fluid changes, brake repair, coolant service, changing
a battery, and tire rotation; minor body, trim, and mechanical repairs shall
also be considered routine maintenance. Typically, routine maintenance and
minor repair is work that can be completed by the resident within a
twenty-four (24) hour time period. Under no circumstances shall outdoor
automobile repair extend over a continuous period of forty-eight (48) hours.
In addition, no auto parts or work equipment such as jacks, ramps, or hoists
shall be left outdoors for a period more than 48 hours. Other onsite
automobile repair or maintenance is strictly prohibited except as provided in
Subsection B below.  Any onsite automobile maintenance done for fee is
strictly prohibited on such residentially zoned or used lots.



   B.   Notwithstanding the above, on residentially zoned or used lots
that are two (2) acres or greater in area, the occupant may perform outdoor
automobile repair in the rear year, outside of any required setbacks, without
adhering to the time limitations contained herein.



   C.   On any residentially zoned lot, major engine/transmission
repair and major bodywork may only be done within an enclosed garage.



Section 9.18   Sidewalks/Greenstrips



   Sidewalks and greenstrips shall be required only for subdivisions and
developments located in the USO Urban Standards Overlay District (unless
specifically mandated for a particular type of development, irrespective of
whether it lies in the USO district or not.) Sidewalk and greenstrip
standards shall be as follows:



9.18.1   Sidewalks



   A.   Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width along
principal and minor arterials and four (4) feet in width along other
streets.  Notwithstanding, in no case shall a sidewalk be required along a
publicly maintained alley.  Sidewalks shall otherwise be placed and
constructed in accordance with specifications on file with the
Administrator.   



   B.   Residential Subdivisions (except as otherwise required in TNDs,
PRDs PUDs, and Infill Residential developments):



      1.   Sidewalks shall be constructed on one side of existing
principal or minor arterial streets and both sides of extensions thereof. 



      2.   Sidewalks shall be constructed on one side of the
principal or minor arterial where the street will not function, at the time
the subdivision is approved, as an arterial street because of its lack of
continuity.



      3.   Except along cul-de-sacs, sidewalks shall be placed on
both sides of all local subdivision streets.  As used herein, the term
“local subdivision street” shall mean any subdivision street other than a
collector street or arterial.  Where a subdivision abuts an existing street
(other than a arterial), a sidewalk shall be provided where the subdivision
abuts said street.



   Sidewalks shall not be required along cul-de-sac streets that are less
than two-hundred fifty (250) feet in length.  For cul-de-sac streets that
are greater than 250 feet in length, sidewalks along the “bulb” of the
cul-de-sac may be waived by the plat approval body (without necessitating the
issuance of a plat variation) upon determination that such waiver would
increasing the aesthetics of the subdivision and that there are practical
difficulties and unnecessary hardships in placing the sidewalks along the
bulb.



      4.   All sidewalks in subdivisions shall be installed within
two years of final plat approval unless a fee in lieu is paid per Section
13.17 of this Ordinance.



   C.   Infill Residential Developments- Sidewalks shall not be
mandated internal streets within the infill residential developments. 
Sidewalks shall only be required on internal streets if such street has a
pavement width of less than twenty-four (24) feet or a right-of-way width of
less than forty (40) feet (refer to Section 8.1.12(A)(13).



   D.   Traditional Neighborhood Developments- Sidewalks shall be
required on all streets within a TND, whether or not the TND lies within the
USO district.  Given that TNDs have unique design elements and building
relationships, the Administrator or approval body shall have the authority to
otherwise modify the sidewalk requirements in order to achieve a better
layout and design and to support pedestrian activity and access throughout
the TND.  Additional development standards for TNDs are found in Section
8.1.13.



   E.   Planned Residential Developments- Sidewalks shall be required
in all PRDs, whether or not the PRD lies within the USO district.  Sidewalk
requirements within a PRD shall be the same as any other subdivision.



   F.   Multi-family Developments- The following sidewalk requirements
shall apply to all multi-family developments, irrespective of whether they
lie in the USO district.  A sidewalk shall be required to connect the front
entryway of any apartment, townhome or condominium building to an adjoining
parking lot.  In addition, if the multi-family development fronts on a
public road with sidewalks, then the development shall connect internal
sidewalks to the public road.  For condominium or townhome developments that
contain fifty (50) or greater units, there shall be a sidewalk on at least
one side of all internal streets [greater than two- hundred and fifty (250)
feet in length], irrespective of whether they are public or privately
maintained. 



   G.   Planned Unit Developments- Sidewalks shall be required in a PUD
irrespective of whether the PUD lies in the USO district.  Sidewalks within
the various residential and non-residential components of the PUD shall be
provided in accordance with the standards contained herein for residential
subdivisions, multi-tenant developments and other developments.



   H.   Multi-tenant Developments



      1.   Non-residential Unified developments. Within
non-residential unified developments, including but not limited to, office
parks and commercial centers, a five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be
constructed on one side of major stem streets and circumferential and radial
connectors as needed to safely move pedestrians throughout the site and to
connect pedestrians to adjoining public streets. The provisions for internal
sidewalks shall apply to both public and private streets and are in addition
to the requirements for sidewalks along adjacent public streets.



      1.   Unified developments within any zoning district
(including those located in the USO district) which primarily serve
industrial-type uses (e.g. warehousing, distribution centers, contractors'
operations centers, welding shops, or machine shops), which generate little
or no pedestrian traffic, may be exempt from the internal sidewalk
requirements of this section.



   I.   Other Developments



      1.   When Required



   Sidewalk construction required by this section shall be installed
adjacent to uses and developments, under the following circumstances:



         a.   When the property is subject to site plan approval
per Section 5.2; and,



         b.   Where curbing exists or is being installed on the
applicable side of said adjacent street, and



         c.   Where adequate right-of-way is available to
construct a sidewalk in accordance with all applicable standards and
specifications.



      2.   Required Locations



   Except as exempted in Subsection 3 below, sidewalks shall be placed in
the following locations:



         a.   Along the abutting side of principal or minor
arterial streets



         b.   Along one (1) side of new and existing collector
and local streets. When determining if a sidewalk is required on a particular
side of the street, the Administrator shall review such criteria as the
pattern of existing sidewalks, the location of existing right-of-way, and
expected pedestrian patterns. Sidewalks may be required on both sides of a
collector or local street if one or more of the following conditions exists:



            ∙   The current or projected average daily
traffic volume is greater than eight-thousand (8,000) vehicles per day.



            ∙   The posted speed limit is greater than
thirty-five (35) miles per hour.



            ∙   The street is a strategic pedestrian route
to an existing or planned pedestrian destination, such as a school, park,
recreational or cultural facility, greenway trail (or similar amenity),
retail commercial site, restaurant, or a multi-family development of ten (10)
or more units, located within a one-quarter (1/4) mile, as measured along the
street centerline.



            ∙   Other pedestrian safety, access, or
circulation needs are identified.



         c.   Sidewalks required by this section shall be
constructed along the street for the full extent of each side of a parcel
upon which such street abuts.



      2.   Exempt Locations



   The following locations shall be exempt from the placement of sidewalks:



         a.   Sidewalks may be required for industrial uses in
urban settings.



         b.   Sidewalks shall not be required along new and
existing local and collector streets where, upon determination of the
Administrator, the following conditions are found to exist:



            ∙   The character and size of the proposed
development will not result in substantial additional pedestrian facility
needs; and



            ∙   The proposed development is not within
one-quarter (1/4) mile of a transit stop (as measured along the street
centerline), and



            ∙   The proposed development is not within
one-quarter (1/4) mile of an existing or planned pedestrian destination, such
as a school, park, recreational or cultural facility, greenway trail (or
similar amenity), retail commercial site, restaurant, or a multi-family
development of ten (10) or more units (as measured along the street
centerline); and



            ∙   There are no new pedestrian facilities
planned that would provide a pedestrian connection to the proposed
development.



         c.   In no instance shall sidewalks be required along a
local or collector street for a use that is likely to generate little or no
pedestrian traffic.



         c.   Further, the Administrator may reduce or waive
sidewalk construction required herein provided that specific circumstances
unique to the subject property would make meeting the requirements
impractical or impossible and that granting such reduction or waiver would
not impair the public safety.



9.18.2   Greenstrips



   A.   A minimum six (6) foot greenstrip shall be required to be
placed inward between the edge of the curb and the sidewalk.  A greenstrip
shall not be required if the abutting street does not contain either a curb
or sidewalk.  In no case shall a greenstrip be required to be placed along
and parallel to a publicly maintained alley.



   B.   Greenstrips shall be provided along streets with curbs and
sidewalks in any planned unit development (PUD) or traditional neighborhood
development (TND), irrespective of whether the PUD is or is not within the
USO district.



   C.   The Administrator, or plat approval body, shall have the
authority to waive or modify the greenstrip requirements herein stated on a
case-by-case basis where he determines that the placement of a greenstrip
would serve no public purpose and/or the greenstrip would not be in keeping
with adjacent developed areas along the same street.  Examples where such
requirements may be found include:



      1.   The site is on a street where other adjacent or nearby
developed lots that do not contain greenstrips;



      2.   The street is within an infill residential development or
TND and the lack of a greenstrip would achieve a better layout and design and
would support pedestrian activity and access;



      3.   There are unique topographic and physical characteristics
associated with the site that would severely restrict placement and/or
long-term maintenance of the greenstrip; or,



      4.   The presence of public utilities (either above- or
below-ground) would affect the long-term maintenance and upkeep of the
greenstrip.



Section 9.20   Hours of Operation



   Hours of operations for all office/commercial services/retail uses
located in a residential zoning district shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
with the exception of automobile service stations which may have hours of
operation outside of these limitations.  If a use seeks to operate outside
of these hours of operations, a special exception shall first need to be
granted by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 5.12.



Section 9.21   Uses with Outdoor Speakers



   All uses with outdoor speakers shall locate the speaker and associated
drive through window and stacking lane, if applicable, seventy-five (75) feet
or more feet from the edge of a lot located in a Residential zoning district.



Section 9.22   Odor



   A.   Every use of land shall be operated in such a way that
regularly recurring odors are not disturbing and do not cause injury,
detriment or nuisance to any person of ordinary sensitivities.



   B.   Every nonresidential use in a Office, Commercial or Industrial
District which adjoins a Residential District must be operated in such a way
that any odor which may be detected by the human senses at the district
boundary line is similar in character to odors which could be expected to be
generated in those Residential Districts.



Section 9.23   Noise



   Every use of land shall be operated in such a way that regularly
recurring noises are not disturbing or unreasonably loud and do not cause
injury, detriment, or nuisance to any person of ordinary sensitivities. 
Every nonresidential use in an Office, Commercial, or Industrial District
which adjoins a Residential District must be operated in such a way that any
noise which may be detected by the human senses without instruments at the
district boundary line is no louder than the noise which could be expected
from uses permitted in those Residential Districts.



Section 9.24   Access Management



   A.   Maximum Number of Curb Cuts



   Lots with one-hundred fifty (150) feet of road frontage or less are
allowed one (1)  curb cut per street front.  Lots with greater than
one-hundred fifty (150) feet of road frontage are allowed two (2) curb cuts
per street front. 



   The Administrator, or appropriate approval body in the case of a
conditional use permit or conditional zoning request, may approve additional
curb cuts along a particular road in accordance with Section 9.24 (E)
provided the lot in question also has at least three-hundred (300) feet of
road frontage. 



   B.   Minimum Distance Between Curb Cuts



   The minimum separation between curb cuts on the same lot shall be forty
(40) feet.  The distance between curb cuts shall be measured from a point on
each driveway outside of the driveway radius.  Refer to Figure 9.24-1
below.  For driveway widths requirements refer to Section 10.13.



Figure 9.24-1









 



   C.   The minimum distance between a curb cut and a street
intersection for lots created after the effective date of this UDO shall be
as shown in Table 9.24-1:



 

TABLE 9.24-1
Minimum Distance Separation Between Curb Cut and Street Intersection


Principal Arterial
 
125 feet


Minor Arterial
 
100 feet


All Other Roads
 
75 feet



 



   D.   The minimum driveway radius shall be ten (10) feet.  Refer to
Figure 9.24-2.  This requirement shall not apply to single- and two-family
residential uses, including manufactured homes on individual lots.



Figure 9.24-2









 



   E.   Modification of Requirements



   The Administrator, or appropriate approval body in the case of a
conditional use permit or conditional zoning request, may modify any
requirement of this Section upon making a determination that such
modification will serve to promote the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists,
and/or motorists accessing the lot(s) in question and nearby lots.  Factors
to be used in making this determination shall include (but not be limited
to): (1) the nature of the proposed development; (2) the location of the
proposed curb cut on the lot; (3) road classification; (4) adjacent land
uses; and, (5) crash data on the road that the lot accesses.



CHAPTER 10:
OFF-STREET PARKING



10.1   General Provisions



10.2   Off-street Parking Lot Design Standards



10.3   Off-street Parking Lot Space and Aisle Dimensions



10.4   Off-street Parking Surface Requirements



10.5   Off-street Parking Space Requirements



10.6   Off-street Staging Space Requirements



10.7   Satellite Parking



10.8   Shared Parking



10.9   Parking Deck Standards



10.10   Off-street Loading Requirements



10.11   Parking of Commercial Vehicles



10.12   Parking and Storage of Boats and Recreational Vehicles



10.13   Driveway Widths



Section 10.1   General Provisions



   Off-street parking areas shall be designed to create a safe and
comfortable environment for both motorists and pedestrians.  Permanent
off-street parking spaces shall be provided as specified herein for all uses
occupying land or facilities (or portions thereof).  In certain instances,
on-street parking may be counted towards meeting the required number of
off-street parking spaces.  Such parking spaces may also be provided, in
part or in whole, in a parking garage. The requirements of this section shall
be met:



   A.   At the time a Certificate of Occupancy is issued for a building
or structure in which an approved use takes place;



   B.   At the time any principal or accessory use or building is
enlarged or increased in capacity, such as by adding dwelling units, guest
rooms, seats, floor area, or other units of measurement [except as herein
provided in Section 10.1 (D)] follows; or



   C.   Before conversion from one type of use or occupancy to another,
or any change in the manner in which the use is constructed that would result
in additional parking requirements [except as provided in Section 10.1(D)].



   D.   Standards for providing off-street parking spaces, and
exceptions thereto, are as follows:



      1.   Every new use, or an enlargement, expansion or alteration
of an existing use except as herein indicated, shall require off-street
parking in compliance with this Chapter.



      2.   Except as provided herein, the number of required
off-street parking spaces shall be increased when a change of use of either a
structure or of land requires additional parking spaces in compliance with
this Chapter. Parking spaces may be decreased when a change of use requires
fewer spaces than was originally provided.



      3.   The number of parking spaces shown in Table 10.5-1 for
each use represents the required number of off-street parking spaces for such
use.  The number of off-street spaces provided on-site [or off-site, per
Section 10.5 (C)] may be reduced] by up to ten (10) percent, upon approval by
the Administrator on a case-by-case basis.  Allowance for such reduction, or
portion thereof, shall be made based on:



         a.   The nature of the use;



         b.   The number of trips anticipated to be generated by
the use;



         c.   The times of day when the use would likely generate
the most number of trips;



         d.   The extent to which other establishments are
located on the same property and which may reduce the number of vehicle trips
required between different establishments; and,



         e.   The availability of nearby on-street or public
parking facilities.



      4.   A reduction by greater than ten (10) percent may only be
granted by the Board of Adjustment as a special exception in accordance with
Section 5.12.2(D).



      5.   Uses are strongly encouraged to provide off-street
parking in keeping with the requirements of Table 10.5-1.  The provision of
off-street parking spaces greater than what is required shall be allowed. 
Notwithstanding, if a use seeks to provide off-street parking in excess of
fifty (50) percent of what is called for in Table 10.5-1, a special exception
shall first need to be granted by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with
Section 5.12.2(D).



      6.   Furthermore, the number of required parking spaces may be
reduced by one (1) percentage point up to ten (10) percentage points for each
two (2) percent of additional quantities of landscape material over the
required minimums listed in Section 11.5(B). 



      7.   Notwithstanding the above, if a use is subject to the
issuance of a conditional use permit or is part of a conditional zoning
request, the granting of the additional off-street parking spaces (or
reduction of off-street parking) may be included as part of the conditional
use permit for such use.



   E.   A principal use that is not deficient in the number of
off-street parking spaces provided may expand or be changed to a different
use without having to provide additional off-street parking spaces under
certain circumstances. Such circumstances are:



      1.   When, after the expansion or use change, the number of
off-street parking spaces provided still meets or exceeds the required
minimum.



      2.   If the expansion or use change results in the need to
create no greater than ten (10) off-street parking spaces in order to meet
the minimum number of required spaces or results in an increase of off-street
parking spaces by no greater than ten (10) percent, whichever is less, these
additional spaces may be waived by the Administrator on a one-time basis. In
shopping centers, office parks and similar planned, phased or multiuse or
multi-tenant developments, such waiver may only be applied once within the
development.



   F.   A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any use
until all off-street parking requirements in accordance with this chapter
have been met and are in place and ready for use.



   G.   The off-street parking and loading requirements contained in
this Chapter shall not be applicable to any use located in the CBD zoning
district, the TND center portion of a TND, except for multi-family uses,
hotels and motels located in such areas.



   H.   All off-street parking areas shall be located no closer than
ten (10) feet from the edge of any public street right-of-way.  Said ten
(10) foot area (with the exception of those located in the CBD district, or
within the TND center component of a TND, and all driveways, sidewalks, and
other means of pedestrian or vehicular access) shall be grassed or planted
with natural vegetation. 



Section 10.2   Off-street Parking Lot Design Standards



   A.   In the Urban Standards Overlay District, off-street parking in
the front yard of the lot shall be limited to no greater than two (2) rows of
parking.  This requirement shall not apply to: single- and two-family
dwellings; individual manufactured homes not located within a manufactured
home park; industrial uses; and, all uses located in an Industrial zoning
district.  Refer to Section 6.6.2.6 (I) for specific requirements.



   B.   Off-street parking lots shall be designed to allow pedestrians
to safely move from their vehicles to on-site buildings.  Lots containing
more than one-hundred (100) off-street parking spaces on any one (1) side of
the building shall be designed to have at least one (1) designated and
readily identifiable corridor that channels pedestrians from their vehicles
in that parking area to a nearby on-site building. 



   C.   Parking lots for commercial or office uses that (1) lie in a
Commercial, Office, or TMU zoning district; (2) also lie within the Urban
Standards (USO) Overlay District; and (3) contain more than fifty (50) spaces
shall be designed to inter-connect with adjoining lots under certain
conditions.  Refer to Section 6.6.2.6 (A) for specific requirements.



   D.   Off-street parking lots shall be designed to facilitate safe
and efficient movement and access by sanitation, emergency and other public
service vehicles without posing a danger to pedestrians or impeding the
function of the parking area.



   E.   Off-street parking areas shall be designed so that parked
vehicles do not encroach upon or extend into public rights-of-way, sidewalks
or strike against or damage any wall, vegetation, utility, or other
structure.  Any off-street parking area shall be designed so that, without
resorting to extraordinary movements, vehicles may exit such areas without
backing onto a sidewalk or public street right-of-way. This requirement does
not apply to parking areas consisting of driveways serving lots that contain
one- or two-family dwelling units and individual manufactured homes.



   F.   Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can
proceed safely without posing a danger to pedestrians or other vehicles and
without interfering with parking areas. 



   G.   No off-street parking or loading area shall be located over an
active or auxiliary septic tank field.



   H.   The temporary parking or storage of manufactured homes shall be
prohibited in any zoning district in which manufactured homes are not
permitted (excluding manufactured homes located in manufactured home sales
lots.



   I.   Off-street parking areas shall be located no closer than ten
(10) feet from the edge of any public street right-of-way. Appropriate
measures shall be taken to prohibit vehicles from driving onto designated
walk areas.



Section 10.3   Off-street Parking Lot Space and Aisle Dimensions



   A.   Each parking space in surface parking lots (other than parallel
parking spaces, those designed for the handicapped persons and as herein
provided for the CBD & TMU districts) shall contain a rectangular area at
least nineteen (19) feet in length and nine (9) feet in width.
Notwithstanding, however, in uses or developments that are required to
provide in excess of one-hundred (100) spaces, up to 20% of the total parking
spaces (excluding those spaces designated for “handicapped persons”) may
be designated as spaces for “compact cars only” and shall be a minimum of
eight (8) feet in width and sixteen (16) feet in length. Lines demarcating
parking spaces may be drawn at various angles in relation to curbs or aisles,
so long as the parking spaces so created contain within them the rectangular
area herein required.



   B.   Wherever parking areas consist of spaces set aside for parallel
parking, the dimensions of such parking spaces shall be not less than
twenty-two (22) feet in length by nine (9) feet in width.



   C.   In the CBD and TMU districts an alternate design for each
parking space of eighteen (18) feet in length and nine (9) feet in width may
be approved by the Administrator.



   D.   Parking area aisle widths shall conform to the following table,
which varies the width requirement according to the angle of parking.



 


TABLE 10.3-1



ANGLE OF PARKING (degrees)


AISLE TYPE
 
0°
 
45°
 
60°
 
90°


One-way traffic
 
13’
 
13’
 
18’
 
24’


Two-way traffic
 
24’
 
24’
 
24’
 
24’



 



   E.   Notwithstanding the above, if a use is subject to the issuance
of a conditional use permit or is part of a conditional zoning request, the
granting of alternative parking lot space and aisle dimensions may be
included as part of the conditional use permit for such use.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-12-16)



Section 10.4   Off-street Parking Surface Requirements



   A.   Except as herein provided, all off-street parking areas shall
be paved. Pavement surfaces shall consist of asphalt, concrete, bituminous
surface treatment, brick or other paving material that will provide
equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, and dust. Pervious paving
surfaces (e.g., "turfstone") that aid in reducing runoff are encouraged.



   B.   In lieu of hard surface pavement, gravel surfaced parking lots
shall be permitted in the following situations, provided appropriate measures
are taken to mark spaces:



      1.   Except in the USO overlay district where all parking lots
are required to be paved, any nonresidential development involving a total of
5 or fewer parking spaces.



      2.   Any industrial uses (outside the USO district) where no
retail sales are involved.



      3.   Any parking lot serving a public assembly facility (e.g.
school, church, athletic fields, stadium, etc.) provided said parking lot is
located in the side or rear yard and is at least two-hundred (200) feet from
any principal residential structure on another lot.  Grassed or gravel
"overflow" may be provided at recreational facilities. Overflow parking
facilities are parking areas that are typically not used more than ten times
per year.



      4.   Parking for single- or two-family residential uses.



      5.   In any case where the Administrator finds that paving
serves no practical purpose, the Administrator may waive the paving
requirement in part or in whole.



   C.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, all
handicapped accessible parking facilities shall be paved.  In addition,
whenever any parking area abuts a paved street, the driveway leading from
such street to such area shall be paved for a distance of fifteen (15) feet
inward from the edge of the public street.



   D.   Parking spaces and drives shall be appropriately marked with
pavement paint or with other acceptable methods when alternate materials are
used. Overflow parking facilities need not be marked.



   E.   Off-street parking areas shall be properly maintained in all
respects. In particular, and without limiting the foregoing, off-street
parking area surfaces shall be kept in good condition (free from potholes,
etc.) and pavement markings shall be kept clearly visible and distinct.



Section 10.5   Off-street Parking Space Requirements



   The following standards shall apply when computing the required number
of off-street parking spaces:



10.5.1   Calculations



   When measurements of the number of required spaces result in fractions,
the space requirements shall be rounded upward to the next highest whole
number.



10.5.2   Different Use Areas



   Except as herein provided, the required number of off-street parking
spaces shall be calculated separately for each different use area in a
building or on a site. 



10.5.3   On-Street Parking



   On-street parking may be used to satisfy some of the off-street parking
that otherwise is required for a particular use.  Those on-street parking
spaces that (1) lie on a public street and (2) that lie within one hundred
(100) feet from the principal pedestrian entrance to such use that abuts such
street or an intersecting street, may used to offset the number of on-site
off-street parking space otherwise required. Refer to Figure 10.5.3-1 below
for an illustration of this requirement.



Figure 10.5.3-1









 



10.5.4   Adjustments to Required Number of Spaces



   The number of spaces shown in Table 10.5-1 shall be considered the
minimum allowed for such uses.  Variations to these requirements, both for
the provision of greater or fewer spaces, may be allowed as called for in
Section 10.1(C), (D) and (E).  In addition, reductions to the required
number of spaces may be allowed in the USO and CH districts as indicated in
Section 6.6.2.6(A).



10.5.5   Parking Based on Seating or Number of Customers



   When requirements use seating or number of customers as a unit of
measurement, all calculations shall be based on the design capacity of the
area(s) used for seating or accommodating customers, or, where applicable,
the maximum building code occupancy capacity.



10.5.6   Parking Based on Floor Area



   Except as herein provided, when requirements use amount of square
footage in buildings as a unit of measurement, all calculations shall be
based on gross floor area.



10.5.7   Parking Based on Students, Employees, and Occupants



   Except as herein provided, when requirements use number of students,
staff, or occupants as a unit of measurement, all calculations shall be based
on the following:



   A.   Students- Maximum enrollment capacity



   B.   Employees- Largest number of persons working on any single shift



   C.   Customers, Patrons or Attendees- Maximum building code capacity



10.5.8   Required Number of Off-street Parking Spaces



   A.   Except as indicated in Subsection B below, the number of
required off-street parking spaces for all uses is shown in Table 10.5-1
(located at the end of this Chapter).



   B.   The following uses have unique parking and loading demand
characteristics, making it impossible to specify a single off-street parking
or loading standard. Upon receiving a development application for a use shown
below, the Administrator shall apply the off-street parking and loading
standard specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the
proposed use or establish minimum off-street parking requirements on the
basis of a parking and loading study prepared by the applicant. Such a study
shall include estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the
Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable estimates as
approved by the Administrator and should include other reliable data
collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or
comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined by
density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. 



      1.   Truck Stops



      2.   Truck Washing Facility



      3.   Animal Kennel



      4.   Airport



      5.   Botanical Garden



      6.   Cemetery



      7.   Correctional Facility



      8.   Military Reserve Center



      9.   Transit Station



      10.   Zoo



      11.   Parks



      12.   Distribution/Wholesale/Indoor Storage Operations



      13.   Warehouse



10.5.9   Handicapped Parking Spaces



   All uses except one, two, three, and four-family dwelling units must
comply with Chapter 3.4 of the North Carolina State Building Code with
respect to the provision of providing spaces designed for disabled and
handicapped persons.  All spaces designed for the handicapped and disabled
that are mandated (in number) per the State Building Code shall count towards
meeting the off-street requirements contained in Section 10.5.



Section 10.6   Off-street Staging Space Requirements



   In addition to providing the required number of off-street parking
spaces as shown in Section 10.5 and Table 10.5-1, uses that have drive-in
windows along with day care centers shall provide the following number of
stacking (i.e., staging spaces:



 



TABLE 10.6-1
STAGING SPACE REQUIREMENTS


Principal Use
 
Staging Space Requirements


Day Care Centers (With 12+ Clients)
 
Five (5) spaces within a two-lane, one-way drive


Financial Institution
 
Four (4) spaces for the first drive/in service window; except if only one
only drive-in window is provided, a minimum of six (6) spaces


Restaurant
 
Eight (8) spaces per drive-in window for fast-food restaurants; Twelve (12)
spaces per drive-in window for drive-through restaurants


Car Wash, Automatic Class II (principal use)
 
Six (6) staging spaces and six (6) drying spaces


Car Wash, Self-service and Car Wash, Automatic Class I (principal use)
 
Two (2) staging spaces and one (1) drying space per wash bay


Convenience Store
 
Three (3) spaces per drive-in window


Beverage Store
 
Three (3) spaces per drive-in window


Dry Cleaner Service Outlet
 
Three (3) spaces per drive-in window


Entry Gates for Gated Subdivisions
 
Three (3) spaces per entry gate


Mini-warehouses (that have locked and keyed entrances)
 
Two (2) spaces outside of the street right-of-way


Other Uses With Drive-in windows
 
Three (3) spaces per drive-in window




 



NOTE 1:   The Administrator shall have the authority to require additional
staging spaces where, in his opinion, such staging spaces are needed to
ensure that there is adequate vehicular storage capacity so that automobiles
do not queue back onto the adjacent road right-of-way.



NOTE 2:  Each staging space shall have a minimum width of nine (9) feet and
a minimum length of twenty (20) feet.



Section 10.7    Satellite Parking



   A.   Off-street parking spaces generally shall be provided on (1)
the same lot as the principal use; (2) on a lot adjoining the principal use;
or (3) on a lot separated by a street or street intersection from the
principal use. In instances where such parking for a principal nonresidential
use cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot, it may be provided on a
separate lot. At least one-half (1/2) of the required parking shall be
provided on the lot containing the principal use, or an adjoining lot or a
lot separated by a street or street intersection from the principal use. The
remaining parking may be provided on a satellite lot, provided all parking
spaces on such satellite lot lie within a five-hundred (500) foot pedestrian
accessible walking distance of the lot containing the principal use. If a
distance of greater than 500 feet is required, a special exception must be
issued by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 5.12.2(E). 
Such satellite parking lots located in a Residential zoning district may only
be for uses (either permitted or conditional) that are allowed in the
underlying Residential (R) zoning district.



   B.   An ingress/egress/shared parking agreement shall be required to
be submitted to the City when the satellite parking site is under different
ownership than the use for which parking is provided. This agreement shall
contain a provision that the Administrator shall be forthwith notified if the
agreement is changed or annulled in the future.



Section 10.8   Shared Parking



   A.   Cooperative provisions for off-street parking may be made by
contract between two or more adjacent property owners. The end result shall
be that the sum of the parking spaces for the uses computed cooperatively
shall be the same or more than if the uses were computed separately. Any such
cooperative parking mechanism first must be submitted to the Administrator
for his review and approval prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. The agreement shall contain a provision that the Administrator
will be forthwith notified if the agreement is changed or annulled in the
future. If the location of the cooperative parking area (which satisfies the
needs of the off-street parking requirements shown in Section 10.5) lies
greater than five-hundred (500) feet (measured in walking distance), a
special exception must be issued by the Board of Adjustment in accordance
with Section 5.12.2(E) of this Ordinance.



   B.   A cooperative parking lot located in a Residential zoning
district may only be for a use (either permitted or conditional) that is
allowed in that underlying Residential district.  Similarly, one parking
area may contain required spaces for several different uses, but except as
otherwise provided in this section, the required space assigned to one use
may not be credited to any other use.



   C.   To the extent that developments that wish to make joint use of
the same parking spaces operate at different times, the same spaces may be
credited to both uses. For example, if a parking lot is used in connection
with an office building from Monday to Friday, but is generally 90 percent
vacant on weekends, another development that operates only on weekends could
be credited with 90 percent of the spaces on that lot. Or, if a church
parking lot is generally occupied only to 50 percent of capacity on days
other than Sunday, another development could make use of fifty (50) percent
of the church's spaces on those other days.



Section 10.9    Parking Deck Standards



   Parking decks may be used to satisfy off-street parking needs in all
districts other than Residential districts. This section sets forth
development standards to address parking decks as a principal or accessory
use within such zoning districts.  There are three different parking deck
standards shown.  Parking decks located in any Office, Commercial (except
CBD), or Industrial District, or the TND Center portion of a TND, shall
conform to any of the three options.  Parking decks in the CBD district or
the TND Center portion of a TND shall conform to Option C.



10.9.1   Parking Deck Option A



   Parking decks may be constructed to the following minimum standards
indicated below:



   A.   Parking decks shall observe a minimum thirty (30) foot setback
from the public right-of-way and must meet any more restrictive setback or
other yard requirements for the underlying zoning district.



   B.   A minimum nine (9) foot clearance shall be maintained on the
first level of the deck and any additional level that provides disabled
parking spaces, and a minimum seven (7) foot clearance throughout the
remainder of the parking deck to ensure the safe movement of vans and
emergency vehicles;



   C.   A minimum twenty-five (25) foot planting strip shall be
provided between the face of the parking deck and the adjoining sidewalk. The
planting strip shall be planted as follows:



      1.   Canopy trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree per
thirty (30) linear feet of street frontage;



      2.   Understory trees shall be planted at a rate of one tree
per thirty (30) linear feet of street frontage; and



      3.   Evergreen shrubs shall be planted along the face of the
parking deck with a maximum spacing of five (5) feet on center.



   D.   A minimum five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be provided with a
minimum six (6) foot wide planting strip between the sidewalk and the
adjoining street. Said planting strip shall be maintained with natural ground
covers.



   E.   If the parking deck has a gated entrance, at least three (3)
staging spaces designed for automobiles waiting for admission shall be
provided.



10.9.2   Parking Deck Option B



   Parking decks may be constructed to the following standards, provided
that the parking deck is architecturally treated in a manner that avoids a
monolithic appearance. Treating the facade of the deck as a street wall and
articulating it through a variety of building materials shall accomplish this
to give the deck a more pedestrian-friendly character.  Development
standards are as follows:



   A.   Parking decks shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet
from the street right-of-way and otherwise meet all yard requirements for the
underlying zoning district.



   B.   A minimum nine (9) foot clearance shall be maintained on the
first level and any additional level that provides disabled parking spaces
and a minimum seven (7) foot clearance throughout the remainder of the
parking deck to ensure the safe movement of automobiles and emergency
vehicles.



   C.   The street wall of the parking deck shall be treated in such a
manner as to partially screen street level parking as well as to provide
visual interest to the pedestrian. This can be accomplished through the use
of articulated pre-cast concrete panels, ornamental grillwork, or other means
such as utilizing a variety of building materials such as brick or stone.



   D.   If more than two (2) floors of parking are provided above
street level, the third floor above street level and higher floors must be
recessed at least twenty (20) feet from the setback of the first and second
floors.



   E.   A minimum twelve (12) foot wide planting strip shall be
provided between the sidewalk and the face of the deck. The planting strip
shall be planted with canopy trees at a rate of one (1) tree per thirty (30)
linear feet of street frontage or understory trees at the rate of one (1)
tree per twenty (20) linear feet of street frontage; and



   F.   A minimum five (5) foot wide sidewalk shall be provided with a
minimum six (6) foot wide planting strip between the sidewalk and the
adjoining street. Said planting strip shall contain natural ground covers.



   G.   If the parking deck has a gated entrance, a staging area
designed to accommodate at least three  (3) automobiles waiting for
admission shall be provided.



10.9.3   Parking Deck Option C



   This Option shall be the only parking deck option that is available in
the CBD district and the TND Center portion of a TND.  It may also be used
in any other district in which parking decks are allowed. Development
standards are as follows:



   A.   At least fifty (50) percent of the street frontage of the first
floor shall be used for retail or office use.  The first floor of the
parking deck shall be designed to compliment pedestrian-scale activity. The
deck shall be designed so that the only openings at the street level are
those that accommodate vehicle entrances and pedestrian access to the
structure. The remainder of the street level frontage must either be retail
or office space or an architecturally articulated facade designed to screen
the parking areas of the structure, to encourage pedestrian scale activity,
and to provide for urban open space.



   B.   The parking deck shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet
from the street right-of-way where no retail or office uses are present.



   C.   A minimum nine (9) foot clearance shall be maintained on the
first level and any additional level that provides disabled parking spaces,
and a minimum seven (7) foot clearance throughout the remainder of the
parking deck to ensure the safe movement of vehicles and emergency vehicles.



   D.   No more than the first two (2) floors of parking are allowed
above the street level use at the setback line.  All additional floors shall
be recessed a minimum of twenty (20) feet.



   E.   A minimum twelve (12) foot wide planting strip shall be
provided between the sidewalk and the face of the deck where no retail or
office uses are present. The planting strip shall be planted with canopy
trees at a rate of one tree per thirty (30) linear feet of street frontage or
understory trees at a rate of one tree per twenty (20) linear feet of street
frontage.



   F.   If the parking deck has a gated entrance, at least three (3)
staging spaces to accommodate automobiles waiting for admission shall be
provided.



Section 10.10   Off-street Loading Requirements



10.10.1   Purpose



   In order to assure a proper and uniform development of off-street
loading areas and to relieve traffic congestion in the streets, the
off-street loading requirements set forth in this section will apply in all
Office, Commercial, and Industrial zoning districts.  In the CBD Central
Business District and the TND Center portion of a TND, off-street loading
provisions shall apply to hotels and motels only. A certificate of occupancy
shall not be issued for any use until all off-street loading requirements in
accordance with this section have been met.



10.10.2   Minimum Off-street Loading Space Requirements



   The following minimum loading space requirements shall apply for the
appropriate use:



 



TABLE 10.10-1
OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS


Type of Use
 
Gross Floor Area (Square Feet)
 
Required Number of Loading Spaces


Office
 
0--4,999
 
None


Restaurant, Hotel or Motel
 
5,000--49,999 
 
One (1)


50,000--99,999
 
Two (2)


100,000+
 
Two (2) plus one (1) for each one-hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area in excess of 100,000 square feet (Restaurants are to be
calculated separately.)


Other Office, Commercial and Industrial Establishments; Shopping Centers
 
0-4,999
 
None


5,000-19,999
 
One (1)


20,000--49,999
 
Two (2)


50,000--79,999
 
Three (3)


80,000--99,999
 
Four (4)


100,000--149,999
 
Five (5)


150,000+
 
Five (5) plus one (1) per fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor
area in excess of 150,000 square feet




 



1010.3    Design of Loading Spaces



   A.   A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any use
until all off-street loading spaces are designed and constructed so that all
maneuvering to park vehicles for loading and unloading can take place
entirely within the property lines of the premises. Loading spaces must be
designed so as to not interfere with the normal movement of vehicles and
pedestrians on public rights-of-way. Where feasible, off-street loading shall
be located in the rear yard or screened from street view. Notwithstanding, in
certain zoning districts, off-street loading areas shall be required in the
rear yard. No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used
to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking (except as noted),
nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the
area requirements for loading and unloading facilities.



   B.   Each loading space shall have a paved surface and be a minimum
of twelve (12) feet in width and thirty-five (35) feet in length. Each such
space shall also have a minimum vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet. For
any use which is required to furnish three or more loading spaces, at least
one (1) of every three (3) spaces shall have a minimum width of twelve (12)
feet, minimum length of one-hundred (100) feet and a minimum vertical
clearance of fourteen (14) feet.



10.10.4    Waiver or Modification



   As part of the review and approval of a site plan and issuance of a
zoning permit, the Administrator shall have the authority to waive or modify
the requirements of this Section upon finding that the use does not require
the requisite number and/or size of loading spaces as herein called for,
given the peculiar operational characteristics of the use and its need or
lack thereof for the delivery or shipment of goods to and from the site.



Section 10.11   Parking of Commercial Vehicles



   In order to preserve the residential characteristics and promote
aesthetic qualities of neighborhoods, the parking of commercial vehicles on
residentially zoned lots within the city limits shall be regulated as follows:



      1.   The overnight parking of tractor trailer trucks or either
of their two (2) components shall be prohibited on any lot less than two (2)
acres. On lots greater than two (2) acres, one (1) tractor trailer truck may
be parked in a manner not visible from the public right-of-way.



      2.   Busses or vehicles designed to transport sixteen (16) or
more passengers shall be prohibited unless the vehicle is owned, operated and
located on church property;



      3.   Heavy equipment, including, but not limited to, dump
trucks, bulldozers, cranes, backhoes, rollers, loaders and other equipment of
equal or greater size and weight shall be prohibited.



      4.   One (1) commercial vehicle may be parked on a
residentially zoned lot as long as it is parked behind the front building
line of the primary residential structure in a delineated driveway or in the
rear yard. For the purposes of this section a "commercial vehicle" is defined
as a motor vehicle having a GVWR of less than twenty-six thousand (26,000)
pounds and being less than twenty-nine (29) feet in length.



      5.   Trailers used for residential, personal or family
purposes, including, but not limited to, horse trailers, boat trailers and
utility trailers shall be parked behind the front building line of the
primary residential structure. Trailers over twenty-four (24) feet in length
shall be prohibited.



      6.   Commercial vehicles shall not intrude into public
rights-of-way or obstruct sight visibility from adjacent driveways. Vehicles
shall not be parked in the front building setback area. Vehicles shall be
maintained in a clean, well-kept state which does not detract from the
appearance of the surrounding area.



(Res. passed 1-10-2011)



Section 10.12   Parking and Storage of Boats and of Recreational Vehicles



   A.   A recreational vehicle shall not be deemed to be a dwelling
unit and, except in a camping and recreational vehicle park and the use of a
recreational vehicle for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes and the
connection of such vehicle to utility services (except for maintenance
purposes) shall be prohibited.



   B.   The following provisions apply to all lots in a residential (R)
zoning district, except for lots over five (5) acres in size located in a
R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning district:



      1.   No more than one (1) recreational vehicle (i.e., RV motor
home, travel trailer) over eight (8) feet in height and no more than one (1)
boat or trailer combination over eight feet in height may be parked on a lot
containing a principal single-family dwelling. 



      2.   Such recreational vehicle shall be parked behind the rear
building line of the principal building and shall be located no closer than
five (5) feet from any property line common with a lot under different
ownership. Recreational vehicles that do not belong to the property owner but
to visiting guests may be parked beyond the front building line of the
principal structure for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive
days.  No greater than three (3) such parking events may be allowed per
calendar year on any lot.  In no case shall the vehicle be parked in a
manner that impairs motorists' vision.  Otherwise, such vehicles shall be
parked in an enclosed garage.



   C.   For multifamily developments that have designated areas for the
parking of boats or recreational vehicles, such areas shall be located
outside of any required setback, buffer, or landscaped area.



Section 10.13   Driveway Widths



   A.   The minimum width of a driveway shall be as shown in Table
10.13-1 below.  Notwithstanding, a driveway with a width of no less than ten
(10) feet for two-way traffic shall be allowed when (1) the driveway is not
longer than fifty (50) feet in length, (2) provides access to not more than
six (6) spaces and (3) has sufficient turnings space so that vehicles within
the parking lot needs not be required to back into a public street.



 

TABLE 10.13-1
MINIMUM DRIVEWAY WIDTHS


 
One-Way Traffic
 
Two-Way Traffic


Principal Arterial
 
14/16* feet
 
20/24** feet


Minor Arterial
 
14/16* feet
 
20/24** feet


All Other Roads
 
14/16* feet
 
20/24** feet


 
 


*    A minimum of sixteen (16) feet is required to accommodate cars
entering a lot; a minimum of fourteen (14) feet is required for cars leaving
a lot.** A minimum of twenty (20) feet is required outside the USO District;
a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet is required within the USO District.



 



   The maximum width of a curb cut shall be thirty-six (36) feet, except
as may be otherwise authorized by NCDOT.



Editor's Note: To view a PDF of Table 10.5-1, click HERE



 



TABLE 10.5.1
REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES


(NOTE: Staging space requirements for uses with drive-in windows and for day
care centers are found in Section 10.6)


USE CATEGORY
 
USE
 
REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES


RESIDENTIAL PRINCIPAL USES
 
·   Single-family dwelling
 
Two (2) per dwelling unit


·   Two-family dwelling


·   Multi-family dwelling


·   Manufactured homes (not in manufactured home park)


·   Day Care Center, Class A
 
Two (2) spaces


·   Dwelling, Mixed Use
 
Two (except additional parking shall be provided based on the non-residential
used portion of the structure)


·   Rooming House
 
Two (2) plus one per roomer bedroom


·   Planned Residential Development
 
Refer to Section 8.1.11


·   Planned Unit Development
 
Refer to Section 8.2.26


·   Assisted Living Center
 
0.25 per resident plus one (1) per staff person


·   Family Care Home


·   Group Home


·   Nursing Home


·   Maternity Home


·   Continuing Care Facility
 
0.50 per resident bedroom plus one (1) per employee




 



 

USE CATEGORY
 
USE
 
REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES





OFFICE/COMMERCIAL SERVICES/RETAIL PRINCIPAL USES

 
·   Offices (including Medical Services Offices)
 
One (1) per three-hundred (300) square feet


·   Bed and Breakfast
 
Two (2) plus one (1) per guestroom


·   Hotel or motel
 
One (1) per sleeping room plus one  (1) per 800 sf of meeting space or one
(1) per three (3) seats in the public restaurant area, whichever is greatest


·   Automobile Service Station
 
One (1) per 250 sf retail area + four (4) per service bay (plus staging
spaces per Section 10.6)


·   Automobile Towing and Wrecker Service
 
One (1) per 500 sf + one (1) per employee


·   Automobile Body Shop


·   Automobile Repair Shop


·   Automobile Detail Shop


·   Automobile, Truck, Boat, Motorcycle, Manufactured Home and
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Rental
 
One (1) per 300 sf + one (1) per 5,000 sf of indoor or outdoor display area


·   Car Wash (Automatic and Self Serve)
 
Two (2) per bay plus staging spaces per Section 10.6


·   Tire recap facility
 
One (1) per employee + one (1) per vehicle used in the operation + two (2)
per vehicle designed to be accommodated in the service area


·   Truck Stop
 
Refer to Section 10.5(H) (2)


·   Truck Washing Facility


·   Restaurant  (All)
 
One (1) per three (3) customers that can be accommodated + one (1) per each
employee during the shift of greatest employment (plus staging spaces per
Section 10.6 for restaurants with drive-in windows)


·   Private Club


·   Food Catering Facility
 
One (1) per employee + one (1) per vehicle used in the operation + two (2)
spaces for visitors


·   Amusement and Sporting Facility, Indoor and Outdoor
 
One (1) per three (3) customers


·   Billiard Parlor


·   Camping and Recreational Vehicle Park
 
One (1) per campsite + one (1) per employee.


·   Country Club
 
One (1) per three (3) persons that outdoor facilities are intended to
accommodate at maximum capacity + one (1) per 300 sf of indoor space
accessible to patrons and guests.


·   Golf Course


·   Gameroom
 
One (1) space per 300 sf


·   Commercial Marina


·   Racetrack (Large or Small)
 
One (1) per three (3) seats, plus one (1) per employee


OFFICE/COMMERCIAL SERVICES/RETAIL PRINCIPAL USES
 
·   Adult Establishment
 
One (1) space per 300 sf


·   Animal Hospital


·   Bail bonds


·   Check Cashing Establishment


·   Commercial Services


·   Personal Care Services


·   Taxidermist


·   Animal Kennel
 
Refer to Section 10.5(H) (2)


·   Financial Institution
 
One (1) space per 300 sf


·   Auction House
 
One (1) per three (3) persons + one (1) per vehicle used in the operation


·   Art Gallery
 
One (1) per 500 sf


·   Business Services


·   ATM (Principal Use)
 
Two (2) per machine (plus staging spaces per Section 10.6)


·   Bus Terminal, Passenger
 
One (1) space per employee + one (1) space per four (4) patron seats in the
waiting area


·   Day Care Center, Class B and C
 
Two (2) spaces per employee


·   Funeral Home
 
One (1) space per three (3) viewing seats


·   School for the Arts
 
Seven (7) per classroom + one (1) per employee


·   Retail Uses
 
One (1) space per 250 sf; except one (1) space per 800 sf for: furniture
stores) and one (1) space per 500 sf for building materials and lumber sales


·   Building Materials and Lumber Sales


·   Laundromat


·   Shopping Centers


·   Tattoo Parlor and Body Piercing


·   Tire Sales, New and Used


·   Produce Stand, Temporary (Principal Use)


·   Convenience Store
 
One (1) space 150 sf


·   Flea Markets, Indoor and Outdoor
 
One (1) per 300 sf of sales area


·   Heavy Equipment Sales and Services
 
One (1) per 300 sf of enclosed floor area + one (1) per 5,000 sf of outdoor
display area


·   Swimming Pool Sales, Service and Supply


·   Nursery
 
One (1) per 400 sf of indoor or outdoor display area + one (1) per employee


·   Electronic Gaming Operations
 
One space for every two terminals or one hundred (100) square feet GFA,
whichever is greater.


 




 



 

USE CATEGORY
 
USE
 
REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES




INDUSTRIAL/ DISTRIBUTIONAL
PRINCIPAL USES
 
·   Crematorium
 
One (1) space per employee + one (1) per twenty (20) employees for visitors
with a maximum of ten (10) visitor spaces required.  For crematoriums with a
viewing room refer to the requirements for funeral homes.


·   Machine, Metal and Woodworking Shops


·   Manufactured Goods, Classes 1, 2 and 3


·   Portable Toilet Services


·   Distribution/ Wholesale/ Indoor Storage Operations
 
Refer to Section 10.5.8 (B)


·   Warehouse


·   Farm Supply Store
 
One (1) per 300 sf of sales area


·   Heavy Equipment Sales and Service
 
One (1) per 300 sf of office area + one (1) per 5,000 sf of indoor or outdoor
display area


·   Mini-Warehouses
 
One (1) for facilities with 1 to 25 storage units; otherwise, one (1) per 25
storage units, with a maximum of five required spaces, for facilities with
greater than 25 storage units.


·   Railroad Terminal and Yards
 
One (1) per employee plus one (1) for each company owned vehicles + ten (10)
spaces for visitors 


·   Commercial Vehicle and Truck Storage


·   Truck Terminals


·   Junkyard/Salvage Yard


·   Outdoor Storage Yards (Contractor)


·   Landfill, Land Clearing and Inert Debris (major)




 



 

USE CATEGORY
 
USE
 
REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES


CIVIC/
INSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPAL USES
 
·   Airports/Airstrips/Freight and Flying Service
 
Refer to Section 10.5 (H)(2)




·   Botanical Garden


·   Cemetery


·   Correctional Facility


·   Military Reserve Center


·   Transit Station


·   Zoo


·   Animal Shelter
 
One (1) per employee + ten (10) spaces for visitors


·   Auditoriums/Assembly Hall/Amphitheater/Community Center
 
One (1) per three (3) persons


·   Community Center"


·   Fraternal and Service Organization Meeting Facility


·   Recreation Center and Sports Center, Indoor


·   Charitable Service Facility
 
One (1) per 300 sf + five (5) for visitors


·   Essential Services, Class 3


·   Essential Services, Class 4


·   Food Pantry


·   Towers, Radio and Television Broadcast


·   Health and Behavioral Care Facility
 
One (1) per three (3) three persons plus one (1) per employee


·   Churches/ Places of Worship
 
One (1) for each three (3) persons in the assembly area or sanctuary


·   College/University
 
Seven per classroom; plus one (1) per three beds in each dormitory; plus one
(1) for each 300 sf of office area. Spaces for stadiums shall be calculated
separately.


·   Essential Services, Classes 1 and 2
 
None


·   Telecommunication Towers


·   Farmers Market, Outdoors
 
One (1) per 300 sf of sales area


·   Hospital
 
One (1) per bed, not including bassinets + one (1) per resident doctor + one
(1) per other employee


·   Library
 
One (1) per employee + one (1) per vehicle used in the operation + one (1)
per three (3) patron seats, or per three (3) auditorium or similar public
assembly spectator seats, whichever is greater


·   Museum
 
One (1) per employee + one (1) per vehicle used in the operation + one (1)
per 300 sf of viewing area or one (1) per three (3) auditorium seats or
similar spectator seats, whichever is greater


·   Parks
 
Refer to Section 10.5 (H)(2)


·   Post Office
 
One (1) per employee + one (1) per vehicle used in the operation + one (1)
per 200 square feet of customer waiting area


·   Recycling Deposit Station
 
One (1) per employee during the shift of greatest employment + one (1) per
vehicle used in the operation + three (3) for visitors


·   Schools, Vocational
 
Seven (7) per classroom + one (1) per 300 sf of office area


·   Schools, Elementary and Junior High
 
2.25 per classroom, or one (1) per three (3) seats in the assembly hall,
whichever is greater


·   Schools, Senior High
 
Five (5) per classroom, or one (1) per three (3) seats in the assembly hall
or outdoor assembly area, whichever is greater


·   Stadiums
 
One (1) per three (3) seats, plus one (1) per employee


·   Recycling Collection Facility
 
One (1) space per employee plus five (5) spaces per visitors


·   Solid Waste Transfer Station
 
One (1) space per employee plus one (1) space for each vehicle used in the
operation


 
 




(Res. passed 7-9-2012)



CHAPTER 11:
SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING



11.1   General Provisions



11.2   Planting Yards



11.3   Buffer Yards



11.4   Landscaping and Street Yard Trees



11.5   Off-street Parking Lot Landscaping



11.6   Open Air Storage Screening



11.7   Solid Waste Dumpster Screening



Section 11.1   General Provisions



11.1.1   Purpose



   The purposes of these screening and landscaping regulations are to:



   A.   Reduce soil erosion and stormwater runoff by increasing
infiltration in permeable land areas;



   B.   Mitigate air, dust, noise, heat and chemical pollution;



   C.   Reduce the “heat island” effect of impervious surfaces such
as parking lots, by cooling and shading the paved surface areas and breaking
up large expanses of pavement;



   D.   Establish a landscape theme including street trees and
streetscape designs;



   E.   Preserve native vegetation as an integral part of wildlife
habitats;



   F.   Promote innovative and cost-conscious approaches to the design,
installation and maintenance of landscaping while encouraging water and
energy conservation;



   G.   Promote planting techniques that ensure long term health of
plant materials;



   H.   Screen unsightly equipment or materials from the view of
persons on public streets or adjoining properties and buffering
uncomplimentary uses; and,



   I.   Maintain and increase property values by requiring an
appropriate amount of landscaping that is properly designed and installed.



11.1.2    General Standards



   A.   Retention of Existing Vegetation



   To the greatest degree feasible and practical, existing trees, shrubs
and ground cover shall be retained and incorporated into a landscape plan
that meets or exceeds the standards contained herein.



   B.   Landscape Plans



   Landscape materials shall be planned and installed in conformity with
an approved landscaped plan.  Such landscape plan shall accompany any
application for site plan approval (refer to Section 5.2).  Approval of a
site plan shall indicate that the requirements of this Chapter, as well as
other applicable provisions of this Ordinance among others, have been met. 
If a specific use or development plan requires review and approval by the
governing board, Board of Adjustment or another approval body, the
landscaping plan shall be submitted as part of such plan or application. 
The landscaping plan shall be drawn at such scale to enable the Administrator
(or other approval body) to clearly determine whether or not the proposed
buffers or landscaped areas shown are in compliance with this Chapter.



   C.   Performance Guarantee



   Except as herein provided, neither a certificate of compliance nor a
certificate of occupancy may be issued for a particular piece of property
unless all applicable requirements of this Chapter have been met.  A
temporary Certificate of Compliance, as allowed in Section 5.6, may be issued
by the Administrator in instances where the installation of required planted
materials prior to use or occupancy of the lot in question would need not be
practical or would serve no useful purpose.



   D.   Violations



   Failure to provide or maintain landscaping or buffering in accordance
with an approved landscaping plan shall constitute a violation of this
Ordinance and shall subject the violating party(ies) to any and all of the
remedies as called for in Chapter 15.



   E.   Installation and maintenance



   The plantings that constitute required buffering and landscaping shall
be properly installed and maintained in order to fulfill the purpose of which
it is established. Plant species shall be recommended for healthy growth
under local climate conditions, not be of a type highly prone to disease, and
be of a type expected to grow in a manner that will satisfy the spirit and
intent of this Chapter. Plant materials shall be planted in accordance with
the recommended practices of the American Standard for Nursery Stock of the
American Nursery and Landscape Association. The owner of the property and any
tenant on the property where buffering and landscaping are required shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all required
landscaped materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary:
to keep the buffered and landscaped areas free of litter and debris; to keep
plantings healthy; to keep growth from interfering with safe vehicular or
pedestrian travel, or use of parking areas, or from creating any nuisances to
adjoining properties; and, to keep walls, fences and berms in good repair and
neat appearance. Any vegetation that constitutes a required screen or
landscaped area shall be replaced in the event that it dies. All buffering
and landscaping material shall be protected from damage.



   F.   Relief



      1.   The Administrator may modify or waive certain portions of
this Chapter when he determines that unusual topography or elevation of a
development site; the location, shape or size of the parcel to be developed
would make either (1) strict adherence to the requirements of this Chapter
serve no meaningful purpose; (2) not achieve one or more of the goals of this
Chapter; or (3) would make it physically impossible to install or maintain
the required screening or landscaping materials as otherwise called for.



      2.   Such modification or waiver may occur only at the request
of the developer, who shall submit as part of his landscape plan the existing
site features that would screen the proposed use and any additional buffer
materials that are to be planted or installed that would serve as the
proposed screened or landscaped area.  The Administrator shall have no
authority to provide said modification or waiver unless the developer
demonstrates that existing or proposed buffering material will screen the
proposed use as effectively as the required buffer. This section shall not be
construed to negate the necessity for establishing buffers for uses that lie
adjacent to vacant properties.



      3.   Additional relief opportunities may apply to required
screening around telecommunication facilities per Section 9.15(H)(1)(n) and
(o) of this Ordinance.



   G.   Easements and Rights-of-Way



   Any planting that is proposed to be placed in a general drainage and
utility easement or in a street right-of-way to conform with the provisions
of this Chapter must first be approved by the City Manager and/or NCDOT in
conjunction with site plan approval.  In all such instances, the location of
the affected rights-of-way must be shown on the site plan.



   H.    Distance from roads and sidewalks



   All trees shall be placed in the most feasible manner so as not to
interfere with roadways, sidewalks, or streetlights and shall not be planted
closer than eight (8) feet to a fire hydrant.



   I.   Distance from utilities



      1.   Any tree required by this Chapter to be placed within
twenty (20) feet lateral distance from the centerline of an above ground
electric utility line shall be an understory tree.  Furthermore, maximum
expected maturity heights of these trees shall be as follows:



         a.   Zero (0) to ten (10) feet lateral distance of
centerline: Fifteen (15) feet maximum expected maturity height; and,



         b.   Greater than ten (10) and up to twenty (20) feet
lateral distance of centerline:  Twenty-five (25) feet maximum expected
maturity height.



   Refer to Figure 11.1.2-1 for an illustration of these requirements.



Figure 11.1.2-1









 



      2.   Outside said twenty (20) foot lateral distance, trees
shall be placed in the most feasible manner to avoid future conflict with
above ground electric utilities and violations of the National Electric
Safety Code, and to avoid conflict with any below ground utilities and
drainage facilities.



   J.   List of Acceptable Tree and Shrub Species



   Appendix 1 contains an approved list of tree and shrub species that are
satisfactory for planting in accordance with the guidelines of this
subsection. The Administrator may approve the use of a species different from
said recommended list, provided the maximum maturity height is in accordance
with the standards of this subsection and is recommended for Gaston
County’s climate.



Section 11.2    Planting Yards



11.2.1   Purpose



   Planting yards are intended to aesthetically enhance and separate
certain land uses and zoning districts from each other, as well as to
beautify individual sites.  Planting yards shall include the following:



   A.   Buffer Yards



   B.   Street Yards



   C.   Parking Lot Landscaping



11.2.2   Applicability



   A.   Planting yards shall be required for all principal uses except:



      1.   Single-family detached homes (except that street yards
shall be required in residential subdivisions located in the USO Overlay
District).



      2.   Manufactured homes (all classes)



      3.   Rooming House



      4.   Bed and Breakfast Inn (without restaurant)



      5.   Family care homes



      6.   Two-family dwelling



      7.   Agricultural Uses



      8.   Day Care Center, Class A



      9.   Developments within the CBD district (except that the
parking lot landscaping requirements of Section 11.5 shall apply)



      10.   Developments within a PRD, TND, infill residential, or
multi-family development, except as specifically provided for those
developments



      11.   Essential Services, Class 1



      12.   Essential Services, Class 2 (provided that no building
or facility exceeds 250 square feet in area)



      13.   Parks without any active recreational facilities (except
that the street yard requirements of Section 11.4 and the parking lot
landscaping requirements of Section 11.5 shall apply)



      14.   Botanical Gardens



   B.   Screening of outdoor storage areas and solid waste dumpsters
shall apply as called for in Sections 11.6 and 11.7, respectively.



   C.   For purposes of this Chapter, building setbacks shall supersede
planting yard requirements.  Landscaping that may be required within a
planting yard shall only be counted for that planting yard requirement and
shall not be used for calculating the minimum quantity for any other planting
yard.



11.2.3   Expansion of Existing Uses



   The physical expansion of an existing structure, or parking lot that
results in a ten percent (10%) or more increase of gross floor area shall be
required to comply with this Chapter to the greatest extent practical.  In
addition, a change of use of an existing use, structure or parking lot shall
be required to comply with this Chapter to the greatest extent practical.



Section 11.3   Buffer Yards



11.3.1   Purpose



   Buffer yards are natural areas of specified widths that serve as a
visual screen between different zoning districts.  Buffer yards shall be of
different types, based upon the relationship between the two land uses where
the buffer yard is to be located and may include natural plantings, a wall,
fence or berm.  The width of the buffer yard and the density of plantings
shall increase as the difference in intensity between adjacent zoning
districts increases.  Minimum buffer yard dimensions shall be measured
horizontally; minimum buffer yard widths shall be measured from the
respective property line.  Where buffer yards turn at property corners, the
length measurements determining plant quantities shall not be required to
overlap.



11.3.2   Buffer Yard Land Use Table



   Land Use Buffers shall be provided along the side and rear yards in
accordance with the following table.  To determine the type of buffer yard
required:



   A.   Identify the type of proposed use of the site that is being
developed (the first column of the table) and the zoning of each adjacent
site (headers of the columns in the table). 



   B.   Find where the proposed use of the developing site and the
zoning of each adjacent site intersect on the table.  If the adjoining site
contains an existing residential use, determine the type of that residential
use and find where the proposed use of the developing site and the
residential type intersect on the table. 



   C.   If a buffer yard is required, the corresponding letter will
indicate the type of buffer yard required.  Width and landscaping
requirements for each buffer yard are explained in Section 11.3.3.



   For example, a Financial Institution that is locating next to a
multi-family development will require a Type B buffer yard.  Using the table
below, a Financial Institution is considered a Commercial Type 1 proposed use
because it is allowed as a use by right in the Office districts, CBD, UMU and
C-1 zoning districts in the Table of Uses (Table 7.1-1)  A multi-family
development is a Type 2 Residential Use.  Looking at the Commercial Type 1
row in the table below, a “B” is found under the Residential Type 2
column, indicating the required buffer yard is a Type B.



 



TABLE 11.3.2-1
BUFFER YARD TABLE


Proposed Use
 
Use or Zoning of Adjacent Site


 
Residential Type
 
Zoning District


 
1
 
2
 
R [1]
 
TMU
 
OLC
 
O-1/OM
 
CBD
 
UMU/C-1
 
C-2/C-3
 
I [2]


Residential Type 1
 
-
 
A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Residential Type 2
 
B
 
A
 
A
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Civic/Institutional
 
B
 
A
 
A
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-


Commercial Type 1
 
B
 
B
 
B
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-


Commercial Type 2
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
A
 
-
 
-


Industrial Type 1
 
D
 
D
 
D
 
B
 
B
 
A
 
A
 
B
 
-
 
-


Industrial Type 2
 
E
 
E
 
E
 
B
 
B
 
A
 
A
 
B
 
A
 
-




 



[1] Applies to undeveloped (vacant) Residential zoned property.



[2] Includes all industrial zoning districts.



Residential Use Types: Type 1 = Single-Family Detached, Manufactured homes on
an individual lot and two-family dwellings; Type 2 = Multi-Family and all
other residential use types (residential uses are those listed in the
"Residential/Agricultural Principal Uses" of Table 7.1-1).



Commercial Use Types: Type 1 = Any commercial use allowed by-right in the
Office districts, CBD, UMU and C-1 zoning districts; Type 2 = all other
commercial uses that are allowed by right or as a conditional use in the
commercial or office zoning districts (commercial uses are those listed in
the "Office/Commercial Services/Retail Principal Uses" of Table 7.1-1)



Industrial Use Types: Type 1 = Any industrial or commercial use that is
allowed as a use by right in the I-U and I-1 industrial zoning districts;
Type 2 = all other industrial uses that are allowed by right or as a
conditional use in the industrial zoning districts (industrial uses are those
listed in the "Industrial/Distribution/Heavy Impact Principal Uses" of Table
7.1-1).



11.3.3   Buffer Yard Composition Standards



   Buffer yard widths and landscaping shall meet or exceed the following
standards:



TABLES 11.3.3-1 – 11.3.3-5
BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS TABLES



 

Table 11.3.3-1
Type A Buffer Yard


Option
 
Width (ft)
 
Fence or Berm Required?
 
Minimum # Canopy Trees Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Understory Trees Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Shrubs Per 100 Linear Ft.


1
 
10
 
No
 
2
 
2
 
15


2
 
8
 
No
 
3
 
3
 
20


3
 
5
 
Yes
 
2
 
2
 
15



 



Figure 11.3.3-1









 



 

Table 11.3.3-2
Type B Buffer Yard


Option
 
Width
 
Fence or Berm Required?
 
Minimum # Canopy Trees Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Understory Trees Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Shrubs Per 100 Linear Ft.*


1
 
20
 
No
 
3
 
3
 
25


2
 
10
 
No
 
4
 
4
 
35


3
 
5
 
Yes
 
3
 
3
 
25



 



Figure 11.3.3-2









 



 

Table 11.3.3-3
Type C Buffer Yard


Option
 
Width
 
Fence or Berm Required?
 
Minimum # Canopy Trees Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Understory Trees Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Shrubs Per 100 Linear Ft.*


1
 
25
 
No
 
4
 
3
 
35


2
 
15
 
Yes
 
5
 
4
 
30


3
 
10
 
Yes
 
4
 
3
 
30



 



Figure 11.3.3-3









 



 

Table 11.3.3-4
Type D Buffer Yard


Option
 
Width
 
Fence or Berm Required?
 
Minimum # Canopy Trees Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Understory Trees  Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Shrubs Per 100 Linear Ft.*


1
 
30
 
No
 
5
 
4
 
45


2
 
20
 
Yes
 
6
 
5
 
40


3
 
15
 
Yes
 
5
 
4
 
40



 



Figure 11.3.3-4









 



 

Table 11.3.3-5
Type E Buffer Yard


Option
 
Width
 
Fence or Berm Required?
 
Minimum # Canopy Trees Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Understory Trees  Per 100 Linear Ft.
 
Minimum # Shrubs  Per 100 Linear Ft.*


1
 
45
 
No
 
5
 
4
 
50


2
 
30
 
Yes
 
6
 
5
 
45


3
 
20
 
Yes
 
5
 
4
 
45



 



*Refer to Section 11.3.5(J) for standards on shrubs



 



Figure 11.3.3-5









 



11.3.4   Exemptions



   In addition to the exemptions set forth in Section 11.2.2, the
following uses shall be exempt from buffer yard requirements:



   A.   Lots separated by a public street right-of-way of greater than
thirty (30) feet



11.3.5   Other Buffer Yard Standards



   A.   Prohibited Uses



   The construction of any building or the placement of any mechanical
equipment within a buffer yard shall not be permitted except for equipment
necessary for the provision of utilities.    Active recreational uses, such
as ballfields, swimming pools and tennis courts, or other active structured
recreational uses, or circulation drives or parking lots shall not be allowed
within the buffer yard area.



   B.   Permitted Uses



   The following other uses may be permitted in a buffer yard area
provided that none of the required plant material is eliminated, the intended
screening is accomplished, the total width of the buffer yard is maintained,
and all other requirements of this Chapter are met:



      1.   Passive Recreation



      2.   Sculpture, outdoor furniture, picnic areas, bicycle or
equestrian trails, golf courses;



      3.   Parks and open space areas (provided that none of the
uses listed in Subsection A above are located within the buffer yard area)



      4.   Walls, fences and driveways connecting to an adjoining
property



   C.   Existing Vegetation



   Existing healthy vegetation may be counted toward the required buffer
yard.  The landscape plan submitted for approval shall indicate the number,
type, size and location of such plant materials.  Existing vegetation that
the Administrator deems “unhealthy” and not likely to materially serve as
a screening agent for the foreseeable future may be disqualified as counting
towards the required buffer.



   D.   Reserved



   E.   Application Toward Setback Requirements



   Buffer yard areas shall be counted towards meeting applicable building
setback areas.



   F.   Standards for Walls and Fences



   Fences used for screening purposes shall be constructed in a durable
fashion with weather resistant wood and be of a consistent pattern. All
materials used in the construction of a fence shall be designed and intended
for such use. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Administrator may approve a
buffer fence constructed of other materials provided the materials and finish
used will provide generally the same degree of opacity, durability, and
aesthetic compatibility with adjoining residential areas as weather resistant
wood. A finished side of all walls or fences shall face the common property
line boundary. No wall or fence used as part of a screen shall be less than
six (6) or more than eight (8) feet in height above grade, unless
specifically approved by the Administrator. All walls or fences used for
screen purposes shall be substantively opaque to the pedestrian at a distance
of ten (10) feet.



   G.   Standards for Berms



   All berms shall be planted with both shrubs and ground covers so as to
leave no bare earth. All shrubs shall be a species that can be expected to
materially screen the development site within five (5) years of planting. The
slope of a berm shall be of a grade so that it is suitable for maintenance
and soil stability while taking into consideration the type of plantings and
ground cover that will be utilized but in no case shall a berm be less than
three (3) feet in height. The use of Pueraria lobata (kudzu) for berm ground
cover is not permitted nor is any other nuisance vining plants that have a
tendency to spread to other properties.



   H.   Location of Buffer Yard 



   With the exception of screening required for open storage (refer to
Section 11.7), any buffer yard required by this section shall be located
along the side and/or rear property lines of the lot(s) containing the use
subject to screening. If screening is required along the right-of-way, it
shall be located behind such right-of-way. In addition, screening and
landscaping shall be subject to site triangle requirements contained in
Section 9.7.



   I.   Evergreen Shrubs



   For all buffer yards, at least fifty (50) percent of the required
shrubs must be of an evergreen species.



Section 11.4   Landscaping and Street Yard Trees



   A.   Purpose



   In order to absorb carbon dioxide and provide oxygen necessary for
human life; purify air through transpiration; provide cooling through shade;
reduce the impact of wind; retard the rate of water runoff; reduce glare and
noise; to conserve property values; and to contribute to the natural beauty
and aesthetics of the community, street trees, as herein provided, are
required.  Additional landscape planting strip standards associated with
parking decks are found in Sections 10.9.1, 10.9.2 and 10.9.3.  The required
street trees may be planted within said landscaped area or elsewhere on the
lot as herein called for in Subsection D.  Greenstrips may also be required
as provided for in Section 9.18.2.



   B.   Where Required



      1.   Street yard and landscaping requirements shall be met
along and parallel to any public road for all new developments (except those
listed in Section 11.2.2), new developments along road frontage not
developed, or substantial redevelopment of an existing site to another use
(except for those listed in Section 11.2.2) within the Urban Standards (USO)
Overlay and CH Corridor Highway Overlay Districts.  In addition, street yard
and landscaping requirements shall be met on any internal road two-hundred
fifty (250) linear feet or greater in length that is used as an entryway into
a parking lot for a commercial development within said districts.  Street
trees shall also be required on lots located within a planned residential
development (PRD), traditional neighborhood development (TND), and planned
unit development (PUD) whether such developments are located in a USO or CH
overlay district.



      2.   Irrespective of the underlying zoning district, street
trees and front yard landscaping shall not be required on any portion of a
lot where the building line is within four (4) feet of the adjoining street
right-of-way. 



   C.   Number of Street Trees Required



   Canopy and understory trees shall be planted, where required, as
follows:



      1.   One canopy tree for each 40 linear feet of frontage; or,



      2.   One understory tree for each 30 feet of frontage; or,



      3.   A combination of canopy and understory trees at the rate
of one per 35 feet of frontage.



      4.   For interior roads only, any combination of canopy trees
so long as the type and spacing of trees placed can be expected to form a
substantial canopy within twenty (20) years of initial planting.



   D.   Location of Trees



   The Administrator shall have the authority to approve the placement of
street trees in a variety of locations, based on (1) the nature of the
development (2) the underlying zoning district (3) the presence of other
street trees on adjacent or nearby lots (4) the presence of overhead utility
lines (5) road maintenance, and (5) other factors that directly affect the
maintenance and long-term viability of the trees. 



   Accordingly, the Administrator shall have the authority to have the
street trees in the following locations, each of which is listed in
descending order of preference:



         a.   In the greenstrip area provided per Section 9.18.2



         b.   Within the landscape easement shown in Figure 11.4-1



         c.   Elsewhere on the adjoining lot



         d.   Within the sidewalk in planters or grates



   Where the Administrator deems none of the above locations feasible and
practical, he shall have the authority to waive or modify the placement of
street trees.



   Where the Administrator deems that the placement of the greenstrip
would be (1) impossible to install in the prescribed location; or (2)
impossible or impractical to be maintained; or (3) would serve no useful
public purpose, he shall have the authority to waive or modify the
installation or width of the greenstrip.



   Refer to Figure 11.4-1 below for a schematic of these possible
locations.  Such locations shall be as follows:



   SN to change “tree easement” to “landscape easement



Figure 11.4-1









 



      2.   In no instance shall canopy trees be placed underneath
aboveground utility lines.



      3.   Distribution shall be generally proportionate along the
road frontage; however, this shall not be construed to require equal
intervals between trees. The intent is to allow flexibility in design while
discouraging long intervals without trees.  r.



   E.   Peninsula Lots



   Properties with street frontage (not including Interstate 85 or the
limited access portion of US 321) on three or more sides may reduce the
number of required street trees by one-half for each street not listed as a
“arterial” on the most recently adopted version of the local thoroughfare
plan.



   F.   Existing Trees



   Existing trees with a caliper of at least ten inches DBH may be counted
as two trees.



   G.   Front Landscaped Areas 



   Street trees that are required to be planted per this Section may be
placed in the required front landscaped area.  Such landscaped area shall be
kept in a natural state with grass, plantings, mulch, or other such
combination of planted materials.  In no instance shall outdoor storage of
any kind be allowed in any required landscaped area.



Section 11.5    Off-Street Parking Landscaping



   The provision of off-street landscaping shall only be applicable to
nonresidential developments and multi-family developments.  Furthermore, all
uses shown in Section 11.2.2 shall be exempt from these requirements. The
provision of off-street landscaping shall only be applicable to
nonresidential developments that are located on a site that is greater than
one (1) acre in area and contains (or proposed to contain) more than
twenty-five (25) parking spaces including staging spaces for any drive-up or
drive-through windows. The following guidelines also shall be used in
determining whether parking lot landscaping provisions shall apply:



   A.   Initial Developments



   For any initial development (i.e., the construction of one or more new
buildings on a lot) parking lot landscaping regulations shall apply if the
lot contains an area of one or more acres and more than 25 required
off-street parking and/or staging spaces are needed as a result of the
development.



   B.   Redevelopments



   For any building that is redeveloped (i.e., reconfigured or otherwise
internally altered for a new use), the parking lot landscaping regulations
shall apply only if the redevelopment increases the number of off-street
parking spaces to 25 or more. If this threshold is met, all parking spaces
associated with the use shall come into compliance with the parking lot
landscaping regulations.



   C.   Building Expansions



   For any development that is expanded, the parking lot landscaping
regulations shall apply if the expansion increases the number of off-street
parking spaces to twenty-five (25) or more and/or the expanded building
coverage area removes twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces. If either
threshold is met, the number of parking spaces associated with the expansion
shall come into compliance with the parking lot landscaping regulations. On
multi-tenant developments where parking spaces between uses are generally
shared, these regulations shall generally apply to those spaces in closest
proximity to the use being expanded.



   D.   Quantities



   Landscaping, as called for in this Section, for parking lots for any
single use or any planned multi-tenant development with twenty-five (25) or
more parking spaces, including any staging spaces, (except for automobile
sales lots which are treated in a separate manner as herein described), shall
be provided in the following manner:



      1.   Canopy trees--One per 15 spaces; and



      2.   Understory trees--One per 10 spaces; and



      3.   Shrubs--One per 4 spaces.



   E.   Automobile Sales Lots



   Properties intended for the sale of automobiles shall not be required
to provide one canopy or understory tree within seventy-five (75) linear feet
[per Subsection G)] of the parking spaces used for the storage of cars
displayed for sale. In lieu, the required landscaping for this use may be
placed on the outer perimeter of the lot, in addition to the requisite number
of street trees, unless the width of the lot exceeds four-hundred (400) feet.
In such cases, the storage areas shall be broken by a landscape strip running
the length of the storage area. Said landscape strip shall be at least
twenty-five (25) feet in width and shall contain a minimum of fifteen (15)
percent of the required planting of the storage area. Areas designed for
employee and customer parking must still observe the 75-foot radius standard
called for in Subsection G.



   F.   Existing Trees



   Existing canopy and/or understory trees located within thirty (30)
linear feet of a parking area or driveway surface may count towards meeting
the parking lot landscape requirements provided they are located on the same
subject property (or, in the case of a shopping center or similar planned
multi-tenant development, within the same development). All distances are to
be measured from the nearest face of the tree trunk. Existing canopy trees
with a caliper of ten (10) inches or greater DBH, may count as two (2) trees.
The use of existing trees shall be noted on the landscape plan.



   G.   Distribution



   Required trees shall be located within or adjacent to parking lots as
tree islands, medians, at the end of parking bays, traffic delineators or
between rows or parking spaces in a manner such that no parking space is
located greater than seventy-five (75) linear feet from a canopy or
understory tree on the subject property. Such trees may be existing trees, a
tree installed as part of a required screen area (refer to Section 11.3) or a
tree installed as a street tree (refer to Section 11.4), or a tree installed
pursuant to this Section.  In addition, a minimum of twenty-five (25%)
percent of the required landscaping shall be distributed within the parking
surface area, except this requirement does not apply to front yard parking in
the Urban Standards Overlay District.  Refer to Figure 11.5-1 below for an
example of how these requirements are applied.



Figure 11.5-1









 



   H.   Planting Area Dimensional Requirements



   Planting areas and islands (except as called for in Subsection H) shall
be not less than eight (8) feet in width and shall include a minimum of
one-hundred forty (140) feet of open planting area for understory trees and
two hundred eighty (280) square feet for canopy trees.  Shrubs or ground
cover may be planted within the required open planting area for trees without
necessitating an increase in the required planted area.  All landscaped
areas called for in this Chapter shall be protected from vehicular
encroachment by concrete curb and gutter or similar material.  Landscaped
areas shall be covered with mulch, ground cover or grass in between shrub and
tree plantings



   I.   Parking Reduction for Increased Landscaping



   The number of required off-street parking spaces for any use may be
reduced by one (1) percentage point, up to a maximum of ten (10) percentage
points, for each two (2) percent of additional quantities of required canopy
and understory trees listed in Subsection B herein. 



   For example, a 60-space parking lot would require 4 canopy trees and 6
understory trees under Subsection B for a total of 10 trees.  If the
applicant agreed to plant one extra canopy tree this would increase the
required number of trees by 10% and consequently reduce the required number
of off-street parking spaces by 5% (from 60 to 57 spaces).



   J.   Building Landscaped Areas



   Parking areas located in the front or side yards shall be separated
from the exterior wall of a structure by a landscaped area of at least four
(4) feet in width.  Shrubs shall be required within said area at a minimum
of one (1) per six (6) linear feet.  Said shrubs may be counted towards the
minimum off-street planting requirement per Subsection B when placed in a
yard that contains off-street parking.  Refer to Figure 11.5-2 below for an
illustration of this requirement.



Figure 11.5-2









 



Section 11.6   Open-Air Storage Screening



   A.   Within all zones, except for residential uses in Residential
zones, screening shall be required for the open storage of any goods,
materials, products, wastes or equipment that is visible from any adjacent
Residential zone and/or any public street. Excluded from such requirement are
the following displays of items for sale: outdoor in-service vending
machines; fresh produce; Christmas trees; live plants; bagged ice in
freezers; firewood in sales bins, tanks of propane in exchange racks; other
retail goods left outside during business hours only, vehicles, trailers,
other equipment capable of being driven or towed on a roadway, manufactured
or modular homes; and storage buildings prefabricated to building codes. 
Retail goods that are left outside overnight and that can be readily carried
without the assistance of a moving device [i.e., be less than fifty (50)
pounds in weight] shall also be excluded from the screening requirement. 



   B.   In addition to the above, all uses that store heavy equipment
outdoors on a regular basis (e.g., bobcats, graders, and other such heavy
equipment) shall provide such screening.



   C.   Screening for storage areas one (1) acre or less in size shall
consist of any one or a combination of more than one of the following: a wall
or opaque fence meeting the requirements of Section 11.3.5(F) or a densely
planted screen which will generally screen the storage from street view or
from view of an adjacent Residentially zoned lot within five (5) years of
installation.



   D.   If the storage area is greater than one (1) acre in size,
screening shall consist of a ten (10) foot planted strip in addition to the
fence or wall. Such planted strip shall be on the exterior of the wall or
fence.



   E.   Where screening is required as a result of the lot in question
being adjacent to a Residentially zoned lot, in lieu of the screening
requirement called for in this Section, buffer yard screening as shown in
Section 11.3.3 may be used instead.  The installation of such buffer yard
screening shall not relieve the property owner from screening requirements
called for herein if the outdoor storage area is visible from a public street.



Section 11.7    Solid Waste Dumpster Screen



   All solid waste dumpsters shall be designed and located, or otherwise
screened, so as to not be visible from a public street and from the view of
adjacent properties (irrespective of zoning).  If screening of the dumpster
is provided it shall consist of a solid opaque device that is at least six
(6) feet in height, or at least one (1) foot higher than the height of the
dumpster, whichever is greater, and have latching gates to provide access.



   Dumpsters shall not be located in the front yard and must be placed
entirely on a concrete slab.



CHAPTER 12:
SIGNS



12.1   General Provisions



12.2   Signs Not Requiring a Permit



12.3   Prohibited Signs



12.4   Permitted Signs: Location, Size and Number



12.5   Design and Construction Standards



12.6   Sign Lighting Standards



12.7   Signs in the Public Right-of-Way



12.8   Nonconforming Signs



12.9   Sign Maintenance



Section 12.1   General Provisions



12.1.1   Purpose



   The purposes of these sign regulations are:



   A.   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
communication.



   B.   To maintain and enhance the pleasing look of the City.



   C.   To preserve the  City as an attractive place to do business.



   D.   To improve motorist, bicyclist and pedestrian safety.



   E.   To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby
public and private property.



   F.   To ensure that signs placed in the City are compatible with the
high quality image that the City seeks.



12.1.2   Applicability



   A.   Applicability



   A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created or
maintained in the City only in conformance with the standards, procedures,
exemptions and other requirements of this Chapter and Ordinance.



   B.   Effect



   The effects of these regulations as herein set forth are:



      1.   To establish a system to allow a variety of types of
signs in the various zoning districts, subject to the standards and permit
requirements herein contained.



      2.   To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive and
incidental to the principal use of the lot upon which they are located, and
without having to seek a permit.



      3.   To provide for temporary signs of a limited nature.



      4.   To prohibit all signs that are not expressly permitted by
this Chapter.



      5.   To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this
Chapter.



12.1.3   Sign Area and Height Measurements



   A.   Sign Area Computations



   The Administrator shall employ the following principles when
determining the area of sign:



      1.   The area of a sign face shall be computed by using up to
three (3) of the smallest basic geometric shapes (i.e. square, circle,
triangle) that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed.  Such measurement shall not include any supporting framework,
bracing or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall is clearly
incidental to the display itself and does not contain any sign copy.  For
pole signs, poles covered with corporate logos or with more than one (1)
corporate color will be considered part of the sign area.



      2.   For a single wall (i.e., the entire wall that shares the
same architectural elevation as shown on the approved sign permit) all pieces
of information or other graphic representations on the wall that are
logically related shall be measured as part of one sign.  If multiple signs
on a single wall share a frame or other material of color forming an integral
part of the display or used to differentiate the signs from the background
against which they are placed, such area will be measured as part of one sign.



      3.   Regardless of whether a single wall has wall sections
that project, recess or otherwise vary from the predominate wall plane, the
sign area measurement shall include the area of all sign faces that can be
viewed from a single vantage point.  In addition, where sign faces of a
double-faced sign are parallel or where the interior angle formed by the
faces is sixty (60) degrees or less, only one (1) display face shall be
measured in computing sign area.  In all other cases, the areas of each face
of a multi-faced sign shall be added together to compute the sign area. 
Sign area of multi-faced signs is calculated based on the principle that all
sign elements that can be seen at one time or from one vantage point should
be considered when measuring the area of such sign.



Examples Of How Sign Area Is To Be Computed Are Indicated Below:







 







 







 



   B.   Sign Height Computation



   The height of a sign shall be computed to be the distance from the base
of a sign at “normal grade” to the top of the highest attached component
of the sign.  “Normal grade” shall be construed to mean the newly
established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming,
mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.  In
cases where the normal grade is below the grade at street level, the height
of a sign shall be computed from the crown of the public or private street
closest to the sign.  Examples of how sign height is computed are included
below:







 



Section 12.2   Signs Not Requiring a Permit



   The following signs shall be exempt from the regulations contained in
this Chapter and shall not be required to have had a permit issued from the
Administrator for their placement.  Unless otherwise specified (e.g., signs
specifically allowed to be located off-premises or placed in a street
right-of-way), such signs shall not fall into any of the “prohibited
sign” categories contained in Section 12.3.  See Section 5.7 for
procedures for obtaining a sign permit.  Notwithstanding, any sign shown
herein, except political signs and holiday decorations, and subdivision
identification signs, and other signs pursuant to Section 12.7, shall be
placed outside of a street right-of-way or required sight distance triangle,
unless specific authorization for such placement is granted by the City or
NCDOT.



   A.   Any official or public notice or warning sign required by a
valid or applicable federal, state, or local law; by a public utility
company; or by a court of competent jurisdiction.



   B.   Building marker signs that include the building name, date of
construction, or historical data, if such sign is cut or etched into the
building masonry, bronze or similar material.



   C.   On-premise Decorational, Seasonal, or Corporate Logo Flags. 
Decorational, seasonal flags, or corporate logo flags (that may include the
company name, insignia or symbol) may be up to twenty-four (24) square feet. 



   D.   Governmental Signs. 



   E.   On-premise Public Interest Signs.  Signs indicating vehicular
entrances and exits, parking areas, one-way traffic, “no trespassing”,
“no loitering”, etc.  Such signs may be illuminated, shall not exceed
four (4) square feet in area and shall not be located at the driveway
entrance or where other instruction is required.



   F.   Memorial signs, plaques or grave markers that are noncommercial
in nature.



   G.   Flags, pennants, insignia, or religious symbols of any
government, nonprofit or not-for-profit organization when not displayed as an
advertising device for commercial purposes.



   H.   On-premise (ground or wall) identification signs for
residential uses that show the name and may also include the street address,
with a maximum aggregate area of six (6) square feet.



   I.   Incidental signs.  Such on-premise signs shall be displayed
for the convenience of the general public and includes such signs as signs
for public rest rooms; automobile inspection; hours of operation; credit
cards accepted, etc.  Such signs may be illuminated and contain no other
sign copy other than service information, trade names, and logos.  Such
signs shall be a maximum of six (6) square feet apiece.



   J.   Political Signs.  Such signs shall be allowed if the following
conditions are met:



      1.   If placed within the street right-of-way:



         a.   Sign area shall not exceed five (5) square feet;



         b.   Sign height shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches
above the street level surface nearest to said sign; provided however, if
said sign is located within twelve (12) feet of the point of intersection of
the edges of pavement of two (2) intersection streets, no such sign shall
exceed thirty (30) inches in height above said street level. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Administrator shall remove any such sign or group of signs
that he deems to be an obstruction to the safe vision of motorists.



         c.   Such signs shall not be put up more than thirty
(30) days prior to election day and must be removed within ten (10) days
following election day; provided however, signs of candidates in a runoff
election may remain up until ten (10) days after said runoff election.



         d.   No such sign shall be placed over any curb, street
surface or sidewalk; or on any utility pole, government sign or signpost,
bridge, tree, rock, fence, or guardrail; nor within fifteen (15) feet of any
fire hydrant.



         e.   The tenant or other person entitled to possession
of the property fronting along the street right-of-way on which such sign is
placed may remove such sign at any time.



         f.   Such signs shall not be placed on right-of-way
fronting public facilities (e.g., government office or operations center,
post office, public park, public cemetery, courthouse, public safety station,
public library, public museum, public school, etc.) except on election day
where said public facility is a polling place and placed in accordance with
the rules of the Gaston County Board of Elections.



      2.   If placed on private property, outside the street
right-of-way;



         a.   Sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet.



         b.   Sign height shall not exceed ten (10) feet or two
and one-half (2.5) times the vertical dimension of the sign face, whichever
is less.



         c.   Such signs shall be removed within ten (10) days
following election day; provided however, signs of candidates in a runoff
election may remain up until ten (10) days after said runoff election.



         d.   No such sign shall obstruct the safe vision of
motorists.



         e.   Irrespective of location, no campaign or election
sign shall be lighted or luminous, nor shall it have any flashing lights or
moving or windblown parts.



   K.   Temporary real estate signs advertising a specific property for
sale, lease, rent or development, or “open houses” shall be located as
follows:



      1.   For Lease, For Rent, For Sale Signs



         a.   One (1) sign per street frontage advertising real
estate "For Sale," "For Rent," "For Lease," or "For Development."  The
maximum area of such sign shall be as follows:



            ∙   Six (6) square feet in a residential
district (except R-1, R-2 or R-3), provided that a maximum area of sixteen
(16) square feet shall be allowed in all residential districts (except R-1,
R-2 and R-3) for any lot with an area of three (3) acres or more and having
over three-hundred (300) feet of linear frontage along a thoroughfare,
provided said sign is located along said thoroughfare;



            ∙   Sixteen (16) square feet in any Office, or
UMU District;



            ∙   Thirty-two (32) square feet in area in all
other districts.



   Such area allowances shall be followed provided that the sign is
located on the property being advertised and so long as said sign is located
behind the street right-of-way line.



   If the property so advertised lies on a corner lot or through lot, then
a second sign may be permitted along the second street so long as the two
signs are at least two-hundred (200) linear feet apart as measured by the
shortest straight line.



         b.   Up to eight (8) off-premise temporary directional
signs per residential development for the purpose of providing directions to
multiple new dwellings for sale or lease in said development; provided, each
such sign is no larger than three (3) square feet in size and four (4) feet
in height, and is attached to its own support anchored in the ground, and
said sign is in place only between 6:00 p.m. on Fridays and 6:00 p.m. on
Sundays.



         c.   Two (2) off-premise directional signs per
residential dwelling for sale; provided, each is no larger than two (2)
square feet in size and two and a half (2.5) feet in height, and is attached
to its own support anchored in the ground.



      2.   “Open House” Signs



         a.   No greater than four (4) such off-premise signs
shall be allowed per open house event.



         b.   No greater than two (2) such signs shall be located
per event shall be located at any one (1) intersection that points motorists
in the same direction.



         c.   Such signs shall be in place from 6:00 PM on
Fridays until 6:00 PM on Sundays only.



         d.   Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in
area apiece.



         e.   No sign allowed under this subsection shall be
illuminated.



         f.   Any real estate sign located in the public
right-of-way shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and may be removed
by the Administrator and destroyed without notice.



         g.   No signs shall be located within fifteen (15) feet
of any fire hydrant.



   L.   Signs providing agricultural products for sale shall be
allowed, provided that:



      1.   On properties where agricultural products for sale are
grown, one (1) such ground sign shall be allowed on roads upon which the
property has frontage.



      2.   On other private properties, with the permission of the
property owner, provided that:



         a.   No more than two (2) such signs shall be allowed on
any such piece of property.



         b.   No person, entity, or family shall be allowed more
than eight (8) such signs for any sale location.



         c.   Such signs may be erected and in place only during
the season where agricultural products are actually being sold.



         d.   Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in
area apiece.  Such signs shall not be illuminated.



   M.   Other on-premise temporary banners for nonresidential uses
located in a nonresidential district, provided that:  For a continuous
advertising period not to exceed fourteen (14) days, on-premises banners;
balloons less than two (2) feet in diameter; pennants; and flags for special
events and grand openings are permitted so long as said sign objects are not
located in a street right-of-way. Within any calendar year, any use may be
permitted temporary signs of this nature for no greater than three (3)
fourteen (14) day periods.  No such banners or balloons shall be placed on a
roof.  Any banner or flag shall have a maximum area of twenty-four (24)
square feet.  No more than three (3) on-premise banners and/or flags shall
be allowed during each advertising period.  Requirements for other signs
(that require sign permits) relating to “grand openings” are found in
Section 12.5.6.



   N.   Off- premise directional signs for public, quasi-public and
not-for-profit uses provided that:



      1.   Such signs shall be permanent ground signs. Portable
signs shall not be allowed.



      2.   No greater than two (2) directional signs shall be
allowed at any street corner.



      3.   No greater than two (2) directional signs per use shall
be allowed.



      4.   No two (2) directional signs shall be located within five
(5) linear feet of each other.



      5.   All directional signs shall be constructed of durable
wood or non-reflective metal or plastic materials.



      6.   Directional signs shall not be illuminated.



      7.   More than one (1) sign may be placed on the same sign
support. The maximum area of any one sign shall be two (2) square feet.
However, the maximum aggregate area of all signs on any sign structure shall
be four (4) square feet.



   O.   Special event signs for public, quasi-public or not-for-profit
organizations.  Such signs may be erected by organizations (e.g., schools,
churches, etc.) without a permit under the following conditions:



      1.   The sign is in association with a special event (e.g.,
barbeque, rummage sale, fair, etc).



      2.   Such signs shall be non-illuminated and may not be of a
sign variety that is “prohibited” as shown in Section 12.3.



      3.   Such signs shall have a maximum area of thirty-two (32)
square feet.



      4.   Ground or wall signs only shall be allowed.



      5.   For scheduled events such as rummage sales, barbeques,
etc, on-premise signs only (including portable signs) shall be allowed. 
Each such sign may remain in place for not greater than seven (7) days prior
to the date of the event and removed no greater than twenty-four (24) hours
after the termination of the event.



      6.   For events such as parades, fairs and festivals, such
signs may be erected (both on and off-premises) within fourteen (14) days of
the event and shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours of the
termination of the event.



   P.   Commercial signs placed in an athletic field and other enclosed
outdoor space where such signs are intended to be visible by persons
attending such events at such facilities.



   Q.   Holiday decorations, with no commercial messages.  Such
decorations may be placed in a street right-of-way and may be displayed
between November 15 and January 15.



   R.   Noncommercial copy signs provided that such signs are ground
signs and are no greater than sixteen (16) square feet in area apiece and
provided that such signs do not fit under any of the categories of “
prohibited signs” as set forth in Section 12.3.



   S.   Yard Sale Signs (except for special event signs for public,
quasi-public not-for profit uses as set forth in Subsection O herein).  Such
signs may not be illuminated and may remain in place within twenty-four (24)
hours prior to the yard sale, and removed within twenty-four (24) hours after
the yard sales event.  Each such sign may have a maximum area of six (6)
square feet.  Such signs may be placed on or off-premises, the latter with
the permission of the property owner.



   T.   Internal window signs, irrespective of whether the sign face
can seen by pedestrians or motorists from an adjoining street.



   U.   Other internal building signs, such that if a sign is inside a
building and cannot be seen by a person of ordinary eyesight who is outside
the building. 



   V.   Breezeway or entryway signs, such that if a sign is located
inside a breezeway or entranceway, under the roof and within the foundation
line of the building but outside the actual entrance door and such sign
cannot be seen by a person of ordinary eyesight who is not under the roof of
the building or is outside the building.



   W.   Construction/Improvement signs (including financing signs and
future development signs) are allowed under the following conditions:



      1.   Signs in conjunction with any residential use shall not
exceed four (4) square feet each. 



      2.   Signs in conjunction with all other uses shall have a
maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet each.



      3.   One (1) sign per premises shall be allowed.



      4.   Such signs shall not be illuminated.



      5.   Such signs shall appear only at the construction site.



      6.   Such sign shall be allowed only after the building permit
for such construction has been issued and is in effect. Such sign shall be
removed within seven (7) days after a certificate of occupancy for any
portion of the project has been issued.



   X.   Subdivision/Multi-family Development/Planned Residential
Development Identification Signs shall be allowed under the following
conditions:



      1.   Such signs may be placed at each principal entrance to
the development.



      2.   Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
in area apiece.



      3.   Such signs shall not exceed four (4) feet in height,
unless integrated into a wall or column in which the sign is encased.



      4.   Such signs shall contain no commercial messages.



      5.   Such signs may be placed in a street median (i.e., in a
street right-of-way), if specific permission for such is first given by the
City or NCDOT and meets the requirements of Section 12.7.



   Y.   Mailbox Signs



   Signage on mailboxes shall be limited to that allowable under U.S.
Postal Service Provisions, and shall also be limited to individual name(s)
and the address of the property served by the mailbox. Commercial messages
and directional information shall be prohibited.



   Z.   Bulletin Boards



   External bulletin boards for any government, nonprofit or
not-for-profit organization, provided that the bulletin board does not exceed
sixteen (16) square feet in area and is located on-site to be readily
accessible to the public.



   AA.   Sidewalk Café/ Umbrella



   Sidewalk cafes, restaurants and other outdoor eating and social venues
shall be allowed to have tables, chairs, umbrellas and similar objects
normally associated with commercial signage.



Section 12.3   Prohibited Signs



   All signs not expressly permitted under this Chapter or are otherwise
exempt from regulation (as stated in this Chapter or elsewhere in this
Ordinance) are prohibited.  Such signs include, but are not limited to:



   A.   Any sign that obstructs the view of bicyclists or motorists
using any street, approach to any street intersection, or which interferes
with the effectiveness of or obscures any traffic sign, device, or signal
shall be prohibited.



   B.   Signs, other than traffic regulatory signs, which contain
lights, rotating disks, words and other devices not erected by a public
authority that may be erroneously construed as government signs or
emergency-warning signs shall be prohibited. An example of this is a sign
that contains a picture of a traffic sign plus the word "Stop," "Yield",
etc.  Any sign located outdoors that interferes with free passage from or
physically obstructs any fire escape, downspout, window, door, stairway,
ladder, or opening intended as a means of ingress or egress or providing
light or air shall be prohibited.  (NOTE:  Signs painted onto windows shall
not be prohibited, nor shall neon and similar signs attached to windows.)



   C.   Any sign placed on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant,
bridge, tree, or other surface located on, over, or across any public street
or right-of-way, (with the exception of certain projecting/suspended signs
and sandwich board signs per Sections 12.5.7 and 12.5.8 of this Ordinance
and/or other signs specifically listed as being allowed for placement within
a street right-of-way) unless otherwise authorized by the City or NCDOT shall
be prohibited.  Signs placed in a required sight distance triangle without
having first received approval for such placement from the City or NCDOT
shall also be prohibited. (NOTE: The Administrator shall have the authority
to remove and may discard without notice any such prohibited sign illegally
placed within a street right-of-way or sight triangle and, at local
discretion, may immediately destroy such sign.)



   D.   Any sign located in such a way as to intentionally deny an
adjoining property owner visual access to an existing sign shall be
prohibited.



   E.   Flashing signs, signs with flashing or reflective disks, signs
with flashing lights or lights of changing degree of intensity or color or
signs with scrolled messages (except light emitting diode [i.e., LED] signs
with electronically scrolled messages), government traffic signs and signs
which give time and temperature information) shall be prohibited, with the
following exceptions:



            ∙   If a time and temperature sign alternates
between a time message and a temperature message, it shall continuously show
one (1) message a minimum of two (2.0) seconds in time before switching to
the other message.  Signs that blink, flash or move in any manner, or have
portions of the sign that more or less have the appearance of moving shall
also be prohibited.



      LED signs with electronically scrolled signs shall be allowed
under the following conditions:



            ∙   Each scrolled message shall remain static
for a minimum period of eight (8) seconds;



            ∙   There shall be a transition time period of
no greater than two (2.0) seconds between sign messages;



            ∙   The scrolled message area shall constitute
no greater than fifty (50) percent of the sign area face.



   F.   Portable signs, excluding temporary signs otherwise permitted
as set forth in Section 12.2.  A sign originally constructed as a portable
sign may not be converted into a permanent sign by chaining or bolting it to
the ground, or by other means or alterations.



   G.   Vehicular signs.



   H.   Rotating signs.



   I.   Electric signs which are not installed and/or wired in
accordance with the national electric code.



   J.   Signs not installed in accordance with the building code.



   K.   Roof signs.



   L.   Signs that contain language and/or pictures deemed obscene per
NCGS 14-190.1.



   M.   Signs that advertise an activity or business no longer
conducted on the property upon which the sign is located.



   N.   Off-premise advertising signs.



   O.   Inflatable objects, including balloons with a diameter of two
(2) feet or greater.



   P.   Any other sign not expressly permitted by this Chapter shall be
prohibited.



Section 12.4   Permitted Signs: Location, Size, Number



   Signs requiring the issuance of a sign permit by the Administrator
shall be permitted in accordance with Table 12.4-1 to 12.4-6 and shall also
be subject to any conditions placed on a particular development through the
issuance of a Conditional Use Permit or Conditional Zoning District.  Any
allowed sign shall also be subject to the design and construction standards
for such type of sign as set forth in Section 12.5. 



   Signs that are allowed without the issuance of a sign permit are found
in Section 12.2.



 


TABLE 12.4-1
TABLE OF SIGNS REQUIRING A SIGN PERMIT



SIGN TYPE
 
Residential Districts
 
TMU District
 
Office Districts
 
CBD District
 
UMU District
 
Commercial Districts (except CBD)
 
Industrial Districts
 
Conditions


FREESTANDING SIGNS




- Directory
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

12.5.2



- Menu Board
 

None

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

12.5.3



- Ground/Pole
 

X
(ground only)

 

X
(ground only)

 

X
(ground only)

 

X
(ground only)

 

X
(ground only)

 

X
(ground/pole)

 

X
(ground/pole, except ground only in I-U))

 

12.5.4



BUILDING SIGNS


- Canopy/Awning
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

12.5.1



- Home Occupation
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

Refer to Sections 9.1 and 9.2



- Menu Board
 

None

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

12.5.3



- Projecting/ Suspended
 

None

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

12.5.7



- Temporary Use/ Grand Opening
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

12.5.6



- Wall
 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

12.5.5



OTHER SIGNS


- Permanent On premise Banners, Automobile, Boat, etc. Sales
 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

X

 

None

 

12.5.9



- Sandwich Board Sign
 

None

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

X

 

12.5.8





 



NOTE:  An “X” indicates that the sign will be permitted with an approved
sign permit, as outlined in Section 5.7.



Section 12.5   Design    and Construction Standards



   Any sign shown herein (except canopy/awning signs per Section 12.5.1,
projecting/suspended signs per Section 12.5.7, and sandwich board signs per
Section 12.5.8) shall be placed outside of a street right-of-way or required
sight distance triangle, unless specific authorization for such placement is
granted herein and/or by the City or NCDOT.



12.5.1   Canopy/Awning Signs



   Awning signs shall be allowed, provided that:



   A.   Awning signs may be used in lieu of or in addition to any other
wall sign. 



   B.   The total of all awning signage area, together with all other
canopy or wall signage, shall not exceed the maximum allowable wall signage
area for such use.



   C.   Awning signs may be illuminated only with direct surface
lighting and not with any form of backlighting.



   D.   All canopy/awning signs attached to the underside of a
canopy/awning shall maintain a clearance of at least eight (8) feet from the
ground beneath it.



   E.   A canopy or awning sign may not extend into a street
right-of-way, except with prior approval from the NCDOT or City.



12.5.2   Directory Signs



   Directory signs shall be allowed where a particular site includes more
than one (1) principal use and shall not be counted towards meeting the
maximum allowable sign area for the site or development, provided that:



   A.   Directory signs shall be allowed in multi-tenant developments
provided that such signs are: (1) located at least fifty (50) feet from any
external public street right-of-way, and (2) placed at internal street
intersections within the development.



   B.   Such signs shall each have a maximum area of twenty-four (24)
square feet and be no greater than six (6) feet in height. 



   C.   Such signs may contain business names or logos along with
arrows and similar directional information.



   D.   Such signs shall not contain any other commercial messages.



   E.   In lieu of a ground-mounted directory sign, such sign may be
placed on a building wall.  If so placed, such sign shall not exceed ten
(10) percent of the allowable wall signage for such use.



12.5.3   Menu Boards



   Menu boards shall be allowed only with a restaurant having a
drive-through window, provided that:



   A.   Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area
and five (5) feet in height.



   B.   Reserved



   C.   The color of such sign shall have ties to the main building or
other signage for the project.



12.5.4   Ground/Pole Signs



(NOTE:  Certain uses may exceed the sign area and height requirements shown
herein using the “master sign plan Flexibility Option Shown in Section
12.5.10).



   Ground/pole signs shall be allowed, provided that:



   A.   A pole sign may only be installed if allowed in the underlying
zoning district (refer to Table 12.4-1).  Otherwise, freestanding signs
shall be limited to ground signs.  There shall be no commercial copy or
other advertising sign copy on the poles of the sign; if such copy is
provided, it will be counted towards part of the allowable sign area.  Refer
to Section 12.1.3(A)(1) for additional information on sign area computation.



   B.   For a single-occupant property, there shall be only one (1)
ground or pole sign per street frontage.  Signage on a second street shall
be allowed so long as there is at least one hundred fifty (150) feet of lot
frontage on such street.  In no case, however, shall there be any two (2)
such signs on the same lot located within two-hundred (200) linear feet of
each other.



   C.   For a multi-tenant development, there shall be only one (1)
ground or pole sign plus one (1) additional ground, but not pole, sign for
each street that the development fronts, provided that the frontage on that
street is at least one-hundred fifty (150) feet in length and that an actual
entrance to the development is permitted on such street.  In no case,
however, shall any two (2) signs advertising the same development be located
within two-hundred (200) linear feet of each other. 



   D.   In no instance shall uses located in outparcels in shopping
centers or similar multi-tenant developments be allowed to have a ground or
pole sign.



   E.   On any parcel where two (2) or more ground or pole signs may be
placed, the property owner may choose to place only one sign on the parcel. 
If only one such sign is placed, the sign area for that sign (with the
largest permitted area) may exceed that which is normally allowed by a factor
of up to twenty-five percent (25%).  For example, if a use on a corner lot
were allowed to have two signs, one with an allowable ground sign area of
sixty-four (64) square feet and the other, a pole sign of thirty-two (32)
square feet, the property owner may elect to place one sign on the
property.  That one sign, if it were a pole sign, could be up to forty (40)
square feet in area; if the one sign were a ground sign, it could be up to
eighty (80) square feet in area.



   F.   Any ground / pole sign erected shall be located no closer than
ten (10) linear feet from any adjacent side lot line, or twenty (20) feet if
that side lot line abuts a residentially developed or vacant lot in a
Residential zoning district.  A ground / pole sign shall be located no
closer than thirty (30) feet from a pre-existing ground / pole sign on an
adjacent lot.



   G.   Any ground / pole sign shall be placed no closer than ten (10)
feet from the edge of the adjoining street right-of-way.  Notwithstanding
the above, the Administrator shall have the authority to modify or waive this
setback requirement when, in his opinion, such stringent requirement would
serve no meaningful purpose or would not impede visibility for motorists or
pedestrians on such street.  Furthermore, the Administrator shall also have
the authority to require a setback of up to twenty (20) feet from the
adjoining street right-of-way line when such sign setback is deemed necessary
to yield a reasonable amount of safety for both pedestrians and motorists on
the adjoining street.



   H.   Irrespective of the regulations shown above, the height of a
free-standing pole sign for certain uses in the C-2 and C-3 districts shall
be a minimum of fifty (50) feet and a maximum of eighty (80) feet and the
area of such pole sign may be increased to two-hundred (200) feet under the
following conditions:



      1.   The lot is located within a one-thousand (1,000) foot
linear radius of the centerline of a grade-separated intersection of a
four-lane, divided, limited access highway.



      2.   The use being advertised is a restaurant (all varieties),
automobile service station, motel, hotel, convenience store, hospital, urgent
medical care facility or medical office.



      3.   Said sign may exceed the normal height and area
requirements that otherwise would be allowed for this use if the sign is
oriented so as to be viewed by motorists traveling on the four lane, divided,
limited access highway.



      4.   If such a larger and/or higher pole sign is erected, a
maximum of one (1) other on-premise freestanding sign may be erected on-site
for the use in question. Said sign may only be a ground sign (as opposed to a
pole sign) and shall have a maximum area of thirty-two (32) square feet.



12.5.5   Wall Signs



   The following regulations shall apply to on-premise wall signs:



   A.   Permitted wall signage for a use may be placed on walls that
may or may not front a public street.



   B.   Wall signs may not extend above the wall upon which the sign is
mounted.



   C.   Reserved



   D.   A retail store in the C-1, C-2 or C-3 zoning district and
exceeding forty-thousand (40,000) square feet gross floor area may add a
business name identification sign to its front building wall for any in-store
adjunct business located within said retail store. Said adjunct business
identification signage shall be allowed in addition to wall signage permitted
pursuant to this section but no such adjunct business identification sign
shall exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area and no retail store shall
display more than a total of seventy-five (75) square feet of adjunct
business signage. As used in this section, the term "in-store adjunct
business" shall mean a small store or service located inside a larger retail
store, but not associated by name or patron transaction with the main retail
store. Examples of such businesses include a financial institution, fast food
restaurant chain, or "postal store and contract station" located in a
separate area within a department store and operating under a different name.
Leased specialty departments (e.g., shoes, jewelry) within a retail store,
cosmetic counters with or without their own personnel, pharmacies, lunch
counter, or eye care departments, either of which operate under the main
store's name and/or conduct patron transactions through the main store
transaction system are examples of store departments which shall not be
deemed an in-store adjunct business. Any such retail store housing inside
said store an automatic teller machine (ATM) operated by a financial
institution, but not associated with an adjunct business within the store,
may display on the front wall an identification sign for said ATM. The ATM
sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet and shall be counted within
the maximum seventy-five (75) square feet for adjunct business signs.



   E.   Wall signs on designated historic buildings shall be placed
within the sign frieze, or distinct place within which a wall sign was
intended to be placed.  No wall sign shall extend beyond such space.  If
there is no such sign frieze, the wall sign shall be placed below the typical
second floor window area.



   F.   If no on-premise ground or pole signs are used where otherwise
a ground or pole sign would be allowed per Table 12.4-1 and Section 12.5.4,
the aggregate allowable wall sign area may be increased by a factor of
twenty-five (25) percent.



   G.   Signs attached to a mansard portion of a roof shall be
considered to be a wall sign.



12.5.6   Temporary Use/Grand Opening Signs



   Signs for temporary uses and “grand openings”, expressly permitted
under Section 5.4, shall be allowed provided that:



   A.   Such signs shall be located only on private property.



   B.   Sign permits shall be limited to the duration of the temporary
use as stated on the temporary use permit.



   C.   Reserved



   D.   Except as may be permitted by the temporary use permit,
temporary use signs shall be attached to and parallel with a wall of the
building on which wall signs are permitted and shall not exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet in surface area.



   E.   Where a temporary use permit specifically authorizes the use of
a temporary ground sign, such sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height
and sixteen (16) square feet in area.



   F.   There shall be only one (1) temporary ground sign, plus one (1)
additional ground sign for street frontage on a second public street,
provided that the frontage on that street is at least one-hundred fifty (150)
feet in length and that an actual entrance to the site is permitted on such
street.  A minimum distance of two-hundred (200) linear feet shall separate
such two signs.



   G.   Sign permits for new business “grand openings” shall be
issued only upon the initial opening of a business for a period that shall
end not later than sixty (60) days after issuance of the first business
license for that business in that location or from the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy for that location.



12.5.7   Projecting/Suspended Signs



   A.   A projecting or suspended sign shall not project more than five
(5) feet from the wall.



   B.   The bottom of the projecting or suspended sign shall be at
least eight (8) feet above the ground immediately below it.



   C.   In no case may a projecting or suspended sign extend more than
three (3) feet into the street right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the
City or NCDOT.



   D.   The height of the top edge of the signboard or bracket shall
not exceed the height of the wall from which the sign projects.



12.5.8   Sandwich Board Signs



   Sandwich board signs shall be allowed provide the following
requirements are met:



   A.   The total area of the signboard shall not exceed ten (10)
square feet per side.  Such signs shall not be used in calculating maximum
allowed square footage for the use.



   B.   The sign shall have a maximum height of five (5) feet and a
maximum width of two (2) feet.



   C.   The sign must be constructed of materials that present a
finished appearance.  Rough-cut plywood and similar unfinished surfaces
shall not be used for such signs.



   D.   Signs may be placed in a sidewalk or within a street
right-of-way (but outside a vehicular travel way) but such signs shall not
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular movement and circulation.



   E.   Signs shall be removed by the end of the business day.



12.5.9   (Permanent) On-premise Banners for Automobile, Boat, Manufactured
Home etc. Sales Uses



   Special sign requirements regarding the provision of permanent on-site
banners shall prevail for automobile, truck, boat, motorcycle, manufactured
home and recreational vehicle sales and rental facilities.  Such banners may
be allowed under the following conditions:



   A.   The banners may consist of any color, design, copy or logo;



   B.   The banners shall be placed in a manner that does not obstruct
or impair motorists' vision, particularly at ingress and egress points;



   C.   The banners shall be affixed, connected to three (3) or more
corners, and shall be no more than sixteen (16) square feet in area;



   D.   The banners may consist of cloth, fiberglass, vinyl, or any
non-rigid material. Banners shall not consist of any reflective and/or
shiny-related material;



   E.   The banners may have up to two (2) flags for the first
one-hundred (100) feet of street frontage plus a maximum of one (1) flag for
each additional fifty (50) feet of frontage along a thoroughfare, plus, up to
one (1) flag for every fifteen-thousand (15,000) square feet of outdoor
display area;



   F.   The banners shall not have an on-site flag within fifty (50)
feet of another flag; and,



   G.   All banners and flags shall be located outside all
right-of-ways.



12.5.10    Master Sign Plan Flexibility Option



   A.   Purpose



   For the purpose of providing flexibility and incentives for coordinated
signage design for certain planned multi-tenant developments, recreation
uses, and for other uses that, by their nature, draw persons from beyond the
greater Gaston County area, provisions are hereby made to allow the
Administrator to approve certain flexibility options in the amount and size
of signs such uses may ordinarily have.



   B.   Applicability



   The planned development flexibility option is available to the
following uses:



      1.   Planned unit developments and traditional neighborhood
developments;



      2.   Office parks, shopping centers, and industrial parks and
similar multi-tenant developments with two-hundred thousand (200,000) or
greater square feet of gross leasable area);



      3.   Continuing care facilities;



      4.   Stadiums; amusement parks; amphitheaters; auditoriums,
and similar large-scale civic or recreational facilities.



      5.   Indoor movie theaters.



   C.   Approval Procedure



      1.   If the use being proposed requires the issuance of a
conditional use permit or is in association with a conditional district
rezoning, the Administrator may recommend to the City Council that the sign
flexibility option be applied as proposed by the applicant or as otherwise
recommended by the Administrator.



      2.   The Administrator may otherwise administratively approve
the signage flexibility option.  In making such approval, the Administrator
shall have the authority to attach fair and reasonable conditions to the
approval upon making a determination that such conditions (1) enhance the
public safety and welfare; and (2) are otherwise in keeping with the sign
package being proposed.



   D.   Submittal and Review Process



      1.   A master sign program shall be submitted to the
Administrator. This shall include, as a minimum, the following information:



         a.   All information required for issuance of a sign
permit per Section 5.7 of this Ordinance;



         b.   Detailed designs of all proposed exterior signs
including their size, height, copy, materials, and color;



         c.   Proposed locations and number of signs;



         d.   Sign illumination plans; and



         e.   Landscaping plans to be used in conjunction with
the signs.



      2.   The Administrator shall have a maximum of twenty-one (21)
days to review the sign program submitted and by the end of such period shall
either: (a) approve the sign package as submitted; (b) approve the sign
package with modifications; (c) disapprove the sign package, or (d) make a
recommendation to the conditional use permit or conditional zoning review and
approval bodies when the use being proposed requires the issuance of a
conditional use permit or is subject to conditional district rezoning.



   E.   Sign Specifications



      1.   All signs must be coordinated in terms of design features.



      2.   All on-premise freestanding signs in association with the
use shall be ground signs. Pole signs shall not be allowed  Up to three (3)
such signs per street front shall be allowed. The maximum height of a ground
sign may be fifteen (15) feet.



      3.   The maximum area of any sign, or the aggregate amount of
sign area, may be increased by up to twenty-five (25) percent above that
which normally is allowed in the underlying zoning district.



      4.   The amount of changeable copy on any sign may not exceed
twenty-five (25) percent of the sign area. All changeable copy shall be
static (i.e., LED signs shall not be allowed.  Segment technology signs,
however, shall be allowed.)



      5.   All freestanding signs shall be located at least ten (10)
feet from the edge of any abutting street right-of-way line or property line.



Section 12.6   Sign Lighting Standards



   A.   No sign for which a sign permit is required (other than ground
signs) located within one-hundred (100) linear feet of a pre-existing
residential structure or a Residential zoning district may be illuminated
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 AM.  A residence shall be
deemed to be pre-existing for purposes of this subsection if a building
permit had been issued for construction prior to the issuance of a sign
permit for that sign.  Any residential structure constructed prior to the
effective date of this subsection shall also be considered to be
“pre-existing”.



   B.   All externally illuminated signs shall have their lighting
directed in such a manner as to illuminate only the face of the sign.



   C.   LED signs with electronically scrolled messages shall be
allowed as called for in Section 12.3(E).



Section 12.7   Signs in the Public Right-of-Way



   A.   No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except
for the following:



      1.   Government signs;



      2.   Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company;



      3.   Informational signs of a public utility regarding its
poles, lines, pipes or other facilities;



      4.   Signs appurtenant to a use of public property permitted
under a franchise or lease with the City;



      5.   Canopy/Awning signs per Section 12.5.1;



      6.   Projecting/suspended signs per Section 12.5.7;



      7.   Ground signs with the name of the residential or
non-residential subdivision or multi-family development shall comply with
Section 12.2(X) and may be located on one (1) or both sides of the principal
roadway entrance into the development or the roadway median under the
following guidelines:



         a.   The sign shall be a ground sign and not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in area.



         b.   The sign shall have a maximum height of four (4)
feet.



         c.   The sign shall not contain a commercial message.



         d.   If located within the public street right-of-way,
specific approval for such location must be granted by the City.



      8.   Political signs per Section 12.2(J).



   B.   Unless otherwise specifically allowed per this Chapter, all
other signs placed in the street right-of-way shall be prohibited and shall
be subject to removal per Section 12.3(C).



Section 12.8   Nonconforming Signs



   Refer to Section 3.5.10 for regulations dealing with nonconforming
signs.



Section 12.9   Sign Maintenance



   All signs and all components thereof, including supports, braces,
anchors, etc. shall be kept in a good state of repair, in compliance with all
building and electrical codes and in conformance with the requirements of
this Ordinance.



TABLE 12.4-5
DIMENSIONAL AND LOCATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT
NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN CBD ZONING DISTRICT



[NOTE: For Residential Uses Within This Zone, Refer to Table 12.4-2; For
Telecommunication Towers in this district, refer to Section 9.15(F)(8) and
(I)(12)]



 

SIGN TYPE
 
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
 
NUMBER OF SIGNS ALLOWED**
 
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (sq. ft.)**
 
MAXIMUM SIGN HEIGHT (ft.)**
 
SIGN LOCATION***




Ground/Pole Signs*
Individual Business and Multi-Tenant Development Identification
 
12.5.4
 
None*
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


12.5.4
 
One(1) per street front*
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


Wall Signs*
Individual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.5
 
Two (2) signs per premises for uses located on ground floor; one sign per
premises on uses located on upper floors
 
Ground floor uses- two (2) square feet per linear foot of public street
frontage up to an aggregate of fifty (50) square feet per building wall*. 
Signs may appear on no greater than two (2) wall faces.  Upper story uses-
Nine (9) square feet.
 
No higher than the wall upon which the sign is mounted
 
N/A


Canopy/Awning Signs* I
ndividual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.1
 
One per exterior customer entrance
 
Fifty (50) percent of canopy/awning area up to a maximum of twenty-four (24)
square feet
 
N/A
 
N/A


Projecting/ Suspended Signs*
Individual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.7
 
One per exterior customer entranceOne per exterior customer entrance
 
One (1) square foot per linear foot of public street frontage up to a maximum
of sixteen (16) square feet
 
N/A
 
N/A


*   Refer to supplemental regulations for additional specifications


**   Refer to Section 12.5.10 regarding “Master Sign Plans”, approvals
of which may allow for deviations from the standards shown herein


*** Refer to Section 12.5.4 (F) for signsetback requirements




 



TABLE 12.4-6
DIMENSIONAL AND LOCATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT
NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2, I-3 and I-U ZONING
DISTRICTS



[NOTE: For Residential Uses Within These Zones, Refer to Table 12.4-2; For
Telecommunication Towers, refer to Section 9.15(F)(8) and (I)(12)]



 

SIGN TYPE
 
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
 
NUMBER OF SIGNS ALLOWED***
 
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (sq. ft.)***
 
MAXIMUM SIGN HEIGHT (ft.)***
 
SIGN LOCATION




Ground/Pole *
Individual Business (Pole signs only allowed where fronting roads with 4+
lanes)
 
12.5.4
 
One (1) per street front*
 
A.  For all uses except certain industrial uses (shown below):
 
A.  For signs with an area of 0-32 square feet- 8 feet For signs with an
area of greater than 32 square feet-15 ft. on roads with four or fewer lanes;
18 ft. on 6-lane roadsB.  20 feet for signs advertising an industrial use
and intended to be read from a four-lane divided highway
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


Local Street (2-3 lane): 32 sq. ft.


Other Street (4+ lane): 64 sq. ft.


B.  For industrial uses located in an Industrial (I) zoning district,
located on a lot adjacent to a four-lane limited access divided highway, 200
square feet, provided that sign is intended to be read from such divided
highway.


Ground/Pole*
Multi-Tenant Development Identification
 
12.5.4
 
One (1) per street front*
 
A.  For developments with a gfa of 0-19,999 sq. ft:
 
A.  For signs with an area of 0-32 square feet- 8 feet For signs with an
area of greater than 32 square feet-15’. B. Fifteen (15) feet C and D.
Twenty-five (25) feet
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


Local Street (2-3 lane): 32 sq. ft.


Other Street (4+ lane): 64 sq. ft


B.   For developments with a gfa of 20,000-49,999 sq ft:


Local Street (2-3 lane): 64 sq. ft.


Other Street (4+ lane): 100 sq. ft.


C.   For developments with a gfa of 50,000-199,999 sq. ft: 100 square feet


D.  For developments with a gfa of 200,000+  sq. ft: 200 square feet


Wall Signs*
Individual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.5
 
No limit
 
10% of individual wall area up to an aggregate of 100 square feet per
building wall*
 
No higher than the wall upon which the sign is mounted
 
N/A


Canopy/Awning Signs*
Individual Business and  Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.1
 
One per exterior customer entrance
 
Fifty (50) percent of canopy/awning area
 
N/A
 
N/A


Projecting/Suspended Signs*/**
Individual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.7
 
One per exterior customer entrance
 
One (1) square foot per linear foot of public street frontage
 
N/A
 
N/A


*   Refer to supplemental regulations for additional specifications


**   Refer to Section 12.5.9 for special regulations for permanent
on-premise banners for automobile, truck, boat, manufactured home and
recreational vehicle sales and rental facilities


***   Refer to Section 12.5.10 regarding “Master Sign Plans”,
approvals of which may allow for deviations from the standards shown herein




 



TABLE 12.4-4
DIMENSIONAL AND LOCATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT
NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE OLC, O-1, and O-M ZONING DISTRICTS



[NOTE: For Residential Uses Within These Zones, Refer to Table 12.4-2; For
Telecommunication Towers, refer to Section 9.15(F)(8) and (I)(12)]



 

SIGN TYPE
 
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
 
NUMBER OF SIGNS ALLOWED**
 
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (sq. ft.)**
 
MAXIMUM SIGN HEIGHT (ft.)**
 
SIGN LOCATION***




Ground *Individual Business Multi-Tenant Development Identification
 
12.5.4
 
One (1) per street front*
 
200 square feet- hospital; otherwise:If structure 0-25,000 sq. ft. gfa- 50
square feet

If structure over 25,000 square feet gfa- 64 square feet
 
10 feet, except 24 feet for a hospital
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


12.5.4
 
One (1) per street front*
 
64 square feet, plus 6 square feet for each tenant within the development up
to 100 square feet
 
10 feet
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


Wall Signs*
Individual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.5
 
Three (3) per building wall.
 
10% of individual wall area up to an aggregate of 64 square feet per building
wall*
 
No higher than the wall upon which the sign is mounted
 
N/A


Canopy/Awning Signs*
Individual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.1
 
One per exterior customer entrance
 
Fifty (50) percent of canopy/awning area, up to a maximum of fifty (50)
square feet
 
N/A
 
N/A


Projecting/ Suspended Signs*
Individual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.7
 
One per exterior customer entrance
 
One (1) square foot per linear foot of public street frontage, up to a
maximum of sixteen (16) square feet
 
N/A
 
N/A


* Refer to supplemental regulations for additional specifications


** Refer to Section 12.5.10 regarding “Master Sign Plans”, approvals of
which may allow for deviations from the standards shown herein


*** Refer to Section 12.5.4 (F) for signsetback requirements




 



TABLE 12.4-2
DIMENSIONAL AND LOCATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT
USES IN THE RSF, RSB, RSC, RLD, RS-20, RS-12, RS-8 AND R-MF ZONING DISTRICTS
AND FOR RESIDENTIAL USES LOCATED IN ALL OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS



[NOTE: For Telecommunication Towers refer to Section 9.15(F)(8) and (I)(12)]



 

SIGN TYPE
 
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
 
NUMBER OF SIGNS ALLOWED**
 
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (sq. ft.)**
 
MAXIMUM SIGN HEIGHT (ft.)**
 
SIGN LOCATION***


Ground/Signs*
Multi-family dwelling; Maternity Home; Nursing home; Continuing care
facility; Assisted living center.
(NOTE: 1.  A WALL SIGN MAY SUBSTITUTE FOR PART OR ALL OF THE ALLOWED
SIGNAGE) 
 
12.5.4
 
One (1) per street front*
 
Twenty-four (24) square feet
 
Four (4) feet
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


Ground or Wall Signs*
Agricultural Uses; Single-family dwellings; Two-family dwellings; Individual
manufactured homes; Private residential quarters; Rooming Houses; Day Care
Center, Class A; Family care home; Group home; Mixed-Use Dwelling; Bed and
Breakfast Inn
 
Refer to Section 12.2 (H)
 
One (1) per street front*
 
Six (6) square feet
 
Four (4) feet
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


Signs*Customary home occupation; Rural Home Occupation
 
Refer to Sections 9.1 and 9.2
 
Refer to Sections 9.1 and 9.2
 
Refer to Sections 9.1 and 9.2
 
Refer to Sections 9.1 and 9.2
 
Refer to Sections 9.1 and 9.2


Ground Signs*/**
All Other Automotive Service Uses, Recreation/Entertainment Uses, Commercial
Service Uses, Retail Uses, Industrial/Distribution/Heavy Impact Uses, and
Civic/Institutional Uses
(NOTE:  A WALL SIGN MAY SUBSTITUTE FOR PART OR ALL OF THE ALLOWED SIGNAGE)
 
12.5.4
 
One (1) per street front*
 
For uses with 0-9,999 square feet total gfa- 16 square feet per sign For uses
with 10,000+ square feet total gfa- 32 square feet per sign
 
4 feet
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


* Refer to supplemental regulations for additional specifications
** Refer to Section 12.5.10 regarding “Master Sign Plans”, approvals of
which may allow for deviations from the standards shown herein
*** Refer to Section 12.5.4 (F) for signsetback requirements



 



TABLE 12.4-3
DIMENSIONAL AND LOCATIONAL STANDARDS FOR SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT
NON-RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE TMU AND UMU ZONING DISTRICTS



[NOTE: For Residential Uses Within These Zones, Refer to Table 12.4-2; For
Telecommunication Towers, refer to Section 9.15(F)(8) and (I)(12)]



 

SIGN TYPE
 
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
 
NUMBER OF SIGNS ALLOWED**
 
MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (sq. ft.)**
 
MAXIMUM SIGN HEIGHT (ft.)**
 
SIGN LOCATION***




Ground Signs*
Individual Business Multi-Tenant Development Identification
 
12.5.4
 
One (1) per street front*
 
Local Street (2-3 lanes): 24 sq. ft.
 
6 feet
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


Other Street (4+ lanes):48 sq. ft


12.5.4
 
One (1) per street front*
 
A.  For developments with a gfa of 0-19,999 sq. ft:
Local Street (2-3 lane): 24 sq. ft.
Other Street (4+ lane): 48 sq. ft
 
6 feet
 
Outside of street right-of-way and required sight triangle*


B.   For developments with a gfa of 20,000+: 48 sq. ft.


Wall Signs*
Individual Business and Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.5

12.5.5
 
Three (3) per building wall.
 
10% of individual wall area up to an aggregate of 50 square feet per building
wall*
 
No higher than the wall upon which the sign is mounted
 
N/A


Canopy/Awning Signs*
Individual Business and  Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.1
 
One per exterior customer entrance
 
Fifty (50) percent of canopy/awning area, up to a maximum of twenty-four (24)
square feet
 
N/A
 
N/A


Projecting/ Suspended Signs*
Individual Business and        Multi-tenant Developments
 
12.5.7
 
One per exterior customer entrance
 
One (1) square foot per linear foot of public street frontage, up to a
maximum of sixteen (16) square feet
 
N/A
 
N/A


* Refer to supplemental regulations for additional specifications


** Refer to Section 12.5.10 regarding “Master Sign Plans”, approvals of
which may allow for deviations from the standards shown herein


*** Refer to Section 12.5.4 (F) for signsetback requirements




 



CHAPTER 13:
SUBDIVISIONS



13.1   Jurisdiction



13.2   Activities that Constitute a Subdivision



13.3   List of Subdivisions Required



13.4   Accuracy of Surveys and Maps



13.5   Approval of Plats Required



13.6   Appeals



13.7   Variations to the Terms of This Chapter



13.8   Approval Procedures for a Minor Subdivision



13.9   Review Procedure for Major Subdivisions



13.10   Infrastructure Improvements



13.11   Submittal Requirements for Preliminary and Final Plat



13.12   Reservation of School Sites



13.13   Subdivision Names, Road Names and Addresses



13.14   Conformity to Thoroughfare Plan



13.15   Roads



13.16   Road Construction Specifications



13.17   Pedestrian Walkways/Greenstrips



13.18   Reserved



13.19   Water Supply and Sanitary Sewer Collection



13.20   Storm Sewers and Surface Water Drainage



13.21   Layout of Blocks



13.22   Cul-de-sacs



13.23   Multiple Accesses



13.24   Lot Layout



13.25   Compliance with Zoning Regulations



13.26   Dedication of Open Space



13.27   Public Utilities and Services



13.28   Monuments Required



13.29   Standards for Subdivision Proposals to Minimize Possible Flood
Damage



Section 13.1   Jurisdiction



   The subdivision design and improvements standards of this Chapter apply
to all subdivisions of land within the planning jurisdiction of Bessemer City



Section 13.2   Activities that Constitute a Subdivision



   A.   For purposes of this Ordinance, “subdivision” means all
division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building
sites, or the divisions when any one (1)or more of those divisions is created
for the purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future)
and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new
street or a change in existing streets; but the following activities do not
constitute a subdivision and are expressly exempt from the design and
improvement standards of this Chapter. 



      1.   The combination or recombination of portions of
previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not
increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the
City as shown in this Ordinance;



      2.   The division of land into parcels greater than ten (10)
acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;



      3.   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for
the express purpose of widening or opening of streets;



      4.   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire
area is no greater than two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots,
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant
lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the City as required by this
ordinance.



      5.   Any of the above shall be referred to as “exempt
subdivisions.”



   B.   However, all exempt subdivisions shall be approved via issuance
of the following Exemption Certificate by the Administrator prior to the
recording of same with Gaston County.



 

   Exemption Certificate 


   I hereby certify that this subdivision of land is exempt from the 
Bessemer City Unified Development Ordinance, and may be recorded with the
Gaston County Register of Deeds Office. Because of its "exempt" status, the
City has not reviewed this plat for compliance with applicable lot standards
and other subdivision regulations. Prospective purchasers should be aware
that plans for building and development may be denied for lots that do not
meet applicable City standards."



________________________      _____________________

   Administrator               Date   



 



Section 13.3   List of Subdivisions Required



   A list of all subdivisions approved under this Ordinance shall be kept
on file in the Administrator’s office.



Section 13.4   Accuracy of Surveys and Maps



   Standards of accuracy as prescribed in G.S. 47-30, mapping
requirements, as amended; standards of practice for land surveying in North
Carolina, amended effective February 1, 1996, or latest amendment, published
by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers
and Land Surveyors, General Statutes of North Carolina Chapter 89C, as
amended and the requirements of the Gaston County Register of Deeds shall
apply to all surveys and maps.



Section 13.5   Approval of Plats Required



   A.   No person, firm or corporation shall transfer or sell any real
property located within the planning jurisdiction of the City by reference to
a plat showing a subdivision of such realty until such plat has been approved
in accordance with this Ordinance and recorded in the office of the Gaston
County Register of Deeds office. No subdivision plat shall be considered or
approved unless the procedure prescribed by this Ordinanceshall be complied
with, and no subdivision plat shall be considered or approved unless the
subdivision and the plat thereof shall comply with the minimum standards and
requirements as hereinprescribed.



   B.   However, the provisions of this Ordinance shall not prohibit
any owner or its agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease by
reference to an approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not yet
been properly approved or recorded with the Register of Deeds, provided the
contract does all of the following:



      1.   Incorporates as an attachment a copy of the preliminary
plat referenced in the contract and obligates the owner to deliver to the
buyer a copy of the recorded plat prior to closing and conveyance.



      2.   Plainly and conspicuously notifies the prospective buyer
or lessee that a final subdivision plat has not been approved or recorded at
the time of the contract, that no governmental body will incur any obligation
to the prospective buyer or lessee with respect to the approval of the final
subdivision plat, that changes between the preliminary and final plats are
possible, and that the contract or lease may be terminated without breach by
the buyer or lessee if the final recorded plat differs in any material
respect from the preliminary plat.



      3.   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat
does not differ in any material respect from the plat referred to in the
contract, the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to
close any earlier than five (5) days after the delivery of a copy of the
final recorded plat.



      4.   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat
differs in any material respect from the preliminary plat referred to in the
contract, the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to
close any earlier than fifteen (15) days after the delivery of the final
recorded plat, during which 15-day period the buyer or lessee may terminate
the contract without breach or any further obligation and may receive a
refund of all earnest money or prepaid purchase price.



   C.   The provisions of this Ordinance shall not prohibit any owner
or their agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease land by
reference to an approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not been
properly approved or recorded with the Gaston County Register of Deeds where
the buyer or lessee is any person who has contracted to acquire or lease the
land for the purpose of engaging in the business of construction of
residential, commercial, or industrial buildings on the land, or for the
purpose of resale or lease of the land to persons engaged in that kind of
business, provided that no conveyance of that land may occur and no contract
to lease it may become effective until after the final plat has been properly
approved under the subdivision ordinance and recorded with the Gaston County
Register of Deeds.



   D.   No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any
building on any lot within a proposed subdivision until a final plat of said
subdivision has been approved in a manner as prescribed by this Ordinance and
recorded at the Gaston County Register of Deeds Office.



   E.   All subdivisions located within a Water Supply Watershed
district shall comply with the provisions of Section 6.6.2.2(H), (K) and (L).



Section 13.6   Appeals



   The applicant may appeal any decision of the Planning Board made in
regard to this Chapter to the governing board in writing within a thirty (30)
day period following the date of said decision. If a written appeal is not
made within said thirty (30) day period, the matter shall be deemed to be
closed and the decision of the Planning Board shall stand.



   Any decision of the Administrator may be appealed per Section 5.13 of
this Ordinance.



Section 13.7   Variations to the Terms of This Chapter



   A.   Notwithstanding other variations to the terms of this Ordinance
that are specifically allowed elsewhere in this Ordinance, the Planning Board
shall have the authority to vary the terms of this Chapter as it applies to
the subdivision requirementson a case-by case basis after having first held a
public hearing and having found in the affirmative each of the following
findings:



      1.   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting
said property such that the strict application of the provisions of this
Chapter would deprive the subdivider of the reasonable use of his land.



      2.   The modification is necessary for the preservation of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.



      3.   The circumstances giving rise to the need for the
modification are peculiar to the subdivision and are not generally
characteristic of other subdivisions.



      4.   The granting of the modification will not be detrimental
to the public's health, safety, and welfare nor injurious to other properties
in close proximity to the subdivision site.



   B.   Said public hearing shall be held in a quasi-judicial manner.
Notice of said public hearing shall be provided in the following manner:



      1.   Notice shall be sent by the City by first class mail to
the applicant and to owners of all contiguous pieces of property at least ten
(10) days prior to the public hearing.  The notice shall indicate the nature
of the public hearing and the date, time, and place where it is to occur.



      2.   Notice shall also be posted by the City in a conspicuous
location at City Hall at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
Said notice shall indicate the nature of the public hearing and the date,
time, and place where it is to occur.



      3.   A sign shall also be posted by the City in a conspicuous
location on the subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the public
hearing.  Said notice shall indicate the nature of the public hearing and
the date, time, and place where it is to occur. In lieu of any or all of this
information to be contained on this posted notice, the notice may give a
phone number where interested parties may call during normal business hours
to get further information on the proposed amendment.



   C.   Notwithstanding the above, a variation to the terms of this
Chapter where a different body approves a development that will require a
subdivision of land to occur (e.g., TND, PRD, etc), and that approval body
specifically has the authority to waive or modify regulations contained
herein, such body shall have the authority to make such variation.



Section 13.8   Approval Procedures for a Minor Subdivision



   A.   No more than two (2) minor subdivisions of the same parent
tract may be accepted for processing or approved within any five (5) year
period.



   B.   The  Administrator or his designee shall have the authority to
approve or disapprove minor subdivision final plats in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



   C.   A summary of subdivision approval procedures is found in Table
13.8-1.



Table 13.8-1
Subdivision Approval Procedures



 

 
Description
 
Pre-Sketch Conference
 
Sketch Plan
 
Preliminary Plat
 
Final Plat




Minor
 
(1)   no new streets (public or private) are proposed; and
 
 
optional
 
 
Administrative Review2


(2)   the entire tract to be subdivided is ten (10) acres or less in size;
and
 
 
 
 


(3)   where no more than five (5) lots will result after the subdivision
is completed and
 
 
 
 


(4)   where no extension of any sewer or water system is required.
 
 
 
 


Major
 
(1)   new streets (public or private) are proposed; or
 
Required
 
Administrative Review1
 
TRC Recommendation Planning Board Final Review
 
Administrative Review2


(2)   the entire tract to be subdivided is greater than ten (10) acres in
size; or
 
 
 
 


(3)   where more than five (5) lots will result after the subdivision is
completed or
 
 
 
 


(4)   where extension of any sewer or water system is required.
 
 
 
 




 



1If a variation is required, Planning Board has final review



2Denial of final plat by the Administrator may be appealed to the Planning
Board



13.8.1   Sketch Plan for Minor Subdivisions



   A.   For minor subdivisions, a preliminary plat shall not be
required.  All such subdivisions, however, shall require the submittal,
approval, and recordation in the Gaston County Deeds Office of a final
plat.  Prior to submission of a final plat, the subdivider may submit to the
Administrator a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision.  The purpose of the
sketch plan is to familiarize the Administrator with the proposed subdivision
and to insure that it is in compliance with all applicable regulations. 
While the submittal of a sketch plan is optional, it is suggested that the
subdivider submit such a plan in order to familiarize the Administrator with
the proposed development and, upon review, notify the subdivider of any
likely problems with the proposed development.  The sketch plan should
contain the following information:



      1.   A sketch vicinity map including north arrow showing the
location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions,
roads, and waterways;



      2.   The boundaries of the lot(s) to be subdivided;



      3.   The tax map number(s) of the lot(s) to be subdivided;



      4.   The total acreage to be subdivided;



      5.   The existing street layout and right-of-way width;



      6.   The name of the proposed subdivision;



      7.   The existing and proposed uses of land within the
subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it.



      8.   The zoning classification of the property to be
subdivided and of adjacent properties, if applicable.



      9.   Streets and lot layout of adjacent developed or platted
properties



      10.   The acreage in each lot shown on the plat.



      11.   The scale according to which the plat is drawn.



   B.   The Administrator shall endeavor to review the sketch plan and
accompanying information to ensure general compliance with the requirements
of this Ordinance in an expeditious manner and will notify the applicant in
writing if review can not be completed within twenty-one (21) days from the
date of submittal. The Administrator shall advise the subdivider of the
regulations pertaining to the proposed subdivision and the procedures to be
followed in the preparation and submission of the final plat.



13.8.2   Final Plat for Minor Subdivisions



   A.   The final plat shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor
currently licensed and registered in the State of North Carolina by the North
Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land
Surveyors.  The final plat shall conform to the provisions for plats,
subdivisions, and mapping requirements set forth in G.S. 47-30 and the
Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, where applicable,
and the requirements of the Gaston County Register of Deeds.



   B.   The required number of copies of the final plat shall be
submitted to the Administrator with one of these copies being on reproducible
mylar. Said copies shall be considered complete if they contain all of the
information as indicated in Table 13.11-1 of this Ordinance. 



   C.   Submission of the final plat shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable filing fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the
City Council.  The fee and the required number of final plats must be
submitted to the Administrator prior to review of the plat taking place.



   D.   The Administrator shall endeavor to review the plat in an
expeditious manner and will notify the applicant in writing if a decision on
the plat cannot be rendered within twenty-one (21) days from the date of
submittal.



   E.   The Administrator shall approve the proposed subdivision unless
the subdivision is not a minor subdivision as defined herein or the
application or the proposed subdivision fails to comply with any other
applicable requirement of this Ordinance.



   F.   If the subdivision is disapproved, the Administrator shall
promptly furnish the applicant with a written statement of the reasons for
disapproval. The subdivider shall have up to thirty (30) days from the date
of disapproval to resubmit a revised version of the final plat to the
Administrator without having to pay an additional filing fee. If a revised
plat is not submitted within said period, any future submittal will require
the payment of an additional filing fee. The Administrator shall review the
revised final plat in the same manner as the original final plat.



   G.   If the subdivision is approved, such approval shall be shown on
each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:



 

   I hereby certify that the subdivision shown hereon, to the best of my
knowledge, is in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Bessemer
City Unified Development Ordinance and that this final recording plat for the
_____________Subdivision has been approved on ____________by the City for
recording in the Office of the Gaston County Register of Deeds.

________________________         __________________   

   ADMINISTRATOR               DATE



 



   H.   If the final plat is approved, the subdivider shall furnish the
Administrator with a copy of the approved subdivision in a digital manner on
media suitable for use by the City. 



   I.   If the final recording plat is approved, the subdivider shall
file the approved final plat with the Gaston County Register of Deeds. Such
recording shall occur within sixty (60) days of the date of final plat
approval, otherwise the approval of the final recording plat shall be deemed
null and void.    The subdivider shall provide the Administrator with a
paper copy of the recorded plat and a copy of the approved final recorded
plat in a digital format on a media suitable for use by the City.  The City
shall issue no zoning permits on the lots shown on the preliminary plat
unless and until such copy of the recorded final plat is first submitted to
the Administrator by the applicant.



Section 13.9    Review Procedure for Major Subdivisions



   Preliminary and final plat approval shall be required for all Major
Subdivisions.  A pre-application meeting shall be required between the
applicant and the Administrator in order that questions may be answered and
that the subdivider may gain a better understanding of the requirements of
this Ordinance and any other applicable requirements. 



13.9.1   Sketch Plan for Major Subdivisions



   A.   Prior to the preliminary plat submission, the subdivider shall
submit to the Administrator a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision.  The
sketch plan shall contain the following information:



      1.   A sketch vicinity map including north arrow showing the
location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions,
roads, and waterways;



      2.   The boundaries of the lot(s) to be subdivided;



      3.   The tax map number(s) of the lot(s) to be subdivided;



      4.   The total acreage to be subdivided;



      5.   The existing street layout and right-of-way width;



      6.   The name of the proposed subdivision;



      7.   The existing and proposed uses of land within the
subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it.



      8.   The zoning classification of the property to be
subdivided and of adjacent properties, if applicable.



      9.   Streets and lot layout of adjacent developed or platted
properties



      10.   The acreage in each lot shown on the plat.



      11.   The scale according to which the plat is drawn.



   B.   The Administrator shall endeavor to review the plat in an
expeditious manner and will notify the applicant in writing if review can not
be completed within twenty-one (21) days from the date of submittal.



   C.   One (1) copy of the sketch plan shall be retained as a part of
the record of the Administrator.  One (1) copy shall be returned to the
subdivider or his authorized agent along with any comments made by the 
Administrator concerning the proposed plat.



13.9.2   Approval of Preliminary Plat for Major Subdivision



   A.   The owner or subdivider seeking preliminary plat approval shall
submit the application and all required paper copies of the plat to the
Administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regularly
scheduled Technical Review Committee (TRC) meeting.  The plat shall contain
all information listed in Section 13.11.



   B.   The TRC shall have up to twenty-one (21) calendar days from the
date of its first consideration of the plat to review the plat and make
comment concerning conformity with this and other applicable City ordinances
and regulations. If no recommendation is made by the TRC within this time,
the subdivider may apply directly to the Planning Board for preliminary plat
approval.



   C.   Upon recommendation from the TRC, the Planning Board shall
consider the subdivision plat so long as the TRC decision is rendered no less
than seven (7) days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the plat is
to be considered. The Planning Board shall have the authority to (1) approve
the preliminary plat, or (2) conditionally approve the preliminary plat with
needed changes to bring the preliminary plat into compliance with this
Ordinance, or (3) disapprove the preliminary plat.



   D.   If the Planning Board approves the preliminary plat, it shall
be noted on the plat and a copy shall be filed with the Administrator.



   E.   Unless a site specific development plan for a period of more
than two (2) years has been approved per Section 5.10, preliminary plat
approval will be valid for two (2) years and shall authorize the start of
construction or installation of roads, utilities, and other improvements
approved as part of the preliminary plat.  If no work in furtherance of the
plan except grading on the site has commenced within this two-year period,
the preliminary plat approval will become null and void and a new application
will be required to develop the site.  If work on the site in furtherance of
the plan has commenced, and such work involves any utility installations or
street improvements except grading, the plat will remain valid and in force.



13.9.3   Approval Procedures of the Final Recording Plat for a Major
Subdivision.



   A.   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board,
the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the
installation of, or arrangement for, required improvements in accordance with
the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this Chapter. Prior to
approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the
improvements specified in this Chapter or guaranteed their installation as
provided herein. No such final plat will be approved by the Administrator
unless it is in compliance with the improvement and guarantee standards of
this Chapter. The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the
preliminary plat that the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that
time; such portion shall conform to all requirements of this Chapter.  No
application shall be considered complete unless it contains all such
information required by Section 13.11.



   B.   If the final plat is approved, such approval shall be shown on
each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:



 

   I hereby certify that any and all required improvements have been
installed in an acceptable manner and according to the specifications and
standards in the Bessemer City Unified Development Ordinance, or that
guarantees of the installation of the required improvements in an amount and
manner satisfactory to the City have been given and received.

________________________         __________________   

   ADMINISTRATOR               DATE



 



   C.   If the final recording plat is approved, the subdivider shall
file the approved final plat with the Gaston County Register of Deeds. Such
recording shall occur within sixty (60) days of the date of final plat
approval, otherwise the approval of the final recording plat shall be deemed
null and void.    The subdivider shall provide the Administrator with a
paper copy of the recorded plat and a copy of the approved final recorded
plat in a digital format on a media suitable for use by the City.  The City
shall issue no zoning permits on the lots shown on the preliminary plat
unless and until such copy of the recorded final plat is first submitted to
the Administrator by the applicant.



Section 13.10   Infrastructure Improvements



13.10-1 Types of Guaranties 



 

Guarantee Type
 
Purpose
 
Amount
 
Section


Performance
 
Provide in lieu of the completion, installation and dedication of
improvements shown on the preliminary plat.
 
1.25times the cost of installing all required improvements.
 
13.10.1


Pre-Acceptance Maintenance
 
to guarantee that such streets will be properly maintained until the offer of
dedication is accepted
 
twenty-five percent (25%) of the cost of the improvements (road base and
pavement)
 
13.10.2(A)


Post Construction Maintenance
 
to guarantee the maintenance of all streets to be used for access to future
phases or adjoining tracts during development of said tracts or phases
 
twenty-five percent (25%) of the cost of the improvements (road base and
pavement)
 
13.10.2(B)



 



13.10.1   Agreement and security required.



   Inlieu of requiring the completion, installation and dedication of all
improvements shown on the approved preliminary plat prior to approval of the
final recording plat, the City may enter into an agreement with the
subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to provide an improvement
guarantee or security to complete all required improvements. Once said
agreement is signed by both parties and the security required herein is
provided, the final plat may be approved, as outlined in Section 13.9.3, if
all other requirements of this Ordinance are met. To secure this agreement,
the subdivider shall provide to the City either one or a combination of the
following guarantees. The subdivider shall choose the type of guarantee. 
The amount of such guarantee shall be equal to 1.25times the cost of
installing all required improvements, as proposed by the subdivider and
verified by the City. All approved security guarantees shall be made payable
to the City.



      1.   Surety performance bond. The subdivider shall obtain one
or more performance bonds from a surety bonding company authorized to do
business in North Carolina. The duration of the bond(s) shall be for not more
than two (2) years, or until such time as the improvements are completed and
accepted by the City.  Any expenses associated with cost verifications
incurred by the City shall be borne entirely by the subdivider.



      2.   Cash or equivalent security. The subdivider shall deposit
cash, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other cash instrument readily
convertible into cash at face value, either with the City or in escrow with a
financial institution designated as an official depository with the City
until completion of the improvements or two (2) years, whichever is less. If
cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow as herein provided, the
subdivider shall then file with the City an agreement between said financial
institution and himself guaranteeing the following:



      1.   That said escrow account shall be in trust until released
by the City and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider in any other
matter during the terms of the escrow; and,



      2.    That in case of a failure on the part of the subdivider
to complete said improvements, the financial institution shall be notified of
such action by the City. The City shall then submit to the financial
institution an estimate of the costs associated with completing the required
improvements [as determined by the City] The financial institution shall then
immediately pay to the City the requisite funds needed to complete the
improvements, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to the
City any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full
to the City.



   Any expenses associated with cost verifications incurred by the City
shall be borne entirely by the subdivider.



      3.   Default. Upon default (i.e., failure on the part of the
subdivider to complete the required improvements within two (2) years as
spelled out in the performance bond or escrow agreement), then the surety, or
the financial institution holding the escrow account, if requested by the
City, shall pay all or any portion of the surety to the City up to the amount
needed to complete the improvements based on the City estimate. Upon payment,
the City, at its discretion, may expend such portion of said funds as it
deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements.
The City shall return to the bonding firm any funds not spent in completing
the improvements. Should the amount of funds needed to complete the
installation of all required improvements exceed the amount in the bond or
escrow account, the subdivider shall nonetheless be responsible for providing
the funds to cover such costs. The subdivider shall at all times bear the
financial burden for the installation of all required improvements.



      4.   Release. The Administrator may authorize the release of a
portion of any security posted as the improvements are completed and approved
by the City. Such funds shall then be released within thirty (30) days after
the corresponding improvements have been so approved.  Provided however, the
balance remaining as surety shall continue to equal 1.25 times the estimated
cost of the remaining improvements, as verified by the City. Whenever a
surety bond or letter of credit has been submitted, the Administrator shall
notify the subdivider at least ninety (90) days prior to the time said
guarantee is set to expire.  If the subdivider does not extend or replace
said guarantee within sixty (60) days of said notification, the Administrator
shall, through the City Attorney’s Office, and after notifying the City
Clerk’s Office, begin proceedings for calling upon the guarantee.    Any
extension or replacement shall be in the same amount as the guarantee being
extended or replaced.  Upon completion of all the improvements required
herein, written notice shall be given by the developer to the
Administrator.  The City or shall inspect said improvements within thirty
days and either recommend the release of the security given to the City or
indicate to the developer any area of non-compliance.



13.10.2   Maintenance Bonds.



   A.   The owner of any development containing streets intended for
public dedication shall post a performance bond or other sufficient surety to
guarantee that such streets will be properly maintained until the offer of
dedication is accepted by the North Carolina Department of Transportation or
by formal acceptance by resolution of Bessemer City. The amount of the
security shall constitute twenty-five percent (25%) of the cost of the
improvements (road base and pavement).  The owner shall provide information
sufficient for the Administrator to determine the actual cost of
improvements.  If the surety/bond described herein is not provided, the
County shall not issue Zoning Permits to any properties on the said
street(s).  The bond/surety shall be posted with the City prior to the
release of any Guarantee Surety in accordance with Section 13.10.1(4).



   B.   In addition to preliminary and final plat approval, all
subsequent development of future phases or development of adjoining tracts
whether or not such phases are shown on the preliminary plat required by this
ordinance, shall not be allowed until the developer shall first have filed a
bond or irrevocable letter of credit or other form of security with the
Administrator. The amount of the security shall constitute twenty-five
percent (25%) of the cost of the improvements (road base and pavement).  The
owner shall provide information sufficient for the Administrator to determine
the actual cost of improvements. Said bond shall be a maintenance bond to
guarantee the maintenance of all streets to be used for access to future
phases or adjoining tracts during development of said tracts or phases.  The
maintenance bond required by this section shall not be released until the
City has determined that streets which were used for access to future phases
or adjoining tracts are in an acceptable condition and that any damage
suffered by said streets has been repaired.  For the purpose of this
section, any damage suffered by a street used for access to property being
developed shall be presumed to have been caused by construction traffic
except any defects noted by the City or its designated representative as
herein provided for. The City or its designated representative shall on
request from the developer inspect existing streets likely to be used by
construction traffic and document the condition of said streets prior to
commencement of development of said subdivision.  Any existing defect in
streets will be noted and the developer will not be responsible for repair of
such existing defects.



Section 13.11   Submittal Requirements for Preliminary and Final Plat



   A.   The Administrator may waive one or more application submittal
requirements shown in Table 13.11-1 if he or she determines that such
information is unnecessary in the particular case to determine compliance
with applicable regulations.



   B.   The final plat shall meet all applicable requirements for
recording set forth in the North Carolina General Statutes. 



Table 13.11-1
Information to be Contained on Preliminary and Final Plat



 

INFORMATION
 
PRELIMINARY PLAT
 
FINAL PLAT




Name of plat (preliminary or final)
 
X
 
X


Title block containing the subdivision name and the name of the owner
 
X
 
X


    Date or dates survey was conducted and plat prepared
 
X
 
X


A scale of drawing in feet per inch listed in words and figures (drawing
shall not be at a scale less than 1” equals 200’)
 
X
 
X


Bar graph scale
 
X
 
X


North Arrow and orientation (North arrow shall be oriented to the top of the
plat)
 
X
 
X


  The name, address and phone number, and email address of the subdivider
 
X
 
X


A sketch vicinity map with north arrow showing the relationship between the
proposed subdivision and surrounding area at a scale of 1” = 2000’
 
X
 
X


Corporate limits, county lines, and other jurisdictional lines if any, on the
tract
 
X
 
X


The names, addresses, telephone number and email address of all owners,
registered land surveyors, developers, land planners, architects, landscape
architects, and professional engineers responsible for the subdivision.
 
X
 
X


The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, fully dimensioned by
lengths and bearings, and the location of existing boundary lines of
adjoining lands
 
 
X


The names of owners of adjoining properties
 
X
 
X


Existing land use of the tract to be divided and adjacent properties.
 
X
 


Minimum building setback lines for all lots within the subdivision
 
X
 
X


The zoning classifications of the tract to be subdivided and on adjoining
properties
 
X
 
X


Existing property lines on the tract to be subdivided and on adjoining
properties
 
X
 
X


Total acreage in tract to be subdivided
 
X
 
X


Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate dimensions
 
X
 
X


Bearings and distances for lot dimensions
 
 
X


Total number of parcels created
 
X
 
X


The lots numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision
 
X
 
X


Existing buildings or other structures, water courses, wetlands, railroads,
bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on the land to be subdivided and land
immediately adjoining plus dimensions and distances to property lines of
buildings to remain on the property once the subdivision is completed
 
X
 
X


Marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes, streams or stream beds and
any other natural features affecting the site
 
X
 
X


The location of all proposed storm drains and appurtenances with grades,
inverts, and sizes indicated, together with a map of the drainage area or
areas tributary to the proposed storm drains.
 
X
 


The proposed method of water supply and sewer disposal
 
X
 


Number of housing units proposed
 
 


Proposed roads with horizontal and vertical alignment
 
X
 
X


For subdivisions over 50 lots, a Traffic Impact Analysis  (see definitions)
 
X
 


Existing and platted roads on adjoining properties and in the proposed
subdivision
 
X
 
X


Linear feet of streets proposed in the subdivision
 
X
 


Street rights of way, location and dimensions
 
X
 
X


Pavement widths
 
X
 
X


Cul-de-sac radius from centerpoint
 
X
 
X


Design engineering data for all corners and  curves
 
X
 
X


Road names
 
X
 
X


If any road is proposed to intersect with a State maintained road, the
subdivider shall apply for driveway approval as required by the NCDOT,
Division of Highways’ Manual on Driveway Regulations.  Evidence that the
subdivider has obtained such approval.
 
X
 


If applicable, a copy of the approved roadway plan submitted to the
appropriate office of the North Carolina Department of Transportation for any
major subdivision
 
X
 


The location and dimensions of all utility and other easements
 
X
 
X


The location and dimensions of all pedestrian or bicycle paths
 
X
 
X


The location and dimensions of all school sites, both existing and proposed
 
X
 
X


The location, dimensions and acreage of all parks, greenways, recreation
areas and other open space with specific type indicated
 
X
 
X


The location and dimensions of areas to be used for purposes other than
residential with the purpose of each stated
 
X
 
X


The future ownership (dedication or reservation for public use to
governmental body, homeowners’ association, or for tenants remaining in
subdivider’s ownership) of recreational and open space lands
 
X
 
X


The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers and control
points
 
 
X


A copy of the approved erosion control plan submitted to the appropriate
field office of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources
 
X
 


A separate map drawn at the same scale as the preliminary plat showing only
proposed streets and lot lines, topography with contour intervals of no
greater than 10 feet
 
X
 


A timetable for estimated project completion of the area covered by the
preliminary plat
 
X
 




 



Section 13.12    Reservation of School Sites



   Schools sites must be reserved with the agreement of the Board of
Education, in accordance with plans adopted by the Board of Education.
Whenever a subdivision includes all or part of a site identified for new
school construction, the  Administrator shall notify the Board of Education
prior to preliminary plat approval. That Board shall then notify the
Administrator whether it still wishes the site to be reserved. If the Board
of Education does not wish for it to be reserved, no reservation will be
required. If that board wishes for the site to be reserved, the subdivision
may not be approved without that reservation. The Board of Education must
acquire the site within eighteen (18) months of the date of reservation. If
the Board of Education has not acquired the site or begun the proceedings to
condemn the site within said 18-month period, the land shall be freed of the
reservation and may be developed for other purposed in accordance with all
other applicable land use regulations.



Section 13.13   Subdivision Names, Road Names and Addresses



   A.   The names of new subdivisions and subdivision roads shall not
duplicate or be phonetically similar to the names of existing subdivisions
and road names in Gaston County.



   B.   Where proposed streets are continuations of existing streets,
the existing street names shall be used.



   C.   House numbers shall conform to the Gaston County Street Naming
and House Numbering Ordinance and shall be assigned by the Bessemer City
Planning Department.



Section 13.14   Conformity to Thoroughfare Plan



   Whenever a tract of land included within any proposed subdivision
includes any part of a street or proposed street as depicted on the most
currently adopted version of the local thoroughfare plan or comprehensive
transportation plan, the subdivider shall:



   A.   Plat the part of such proposed public way in the location and
to the width indicated on the thoroughfare plan if such street is part of the
network of streets within or providing access to the proposed subdivision; or



   B.   Reserve the part of such public way for street purposes and
establish appropriate building setback lines therefore if such street is not
part of the network of streets within or providing access to the proposed
subdivision.



Section 13.15    Roads



   Road standards for new subdivisions shall be as provided herein. 
Notwithstanding, some of these requirements (e.g., road widths, allowances
for alleys, private roads, etc.) may be exempt in TNDs, PRDs and infill
developments.  See Sections 8.1.11, 8.1.12 and 8.1.13 for such exemptions. 



13.15.1    Public Roads



   A.   Unless specifically authorized herein, public roads must be
designed in accordance with the Minimum Construction Standards for
Subdivision Roads established by the North Carolina Department of
Transportation, Division of Highways.  When other City regulations impose
higher or more restrictive standards, the higher or more restrictive standard
shall apply.



   B.   Except as noted in Section 13.15.2, all roads shall be public.



13.15.2   Gated Residential Developments; Infill Developments 



   A.   Unlike other developments in Gaston County, a Gated Residential
Development, where a gate is placed at the outer periphery of the development
in order to restrict access, may be allowed to have private streets that are
not owned and maintained by NCDOT or the City. All Gated Residential
Developments must be developed in accordance with the regulations of this
section and other applicable regulations of the this Ordinance.



   B.   The design and layout of any gatehouse, entry gates, external
fence, walls, and berms shall be located outside any public street
right-of-way and shall be designed to blend in, to the greatest degree
feasible, with the proposed development and be attractive to motorists and
pedestrians from adjoining public streets.  Gatehouses and entry gates shall
be located outside any required screening areas.  Entry gates shall be set
back sufficiently far from public street entrances to allow for stacking of
at least three (3) vehicles out of the public travel lanes.  An additional
setback between the point of the access control device and the entry gate
shall be required to allow a vehicle which is denied access to safely turn
around and exit onto a public street.  Pedestrian access to the gated
residential development shall be provided at its entrance outside of the
vehicle travel lanes.  Entry gates shall have sufficient minimum gate widths
and openings to allow safe passage of all vehicles permitted to use public
roadways. Overhead barriers or obstructions shall not be allowed above entry
gates.  All gatehouses, entry gates, external fences and walls shall be
subject to specific review and approval of the Administrator prior to the
start of construction.  Said review and approval shall include any signage
and/or illumination integral to subdivision gatehouses, entry gates, external
fences and walls. 



   C.   With the exception of the placement of a gate and guardhouse in
a private street right-of-way, all private roads, traffic signs and markings
shall meet all applicable minimum right-of-way, pavement, construction and
design standards for public roads as established by the North Carolina
Department of Transportation (NCDOT) and this ordinance. The City reserves
the right to have streets inspected during the construction phase to insure
that they are being built in accordance with all applicable NCDOT
standards.  The developer of the subdivision shall bear all costs borne by
the City in association with such inspections. 



   D.   Prior to the approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall
submit to the Administrator evidence that the subdivider has created a
homeowners’ association whose responsibility it will be to maintain common
areas, private streets, curb and gutter and sidewalks within the
subdivision.  Such evidence shall include filed copies of the articles of
incorporation, declarations, and homeowners’ association bylaws.



   E.   The maintenance and upkeep of any guardhouses or entry
structures, and subdivision walls, fences, or berms located at the external
periphery of the subdivision as well as internal streets, curb, gutter, and
sidewalks shall be the sole responsibility of the subdivider and/or any duly
incorporated and active homeowners’ association.  Accordingly, any
maintenance bond accepted by the City per Section 13.10.1(F) for a gated
residential development subdivision shall be calculated using the
construction costs of all facilities listed above (in addition to the cost of
roads).  The maintenance bond shall remain in place for two years following
final plat approval of the Subdivision plat or until the Administrator is
satisfied (in his own exclusive discretion) that the homeowners’
association is controlled by individual lot owners other than the developer
(one year, at a minimum, after a homeowners’ association is incorporated
and active), has made necessary assessments for payment of maintenance of the
roads and facilities, and has otherwise taken over the full responsibility of
maintenance of such facilities and the private roads within the subdivision.
The decision to release the bond shall rest entirely with the City and shall
be made based upon the homeowners’ association financial ability to
properly maintain these roads and common facilities.  After the maintenance
bond is released, the homeowners’ association shall be required to submit
to the Administrator, by the 15th of January of each calendar year, the
names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all duly elected members of their
board of directors as well as a copy of their annual financial statement
showing, at a minimum, the amount of funds budgeted to maintain such
facilities.  In the event the Planning Board, in its discretion, believes
the homeowners’ association is not making necessary repairs to the roadways
or facilities (amenities) or is not making assessments necessary to cover the
cost of said repairs, it may after notice of hearing published as provided in
this Ordinance, and notice provided to each lot owner within the subdivision,
as shown on the tax scrolls of Gaston County as of January 1 of the prior
year, require the homeowners’ association to provide a maintenance bond as
required in 13.10.1. This maintenance bond may be eliminated or reinstated at
the discretion of the City upon notice as set out above.



   F.   The subdivider and homeowners’ association shall guarantee
access to all private streets by emergency and law enforcement vehicles. 
Access procedures must ensure immediate access through the entry gates for
emergency and law enforcement vehicles responding to emergencies.  Approach
and departure areas on both sides of a gated entrance must provide adequate
setbacks and proper alignment to allow free and unimpeded passage of
emergency vehicles through the entrance area.  The subdivider shall provide
documentation from Gaston County Emergency Management and the local law
enforcement department that proposed entry gates and access procedures meet
all City and County standards for access by emergency and law enforcement
vehicles. 



   G.   The subdivider and homeowners’ association shall guarantee
access to all private streets by City agencies, State of North Carolina
agencies, and all public utility companies when access to the subdivision is
needed to conduct official business by such agency or company.  A statement
to this effect shall appear on or accompany the final plat. 



   H.   If the homeowners’ association fails to maintain reliable
access for the provision of emergency or other public services, the City may
enter the gated residential development and open, disable or remove any gate
or device which is a barrier to access, at the sole expense of the
homeowners’ association and/or the developer.  The declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions and any other relevant documents of
the homeowners’ association shall include this provision. 



13.15.3   Lots to Abut a Public Street



   Each lot shall have frontage on a public street  and meet the
requirements of Section 9.5, with the following exceptions:



   A.   Existing lots meeting the requirements set forth in Section
3.5.7; or



   B.   Lots fronting on a private road meeting the requirements set
forth in 13.15.2; or



   C.   Proposed lots for use by single-family dwellings and individual
manufactured homes that do not have frontage on a public street may be
approved by the Administrator after determining the following:



      1.   Each such resultant lot is a minimum of three acres in
size; and



      2.   Since the effective date of this Ordinance, not more than
three lots served by an easement have been created out of that parent tract.



      3.   Each such lot is provided with access to a public street
by means of a recorded twenty (20) foot wide access easement; and



      4.   Each such resultant lot is served, at a minimum, by an
all weather road; defined as: a well drained travel surface composed of
gravel, crusher run, or other similar material, having a center crown to
prevent ponding of water on the travel surface, and have a minimum twelve
(12) foot travel surface and shall be built in accordance with the following
figure.



Figure 13.15.3-1









 



Section 13.15.4  General Street Layout



   A.   The street layout of the subdivision shall provide for the most
advantageous development of the entire neighboring area.  All proposed
streets shall provide satisfactory alignment for continuation of existing,
planned or platted streets with which they are to connect.



   B.   When a proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a
railroad right-of-way, it shall be planned so as to avoid having residential
lots front on a street which runs parallel and adjacent to the railroad
right-of-way.



   C.   When a tract of land to be subdivided includes a principal or
minor arterial as designated on the most recently adopted version of the
thoroughfare plan of the Gaston Urban Area or any officially adopted
thoroughfare plan, the subdivider shall provide a separate street permitting
access to the lots abutting the principal or minor arterial.  When reverse
frontage is established, private driveways shall not have direct access to
the principal or minor arterial.



   D.   When a tract of land to be subdivided includes or provides
access to a principal or minor arterial as designated on the most recently
adopted version of the thoroughfare plan of the Gaston Urban Area or any
officially adopted thoroughfare plan, or when a tract of land to be
subdivided includes or provides access to a street that does not meet the
standards contained as a result of the development, the subdivider shall be
responsible for said improvements.



   E.   Street layout shall be so designed as to provide for future
access to and not impose undue hardship upon undeveloped property adjoining
the subdivision.



Section 13.16   Road Construction Specifications



   Standard curb and gutter shall be required on principal and minor
arterials. Valley curb and gutter shall be required on all residential
streets.



13.16.1   Street Right-of-Way Dimensions



   Street right-of-way widths shall be as follows:



   A.   Freeways shall comply with the requirements on file with the
Administrator and with the North Carolina Department of Transportation as
outlined in the most recently adopted technical report of the Gaston Urban
Area thoroughfare plan.



   B.   Principal arterial streets shall comply with the requirements
on file with the Administrator and with the North Carolina Department of
Transportation as outlined in the most recently adopted technical report of
the Gaston Urban Area thoroughfare plan.



   C.   Minor arterial streets shall comply with the requirements on
file with the Administrator and with the North Carolina Department of
Transportation as outlined in the most recently adopted technical report of
the Gaston Urban Area thoroughfare plan.



   D.   Collector streets rights-of-way shall be not less than sixty
(60) feet.



   E.   Residential streets rights-of-way shall not be less than forty
(40) feet with a five-foot general drainage, sidewalk and utility easement on
each side of the right-of-way.



Section 13.16.2   Street Grades and Alignment Grades



   A.   The minimum grades for freeways, principal and minor arterials
shall comply with the requirements of the requirements on file with the
Administrator and with the North Carolina Department of Transportation.



   B.   All other streets shall have grades no greater than ten
percent, unless prohibited by geographic or topographic conditions or
otherwise approved by the Planning Board upon recommendation by the TRC.



   C.   No street shall have grades of less than one percent in the
flow line, where concrete gutters are provided unless otherwise approved by
the Planning Board upon recommendation by the TRC .



Vertical Curves



   All changes in street grade shall be connected by vertical curves of a
minimum length as determined by the standards and specifications on file with
the Administrator.



Horizontal Curvature



   The minimum radius of horizontal curvature on the centerline of a
street shall be as follows:



   A.   Principal arterial streets – six-hundred-fifty (650) feet.



   B.   Minor arterial streets – four hundred (400) feet.



   C.   Other streets – two hundred fifty (250) feet.



Tangents



   Tangents.  Between reverse curves on thoroughfares there shall be a
tangent of not less than one hundred (100) feet, except where curves are
spiral curves; all other streets shall have a tangent of not less than fifty
(50) feet between reverse curves, unless otherwise he by approved by the
Planning Board upon recommendation by the TRC.



Intersections



   A.   All streets shall intersect at an angle as near to ninety (90)
degrees as possible and practicable.



   B.   In the interest of greater safety and better traffic flow at
street intersections or block corners, the property lines at the intersection
shall be rounded by an arc of a radius of not less than twenty-five (25) feet
on thoroughfares and by an arc of a radius of at least twenty (20) feet on
all other streets.



   C.   Where streets intersect at an angle of less than ninety (90)
degrees, the foregoing radii shall be increased to lengths prescribed by the
Planning Board upon recommendation by the TRC.



Section 13.16.3   Street Grading



   Streets within the subdivision and any other streets required to gain
ingress and egress from existing streets into the subdivision shall be graded
by the subdivider to their full right-of-way so as to provide adequate
shoulders and pedestrian walkways.  Such grading and construction shall be
done in accordance with the typical cross section and profile approved by the
Planning Board upon recommendation by the TRC.  The minimum distance
permitted for any new street opened or constructed under this chapter shall
extend the entire length of property to be developed by the subdivider.



Section 13.16.4   Acceptance of Maintenance for Streets inside City



   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute an acceptance of
the streets for City maintenance.  Streets will be accepted for City
maintenance upon approval from the Administrator and City Council.



Section 13.16.5   Minimum Requirements for Streets Outside City



   The owner and/or subdivider of a subdivision located within the
city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction shall also comply with the minimum
requirements for street improvements as required within the city, as well as
any additional requirements of the North Carolina Department of
Transportation, in order that the streets within the subdivisions may be
accepted for maintenance by the North Carolina Department of Transportation.



Section 13.16.6   Requirements for Street Paving



   The paving of any newly dedicated or opened street, when provided by
the subdivider; shall be installed in accordance with the specifications of
the City engineer for the particular street involved, as follows:



   A.   The minimum paving for the major freeways and principal
arterials shall comply with the requirements of Bessemer City and the North
Carolina Department of Transportation.



   B.   Minimum paving for minor arterial streets shall be two inches
bituminous concrete surface course, two and one-half inches bituminous binder
course, on an eight-inch compacted stone base.



   C.   The minimum paving for streets other than those referred to in
items (a) and (b) above shall be one inch bituminous concrete surface course,
two inches bituminous binder curse, on a six-inch compacted stone base.



   D.   Standard curb and gutter shall be required on principal and
minor arterials. Valley curb and gutter shall be required on all residential
streets.



   E.   Streets described in Paragraphs “B” and “C” above,
shall be topped with a roadway surface that complies with the requirements of
Gaston County and North Carolina Department of Transportation and as
determined by the City engineer.



Section 13.16.7   Paving Widths



   The width of pavement shall be as follows:



   A.   The minimum width for freeways and principal arterials shall be
as after duly considering the needs of the City and the North Carolina
Department of Transportation as outlined in the Gaston Urban Area
Thoroughfare Plan.



   B.   Minor arterials, which are determined by the City engineer to
be four twelve-foot traffic lanes, shall have a paving width of not less than
fifty-three (53) feet back of curb to back of curb.



   C.   Minor arterials that are determined by the Planning Board to be
three twelve-foot traffic lanes, shall have a paving width of not less than
forty-one (41) feet back of curb to back of curb.



   D.   Collector streets that are determined by the Planning Board to
be two fifteen and one-half foot traffic lanes, shall have a paving width of
not less than thirty-five (35) feet back of curb to back of curb.



   E.   Other collector streets, which are determined by the Planning
Board to be three twelve-foot traffic lanes, shall have a paving width of not
less than forty-one (41) feet back of curb to back of curb.



   F.   Residential streets shall have a paving width of not less than
twenty-eight (28) feet back of curb to back of curb. [Two twelve-foot traffic
lanes].



   G.   Cul-de-sac or dead-end street pavement shall terminate with a
paved turning area after duly considering the applicable NCDOT standards and
other site locational factors.



Section 13.17   Pedestrian Walkways/Greenstrips



   Crosswalks including the necessary improvements, may be required at or
near the center of any block which is more than 1,000 feet long, or at the
end of cul-de-sac streets where deemed necessary for pedestrian circulation
or for access to schools and commercial areas.



   Sidewalks shall be provided per Section 9.18.1(B); greenstrips shall be
provided per Section 9.18.2.



Section 13.18   Street Trees



   Street trees shall be required for subdivisions located within the USO
and CH Overlay Districts only.  The subdivider shall install street trees
along all streets within a subdivision and along the abutting side of streets
forming the perimeter of the subdivision. Planting requirements for street
trees are found in Section 11.4.



Section 13.19   Water Supply and Sanitary Sewer Collection



13.19.1   Subdivisions Inside the Urban Standards Overlay District. 



   Subject to availability of public water and/or sanitary sewer service,
if county or municipal water and/or sanitary sewer lines are located within
one-half (1/2) mile of a subdivision of 10 – 39 lots, or within one (1)
mile of a subdivision of 40 lots or more, where the distances are measured
along the roadway to the nearest edge of the property, then the developer
must connect to these lines to provide water service, fire protection, and
sewer service for the subdivision.



13.19.2   Subdivisions Outside Urban Standards Overlay District, Utilities
Not Available



When a subdivision is located outside the Urban Standards Overlay District or
the water and sanitary sewer facilities are not available (as defined in the
previous section), the subdivision shall comply with all rules and
regulations prescribed for private and/or commu-nity water supply and waste
disposal by the North Carolina State Board of Health and the Gaston County
Health Department. This approval shall be obtained from the proper
authorities prior to submission of the plat plat to the TRC for consideration.



Section 13.20   Storm Sewers and Surface Water Drainage



13.20.1   Surface water in sanitary sewers prohibited



   No surface water drainage shall empty into any sanitary sewer line.



13.20.2   Requirements When Public System Available



   If a public storm drainage system is reasonably accessible to the
subdivision either by being within or by adjoining its boundaries, the
subdivider shall connect with such storm drainage system and shall do all
grading and ditching, and shall provide and install all piping,
appurtenances, and drainage structures deemed necessary by the City engineer
to properly carry the water to the storm drainage system.



13.20.3   Requirements When Public System Not Available



   If a storm drainage system is not reasonably accessible to the
subdivision (as defined above), the subdivider shall do all grading and
ditching, provide and install all piping, appurtenances and structures that
are necessary to properly carry the surface water to locations within the
boundaries of the subdivision which are acceptable to the City engineer.



13.20.4   Construction Requirement



   The size, location, design of structures, mode of installation and type
of materials for all construction of storm sewers shall be as approved by the
(City)(County)(Town) engineer.  Allstorm drainage system pipes bearing
vehicular loading shall be reinforced concrete pipe (ASTM C-76, latest
amendment) or equivalent. All storm drainage construction shall be
inaccordance with the North Carolina Department of Transportation standards
and may be inspected during construction by the City.



12.20.5   General Drainage and Utility Easement



   The subdivider shall provide a general drainage and utility easement
for each and every underground pipe or open ditch drain when located in other
than a public way, and such easement shall be of a width satisfactory to the
City Engineer.



13.20.6   New Drainage Ways



   A.   Where new drainage ways are required, they shall be coordinated
with existing and proposed general drainage systems and designed with due
regard for safety, appear-ance and geological effects.



   B.   Drainage ways shall be located and constructed to maintain a
natural appearance, shall be limited to safe water depths in easily
accessible areas, and shall be designed to avoid excessive rates of flow,
erosion or overflow into developed areas subject to damage.



   C.   In circumstances where there is to be a drainage way between
two lot lines or crossing a lot(s), the drainage way will be piped to the
rear lot line or to a point as approved by the City engineer.



Section 13.21    Layout of Blocks



   A.   The width of the blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers
of lots of appropriate depth where possible.



   B.   Block length shall be not less than 400 feet and shall not
exceed 1,200 feet except in cases where, in the judgment of the TRC, a longer
block is necessary because of unusual topography or in order to complete a
comprehensive neighborhood plan.



Section 13.22   Cul-de-sacs



   Permanent dead end streets in the Urban Standards Overlay District
shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, except that cul-de-sacs
shall not be greater than two-hundred fifty (250) in length in a TND. 
Permanent dead end streets outside the Urban Standards Overlay District shall
not exceed one thousand (1000) feet in length.  The length of the cul-de-sac
shall be computed from the point where the centerline of the dead end street
intersects with the center of a through street to the center of the
turnaround of the cul-de-sac. 



Section 13.23    Multiple Accesses



   Multiple accesses into a subdivision are required to be provided for
additional ingress and egress.  Any subdivision exceeding seventy-five (75)
lots shall be provided with at least two entrances on to a public street or
interconnect to an adjoining/adjacent existing public street, road or
highway.  Requirement for multiple entrances shall be based on the
cumulative number of lots for a contiguous development, whether or not it is
developed in phases.  Subdivision entrances shall be no closer than two
hundred feet, as measured from the street centerlines.



Section 13.24   Lot Layout



   A.   Every lot created after the effective date of this ordinance
shall conform with the underlying zoning regulations with respect to minimum
required street frontage. However, multiple lots designed for single-family
detached dwellings or manufactured homes need not front on a public street
provided that all portions of each dwelling unit proposed shall be located
within eight hundred (800) feet of a publicly or privately maintained street
and provided further that access to each such lot be made available via
either a recorded access easement that meets required street width standards
contained in Section 13.15.3 of this Ordinance.



   B.   Where public water and sewer facilities are not available each
residential lot layout shall be of a size as determined by the local agency
having jurisdiction over such facilities. In no event shall the lot area be
less than that prescribed in Table 7.1-2 for the lot in question based on
underlying zoning district requirements.



   C.   Side lot lines shall be as near as is practicable at right
angles to the straight street or radial to curved streets.



   D.   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the
off-streetservice parking facilities required by the type of use and
developments contemplated.



Section 13.25   Compliance with Zoning Regulations



   All lots shown on a preliminary and final subdivision recording plat
shall be in conformance with all other applicable regulations and
requirements of this Ordinance. 



Section 13.26   Dedication of Open Space



13.26.1   General Provisions



   Every subdivider who proposes a subdivision of land for residential
purposes shall dedicate a portion of land or pay a fee in lieu thereof, in
accordance with this Section, for public park, greenway, recreation, and open
space sites to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the
subdivision or development.



   The provisions of this Section shall apply to all subdivisions of
land.  Notwithstanding, specific provisions pertaining to traditional
neighborhood developments, planned residential developments, planned unit
developments, infill residential developments and multi-family developments
are found in Section 13.26.7.



   Irrespective of the above, when a subdivision is located on a tract of
land where a future greenway or greenway connection has been specifically
identified on a locally adopted recreation plan, or greenway master plan,
open space for such designated greenway shall be dedicated and the
fee-in-lieu option shall not be used for such lands.



13.26.2   Amount of Land to be Dedicated 



   At least one thirty-fifth (1/35) of an acre shall be dedicated for each
dwelling unit planned or proposed in the subdivision plat or development. The
minimum amount of land which shall be dedicated for a public park,
recreation, or open space site shall be no less than two (2) acres in size. 
When the area to be provided is less than two (2) acres, the subdivider shall
be required to make payment in lieu of the dedication to be used for the
acquisition or development of recreation, park, or open space sites which
would serve the needs of the residents of the subdivision. 



   The proximity of existing publicly dedicated and publicly accessible
open space (e.g., park, greenway) to the subdivision shall reduce the amount
of open space required in the subdivision.  If such open space is located no
greater than one-quarter (1/4) mile walking distance (such distance measured
from the pedestrian access point of the existing open space to a perimeter
public street or sidewalk within the development), the amount of required
open space shall be reduced by up to twenty-five (25) percent. If the
existing public open space is located directly adjacent (either immediately
abutting or directly across a public street) from the subdivision, the amount
of required open space for the subdivision shall be reduced by up to fifty
(50) percent. 



   The reduction in required open space for the subdivision shall be
calculated based on the acreage contained in the existing public park.  For
instance, if a subdivision contained two-hundred (200) lots, it would
ordinarily be required to have 5.71 acres of open space.  If a five (5) acre
public park were located one-tenth (1/10) of a mile away from the
subdivision, one-quarter of the acreage of the park, or 1.25 acres, could be
used to offset the amount of open space required in the subdivision.  The
required amount of open space within the subdivision shall then be reduced to
4.46 acres.



(NOTE:  Different amounts of open space are found in Section 13.26.7 of this
Ordinance for planned residential developments, planned unit developments,
traditional neighborhood developments, and infill residential developments. 
In such instances the amount of required open space to be dedicated shall be
as shown for that particular use.)



13.26.3   Nature of Land to be Dedicated 



   Except as otherwise required by the Planning Board at the time of
preliminary plat approval, all dedications of land shall meet the following
criteria:



   A.   Unity



   The dedicated land shall form a single parcel of land, except where the
Planning Board determines that two or more parcels would be in the best
interest of the public, given the type and distribution of open spaces needed
to adequately serve the proposed development.  In such cases, the Planning
Board, in approving the preliminary or final plat, may require that such
parcels be connected by a dedicated strip of land at least thirty (30) feet
in width.  Where practical, the strip shall be placed in the subdivision to
enable persons to walk between the two open space areas. 



   B.   Usability



   Two-thirds (2/3) of the dedicated land shall be useable for active
recreation.  Furthermore, lakes and other bodies of water may not be
included in computing any of the dedicated land area. 



   C.   Shape



   The shape of the portion of dedicated land which is deemed suitable for
active recreation shall be sufficiently square or round to be usable for any
or all recreational facilities and activities, such as athletic fields and
tennis courts, when a sufficient amount of land is dedicated to accommodate
such facilities.  Land dedicated only for greenways need not follow the
requirements of this sub-section.



   D.   Location



   The dedicated land shall be located so as to reasonably serve the
recreation and open space needs of residents of the subdivision.



   E.   Access



   Access to the dedicated land shall be provided either by adjoining
public street frontage or by a dedicated public easement, at least thirty
(30) feet wide, which connects the dedicated land to a public street or
right-of-way.  Gradients adjacent to existing and proposed streets shall
allow for reasonable access to the dedicated land.  Where the dedicated land
is located adjacent to a street, the developer or subdivider shall remain
responsible for the installation of utilities, sidewalks, and other
improvements required along that street segment.  Public access or dedicated
walkways to greenway dedications only shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.



   F.   Topography



   The average slope of the portion of dedicated land deemed usable for
active recreation shall not exceed the average slope of the entire
subdivision to be developed.  In no case shall a slope on the usable portion
of dedicated land exceed fifteen (15) percent.



   G.   Landscaping



   Dedicated parks, recreation, and open space areas shall have a
sufficient natural or manmade buffer or screen to minimize any negative
impacts on adjacent residents.



13.26.4   Payments of Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication



   A.   General



   The payment of fees, in lieu of the dedication of land as required
above, may occur at the request of the subdivider or developer.  However,
the decision to require the dedication of land for recreational purposes, or
a payment of a fee in lieu, shall be made by the Planning Board after having
received a recommendation from the TRC and having evaluated the proposed
dedication and the relationship such dedication would have with the City’s
overall recreational needs.  Payments of fees in lieu shall not be allowed
for traditional neighborhood developments (TNDs), planned residential
developments (PRDs) and planned unit developments (PUDs).



   B.   Time of Payment



   The fees in lieu of dedication shall be paid to the City by the
subdivider prior to final plat approval.



   C.   Amount of Payment



   The amount of the payment shall be the determined based on:



      1.   The number of acres to be dedicated, as required above;



      2.   The assessed value for property tax purposes of the land
to be dedicated as listed in the Gaston County tax office, adjusted to
reflect its current fair market value at the time such payment is due to be
paid.



      3.   Procedures for determining the amount is as follows:



   The  Administrator shall calculate the required payment amount using
the following procedures:



         a.   The  Administrator shall calculate the average
per-acre value of land for the entire tract by dividing the assessed value of
the entire unimproved tract of land by the total number of acres in the tract;



         b.   The  Administrator shall then calculate the value
of required open space at the date of most recent revaluation, which is the
product of one thirty-fifth (1/35) of the average per-acre value of land and
the number of proposed residential lots in the subdivision ; 



13.26.5   Procedures



      1.   At the time of filing a preliminary plat, the subdivider
shall designate thereon the area or areas to be dedicated.  If the
subdivider desires to make a payment in lieu of the dedication of land, a
letter to that effect shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.  The
Planning Board reserves the right to refuse to accept dedication of parcels
for public park, recreation, or open space and to require a fee in lieu
thereof.



      2.   Where a dedication of land is required, such dedication
shall be shown on the final plat when submitted. Where a payment in lieu of
dedication is approved by the Planning Board, such payment will be made
before the final plat is signed and recorded.



13.26.6   Greenways



   Greenways may be credited against the requirements of this section
provided that such greenways are part of the City’s greenway plan and
dedicated to public use.



13.26.7   Open Space in Traditional Neighborhood Developments, Planned
Residential Developments, Planned Unit Developments, Infill Residential
Developments and Multi-family Developments



   A.   Amount of Land to be Dedicated  (as a minimum)



      ∙   Traditional Neighborhood Development- 20 percent of
gross acreage



      ∙   Planned Residential Development- as common open space. 



      ∙   Planned Unit Development- 10 percent of gross acreage



   The payment of fees, in lieu of the dedication of land shall not be
allowed for the development types listed above.



   B.   Nature of Land to be Dedicated



      ∙   Open space shall be planned and improved so as to be
accessible to residents of the development and (for planned unit developments
and traditional neighborhood developments), users of the development.



      ∙   Improved shall mean cleared of underbrush and debris and
may contain one or more of the following improvements: walks and greenways,
statues, utilities, irrigation fields, wet detention ponds, open fields,
athletic fields, playground equipment, ponds and lakes (that are located
entirely within the development).  Certain open space areas (e.g., plazas)
may also be paved.



      ∙   Wet detention ponds may be counted towards meeting the
open space requirement if (1) the facility is designed to hold water
throughout the year, and (2) if the facility is surrounded by a path or
walkway and contains benches or similar improvements for enjoyment by
residents or users of the development.



      ∙   Required landscaped and screening areas (per Chapter 11)
shall not count towards this requirement.



   C.   Shape and Size



      ∙   The shape of the portion of dedicated land which is
deemed suitable for active recreation shall be sufficiently square or round
to be usable for any or all recreational facilities and activities, such as
athletic fields and tennis courts, when a sufficient amount of land is
dedicated to accommodate such facilities. 



      ∙   Two-thirds (2/3) of the dedicated land shall be useable
for active recreation.  Furthermore, lakes and other bodies of water may not
be included in computing any of the dedicated land area. 



      ∙   For inclusion in the amount of dedicated open space, all
common areas within fifty (50) linear feet of the greenway (and not already
computed in the open space requirements) shall be counted towards the minimum
common open space requirement.



      ∙   If any of the types of open space areas listed below are
counted towards the development’s total open space requirement, then the
following minimum lot size and improvement requirements shall be met:



 

OPEN SPACE AREA
 
MINIMUM AREA SIZE
 
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS


Playground
 
One-thousand (1,000) square feet
 
Playground equipment; benches; paths and walkways.


Close
 
Five-hundred (500) square feet
 
Grassed area (benches optional)


Square
 
Two-hundred fifty (250) square feet (infill residential); one-thousand
(1,000) square feet; elsewhere.
 
Grassed area; trees, (benches optional)


Plaza
 
Two-hundred fifty (250) square feet (infill residential); one-thousand
(1,000) square feet; elsewhere.
 
Paved; Benches and other street furniture.


Park
 
One (1) acre
 
Playground equipment; benches; athletic fields; paths and walkways.



 



Section 13.27   Public Utilities and Services



   A.   All public utilities and services lines will be below ground to
the point of service.  This includes, but is not limited to, lines for
electric service, cable service, telephone service, water service and
wastewater services.



   B.   Easements shall be provided for storm and sanitary sewers,
water lines and other utilities in such widths, and at such locations as may
be required by the City; in order to properly serve the lot and adjoining
realty; but in no event shall the City require less than easements of ten
feet in width along all rear lines and exterior side lot lines, and five feet
in width along each side of all interior side lot lines.  Notwithstanding,
in no case may the width of an easement upon a lot be less than the minimum
required side or rear yard setback for that lot per the requirements of the
underlying zoning district.



   C.   No principal or accessory structure may be placed within a
utility easement.



   D.   Inside the Urban Standards Overlay District, streets lights
will be installed by the subdivider in all subdivisions of 6 or more lots. 
Distances between streetlights shall not exceed 200 feet. Street light
intensity and placement shall be determined by the City in conjunction with
the utility provider.



Section 13.28   Monuments Required



13.28.1   Control corner



   In accordance with article 5A, chapter 39 of the North Carolina General
Statutes, whenever a subdivider shall divide any parcel of real estate into
lots and lay off streets, he shall cause at least one or more corners of the
development to be designated as a control corner and place at such control
corner a permanent marker. The permanent marker shall be as prescribed in the
G.S. 47-30 mapping requirements, as amended; standards of practice for land
surveying in North Carolina, amended effective February 1, 1996, or latest
amendment, published by the North Carolina State Board of Registration for
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, General Statutes of North Carolina
chapter 89C, as amended, and the requirements of the Gaston County register
of deeds shall apply to all surveys and maps.



13.28.2   Lot corners



   Alllot corners shall be accurately established and shall be marked with
a permanent or semi-permanent marker provided by the subdivider and approved
by the (City)(County)(Town) engineer, such as concrete monuments, or iron or
steel pins or pipes of an appropriate length and driven in so as to project
approximately two inches above the ground. Front corner irons of lots should
be placed after the streets are graded, so that sidewalk areas may be graded
to the proper elevation without destroying the lot corners.



Section 13.29   Standards for Subdivision Proposals to Minimize Possible
Flood Damage



   All subdivision proposals located within a flood hazard area shall
comply with Section 6.6.2.1, the FH Flood Hazard Overlay District.  In
addition, all subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and shall meet the following standards.  (Refer to
Section 6.6.2.1FH for definitions):



   A.   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



   B.   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   C.   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all
subdivisions submitted.



   Lots within floodplains shall not be approved for recordation unless
the following provisions are met:



      (a)   Lots Wholly Subject to Flooding



   No proposed residential building lot that is wholly subject to flooding
as defined herein shall be approved.



      (b)   Lots Partially Subject to Flooding



   Where only a portion of a proposed lot is subject to flooding as
defined herein, such lot may be approved only if there will be available for
building a usable lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet.  The usable
lot area shall be determined by deducting from the total area the area of all
yards and setbacks required by the applicable zoning regulations and any
remaining area of the lot lying within the area of the base flood (l00-year
flood) as shown on the "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map".



CHAPTER 14:
ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS



14.1   Changes to the Official Zoning Map



14.2   Changes to the Ordinance Text



14.3   Protest Petitions



Section 14.1   Changes to the Official Zoning Map



14.1.1   Authority



   Upon compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the City Council
shall have the authority to amend or repeal the zoning classification of any
parcel of land, as indicated on the Official Zoning Map.



14.1.2     Initiation Of A Zoning Map Amendment



   A.   Any person, board, department or commission may apply for a
change in    zoning district boundaries (rezoning), with the following
limitations:



      1.   Applications for parallel conditional use and conditional
rezoning as set forth in Sections 14.1.4 and 14.1.5 of this Ordinance may be
initiated only by the property owner or his authorized agent (refer to
Section 5.1);



   B.   An amendment to the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by
filing a complete and signed application with the Administrator.  Before any
application is accepted, the applicant must meet with the Administrator to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for a zoning amendment
request. During the conference, the Administrator will identify the submittal
requirements.  The Administrator may waive the pre-application requirement,
on a case-by-case, where due to the size of the tract being petitioned for
rezoning or the likely impact that such rezoning might have, such conference
would not serve any useful purpose.



14.1.3     Zoning Map Amendment Process- General District Rezoning



   When considering a petition for the reclassification of property to a
general zoning district (i.e., other than a parallel conditional use district
or a conditional district), neither the Planning Board nor the governing
board shall evaluate the petition based on any specific proposal for the use
or development of the affected property and the petitioner shall refrain from
using any graphic materials or descriptions of the proposed use or
development except for those which would apply to any use permitted in the
requested district.



   A.   Filing of Petitions; Determination of Completeness-



   For a reclassification of property proposed by any person or entity
other than the Planning Board or governing body, such petition shall be on an
application form prescribed by the Administrator, signed by the applicant and
accompanied by the fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the
governing board.  Said application form and fee shall be filed with the
Administrator. Said application form and fee shall be waived for any petition
submitted by any official or agency acting on behalf of the City of Bessemer
City, or the State of North Carolina. No application shall otherwise be
considered complete unless accompanied at the time of submittal by said
fee.  An application will otherwise be deemed complete if it is:



      1.   Submitted on the proper form;



      2.   Includes all mandatory information;



      3.   Includes all necessary supporting materials specified;
and,



      4.   Includes the designated fee



   B.   Content of Application



      1.   Each non-adjacent parcel of land for which rezoning is
requested shall be deemed a separate application, and said application fee
shall accompany each application.  For the purpose of this section, land
located and adjacent on either side or to the rear and all property located
directly across any street, railroad, body of water, jurisdictional boundary
line, or public right-of-way from the subject property shall be deemed to be
adjacent.  Also refer to the definition of “adjacent property” in
Section 2.7.



      2.   Each application for a rezoning of land shall be
accompanied by two (2) copies of a map, drawn to scale, with the following
information either shown on the map or accompanying it:



         a.   The subject property plus all adjacent properties;



         b.   If the property is in a subdivision of record, a
map of such portion of the subdivision that would relate the subject property
to the closest street intersection;



         c.   A survey and written description of the property
(ies) proposed for rezoning shall accompany the map for rezoning requests
that do not address the entire parcel and where one or more of the exterior
boundaries of the rezoning request do not follow readily identifiable mapped
features (e.g., street or railroad rights-of-way, easements, bodies of water,
etc.);



         d.   The present and proposed zoning classification of
the lot(s) in question; and,



         e.   The property identification number(s) of the lot(s)
in question as issued by the Gaston County Tax Department.



   C.   Submittal and Review Procedures



      1.   In order for an amendment to the Official Zoning Map to
be made, a public hearing must be held by the governing board after the
Planning Board has had an opportunity to review and make a recommendation on
the application.  The public hearing, once opened, may be continued to a
later date.  Any complete application shall be submitted to the
Administrator at least 30 days prior to the public hearing.  This shall be
sufficient time period for the staff to review the application and produce a
staff report and to ensure that all applicable notification requirements can
be met.  Notification of the public hearing shall be as follows:



         a.   A notice shall be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in Bessemer City once a week, for two successive weeks,
the first notice to be published not less than ten (10) days nor more than
twenty-five (25) days prior to the date of the governing board public hearing.



         b.   A notice of the proposed zoning map change shall be
sent by first class mail by the Administrator to the applicant and owners of
all adjacent properties as indicated on the most up-to-date records of the
Gaston County Tax Department not less than ten (10) days nor more than
twenty-five (25) days prior to the date of the governing board public hearing.



         c.   The Administrator shall post at least one (1)
notice on the site proposed for rezoning or an adjacent public street or
highway right-of-way at least ten (10) days prior to the City Council public
hearing.  Where multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map
amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the City
shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested
persons.  Such notice shall state the nature of the public hearing and its
date, time, and location at which it is to be held. The notice shall be
removed only after final action has been taken on the matter. In lieu of any
or all of this information to be contained on this posted notice, the notice
may give a phone number where interested parties may call during normal
business hours to get further information on the proposed amendment.



      2.   Any public hearing notice published or mailed shall state
the nature of the public hearing, the date, time, and place at which the
hearing is to occur, and who to call and/or see for more information.



      3.   The first class mail notice required per Section
14.1.3(C)(1)(b) may be waived if the zoning map amendment directly affects
more than fifty (50) properties, owned by a total of at least 50 different
property owners. Under such circumstances, the City may elect to publish such
notice per NCGS 160A-364. The advertisement shall not be less than one-half
of a newspaper page in size. The newspaper advertisement shall be effective
only for property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the
newspaper that publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside of
the newspaper's circulation area, according to the address listed on the most
recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified by
first class mail pursuant to this section. In addition to the newspaper
notice, the City shall post one or more prominent signs on or immediately
adjacent to the subject area reasonably calculated to give public notice of
the proposed rezoning.



   D.   Planning Board Action



      1.   The Planning Board shall have (30) days to make a
recommendation on the proposed change, said thirty (30) days being measured
from the date of the date of initial referral of the amendment by staff to
the Planning Board.  Said recommendation shall address whether the proposed
amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted by
the governing board and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable
along with other matters that the Planning Board deems appropriate and a
statement as to why Planning Board considers its recommendation to be
reasonable and in the public interest.  If a recommendation is not made
during said time period, the application shall be forwarded to the City
Council without a recommendation from the Planning Board.



      4.   The Planning Board recommendation shall be as follows:



         a.   Grant the rezoning as requested; or



         b.   Grant the rezoning with a reduction of the area
requested; or



         c.   Grant the rezoning to a more restrictive general
zoning district or districts; or,



         b.   Grant the rezoning with a combination of
Subsections (2) and (3) above; or,



         c.   Deny the rezoning.



      5.   The list of general zoning districts in descending order
of restrictiveness is as follows, with RLD being the most restrictive and I-3
being the least restrictive:



         a.   RLD (Most restrictive)



         b.   R-1 



         c.   R-2   



         d.   R-3



         e.   RS-20 



         f.   RS-12 



         g.   RS-8



         h.   RMF



         i.   OM



         j.   TMU



         k.   OLC



         l.   O-1



         m.   C-1



         n.   CBD



         o.   UMU



         p.   C-2



         q.   C-3



         r.    I-U



         s.   I-1



         t.   I-2



         u.   I-3 (Least restrictive)



   E.   City Council Action



      1.   Once the City Council public hearing has been closed, the
City Council shall render a decision on the petition.  The decision of the
City Council shall be in the form of any of the various options listed in
Sections 14.1.3(D)(3) and (4).  Alternately, the City Council may send the
application back to the Planning Board for further study and consideration. 
(NOTE: Such resubmittal by the City Council to the Planning Board may occur
not more than one time for any rezoning request.) If a resubmittal to the
Planning Board occurs, the Planning Board shall hear the case and have an
additional thirty-day period (from the date it re-reviewed the application)
to resubmit a recommendation to the City Council.  Any final decision made
by the City Council shall be accompanied by a statement that address (1)
whether the proposed amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that
has been adopted by the governing board and any other officially adopted plan
that is applicable, and (2) other matters that the City Council deems
appropriate and (3) why it considers the action taken to be reasonable and in
the public interest.



   F.   Petition Withdrawal



   An applicant who has submitted a complete application for a zoning map
amendment may withdraw that application prior to a final decision being
rendered by the City Council.  Such withdrawal may be made under the
following guidelines:



      1.   If said petition is withdrawn at least two (2) working
days prior to the City Council public hearing, a similar application shall
not be accepted by the Administrator within 180 days of the date of
withdrawal.



      2.   Otherwise, if said petition is withdrawn less than two
(2) working days prior to a final decision being rendered, a similar
application shall not be accepted by the Administrator within one (1) year of
the date of withdrawal.



      3.   Notwithstanding the above, the Administrator may allow a
similar application to be submitted prior to the expiration of said time
periods having first determined:



         a.   There has been a significant change in the zoning
district classification of an adjacent piece of property; or



         b.   The governing board has adopted a plan that changes
public policy regarding how the property affected by the proposed change
would be developed; or,



         c.   Construction or expansion of a road, water line,
sewer line, or other such facility has occurred to serve the property and can
comfortably accommodate the proposed zoning classification; or,



         d.   There has been some other extraordinary change in
conditions or circumstances, outside the control of the petitioner, which
justifies the waiver of said time restrictions. This, however, shall not
include a change in property ownership; or,



         e.   The proposed zoning map amendment is substantially
different from that which was previously proposed and, if such amendment were
approved, would effect a change substantially different than that contained
in the previous application.



      5.   Notwithstanding the above, any amendment petition
initiated by the Planning Board or governing board shall be exempt from any
time restraints on resubmittal.



   G.   Petition Resubmittal



   If the City Council has denied an application for the rezoning of a
parcel of land to a general zoning district, a similar application shall not
be accepted by the Administrator for a period of one year following the date
of such denial.  Notwithstanding, the Administrator may accept such
submittal within said one-year period if he makes any one of the findings
listed in Section 14.1.3(F)(3) of this Ordinance.



14.1.4   Zoning Map Amendment Process-Parallel Conditional Use Districts



   A.   Purpose



      1.   The parallel conditional use rezoning process allows
particular uses to be established, but only in accordance with a specific
development project. Some land uses are of such a nature or scale that they
have significant impacts on both the immediate surrounding area and/or on the
entire community that cannot be predetermined and controlled by general
district standards or the criteria governing planned developments. There are
also circumstances in which a general district designation allowing such a
use by right would not be appropriate for a particular property even though
the use itself could, if properly planned, be appropriate for the property
and be consistent with the objectives of these regulations, the adopted land
use plan, and other plans for the physical development of the City as adopted
by the governing board. The review process established herein provides for
the accommodation of such uses by a reclassification of property into a
"parallel conditional use" district.



      2.   The "parallel conditional use" district (CUD) approval
process is established to address those situations when a particular use may
be acceptable but the general zoning districts which would allow that use
would not be acceptable. Such zones may be approved or changed only by the
City Council in accordance with the regulations contained herein. 



      3.   In order for a property owner to secure privileges for
developing property under the parallel conditional use process, a two-step
process must be followed. The property must first be rezoned by the City
Council to a parallel conditional use district. The City Council must then
approve a conditional use permit which may contain fair and reasonable
conditions to assure conformance with this Ordinance, other plans adopted by
the governing board and compatibility with surrounding properties. Any use
permitted under this process also must conform to the development regulations
for the corresponding general zoning district. Thus, if a property were
rezoned to a "CUD-R-1 " conditional use district, and a conditional use
permit approved authorizing the development of a particular use, that use
must (1) be a use allowed in the R-1 district, (2) meet all dimensional,
screening and related requirements of the R-1 district, (3) meet any listed
supplemental requirements for that particular use in the R-1 zoning district,
and (4) meet any additional requirements placed by the City Council on the
conditional use permit.



      4.   Rezoning of property to any CUD parallel conditional use
district is a voluntary procedure on the part of the property owner and is
intended for firm development proposals. A CUD district application may not
be initiated by a governing board, Planning Board, administrative staff, or a
third party with no ownership interest in the subject property. 
Furthermore, it is not intended or suited for securing early zoning for a
tentative proposal that may be undertaken at some unknown time in the future.



      5.   In order for a property owner to secure development
privileges in accordance with the regulations contained in this Chapter, the
City Council must first rezone said property to a particular CUD district and
then must issue a conditional use permit allowing the particular development
to take place.



   B.   Reclassification Required



   No CUD parallel conditional use district and associated conditional use
permit shall be established until the owner of the property in question (or
his authorized agent) proposing the district has submitted an application for
the rezoning of the property and issuance of a conditional use permit, and
City Council has approved such application in accordance with the procedures
stated herein.



   C.   Plans and Other Information to Accompany Petition



      1.   Every application for the rezoning of property to a
parallel conditional use district and issuance of a conditional use permit
shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale containing all of the
information outlined in Section 5.11.2(B) of this Ordinance.



      2.   Furthermore, no application shall be considered complete
unless it is accompanied by a fee, in accordance with a fee schedule approved
by the governing board for the submittal of an application for rezoning to a
CUD district and issuance of a conditional use permit. Said fee shall be
waived for any application submitted by any official or agency acting on
behalf of the City of Bessemer City, or the State of North Carolina



   D.   Public Hearing Notification Requirements



      1.   Before any property is rezoned to a CUD district and a
conditional use permit issued, a public hearing must be held by the governing
board after the Planning Board has had an opportunity to review and make a
recommendation on the application.  Any complete application shall be
submitted to the Administrator at least 30 days prior to the public
hearing.  This shall be sufficient time period for the staff to review the
application and produce a staff report and to ensure that all applicable
notification requirements can be met.  Notification of the public hearing
shall be as follows:



         a.   A notice shall be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in Bessemer City once a week, for two successive weeks,
the first notice to be published not less than ten (10) days nor more than
twenty-five (25) days prior to the date established for the joint public
hearing.



         b.   The Administrator shall post at least one notice on
the site proposed for rezoning or an adjacent public street or highway
right-of-way at least ten (10) days prior to the governing board public
hearing.  Where multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map
amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the City
shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested
persons.  Such notice shall state the nature of the public hearing and its
date, time, and location at which it is to be held. The notice shall be
removed only after final action has been taken on the matter. In lieu of any
or all of this information to be contained on this posted notice, the notice
may give a phone number where interested parties may call during normal
business hours to get further information on the conditional use permit
requested.



         c.   A notice of the public hearing shall be sent by
first class mail by the Administrator to the applicant and to all adjacent
property owners at least ten (10) days prior to the governing board’s
public hearing.



   E.   Planning Board Review/Action



      1.   The Planning Board shall have thirty (30) days to make a
recommendation on the proposed change, said thirty (30) days being measured
from the date of initial referral of the request by staff to the Planning
Board.  If a recommendation is not made during said time period, the
application shall be forwarded to the governing board without a
recommendation.  Any such Planning Board recommendation shall be accompanied
by statements that address (1) whether the proposed map amendment is
consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted by the governing
board and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable, and (2) other
matters that the Planning Board deems appropriate and (3) why it considers
the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest.



   F.   Final Action



      1.   Conduct of Public Hearing



         a.   Once a recommendation has been received from the
Planning Board, or the thirty (30) day Planning Board review period has
expired, the governing board may conduct a public hearing on the proposed
zoning change and issuance of a conditional use permit.  The governing board
public hearing shall be held in a quasi-judicial manner. Once opened, the
public hearing can be continued and action taken at a later date.  Any such
public hearing shall consider information relating both to the zoning of a
piece of property to a CUD district and the issuance of a conditional use
permit.  That notwithstanding, the decision to rezone property to a CUD
district shall be legislative in nature. The decision to issue a conditional
use permit shall be quasi-judicial in nature. In approving an application for
a conditional use permit, the governing board may attach fair and reasonable
conditions to the approval that are mutually approved by the local government
and the petitioner.  Such conditions shall be limited to those that address
the conformance of the development and use of the site to City ordinances and
an officially adopted comprehensive or other plan and those that address the
impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the development or use of the
site.  The petitioner will have a reasonable opportunity to consider and
respond to any additional requirements prior to approval or denial by the
governing board.  In no instance shall any of these conditions be less
restrictive than any requirements that would pertain to that particular
development found in the zoning district in which the property is located.
Such conditions may exceed any performance criteria or minimum requirements
listed elsewhere in this Ordinance that pertain to that development. 
Statements that (1) analyze whether the rezoning is consistent with an
adopted comprehensive plan and any other officially adopted plan, and (2)
other matters that the City Council deems appropriate and (3) why it
considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest shall
be prepared and accompany each final decision relative to the CUD rezoning
request.



      2.   The Following Information Applies to All Local Governments



         a.   The applicant has the burden of producing
competent, material and substantial evidence tending to establish the facts
and conditions that Subsections (2) and (4) below require. If any person
submits competent, material, and substantial evidence allegedly contrary to
any of the facts or conditions listed in Subsections (1) and (3) below, the
burden of proof for overcoming such evidence shall rest with the applicant.



         b.   The City Council may only issue a conditional use
permit if it has evaluated an application and found each of the following
findings of fact in the affirmative:



            i.   The use will not materially endanger the
public health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to
plan;



            ii.   The use meets all required conditions and
specifications;



            iii.   The use will not substantially injure the
value of adjoining or abutting property unless the use is a public necessity;
and



            iv.   The location and character of use, if
developed according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony
with the area in which it is to be located and will be in general conformity
with the adopted Land Use Plan and other plans for the physical development
of the City as adopted by the governing board.



   G.   Additional Review Criteria/Findings of Fact



   In addition to the findings of fact listed immediately above certain
uses require the consideration of additional review criteria. Before a
conditional use permit may be issued for said uses, the findings of fact
listed immediately above along with those pertaining to that individual use
must each be found in the affirmative.



   H.   Effect of Approval



      1.   If a petition for a CUD rezoning and conditional use
permit are both approved as herein provided, the district that is
established, the approved conditional use permit, and all conditions that may
have been attached to the approval are binding on the property as an
amendment to the Zoning Map. Subsequent development on the property in
question shall be in accordance with the standards for the approved CUD
district, the conditional use permit, and any conditions attached to the
approval. The applicant shall be responsible for all expenses involved in the
dedication of rights-of-way when such dedication is a condition of the
conditional use permit.



      2.   Whenever a petition for CUD zoning has been approved and
a conditional use permit granted, the applicant shall file and record a copy
of the conditional use permit in the office of the Register of Deeds for
Gaston County.  The conditional use permit shall become null and void unless
it was recorded in such office within 180 days of the granting of the
conditional use permit.  No zoning permit shall be issued on such property
unless evidence of such recordation has been first presented to the
Administrator.



      3.   Following the approval of the petition for a parallel
conditional use district, the subject property shall be identified on the
zoning map by the appropriate district designation. A parallel conditional
use district shall be identified by a general zoning district classification
preceded by the letters CUD (for example, "CUD-RSF").



   I.   Binding Effect



      1.   Changes to the approved CUD petition or to the conditions
attached to the approval shall be treated the same as an amendment to the
zoning map and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures contained
in Section 14.1.4.



      2.   Except as provided below, any conditional use permit
herein authorized shall be perpetually binding to the property included in
such permit unless subsequently changed or amended by the City Council
However, minor changes in the detail of the approved application may be
approved by the Administrator. A “minor change” to the approved
conditional use permit shall be deemed to be a change which:



         a.   Will not alter the basic relationship of the
proposed development to adjacent property;



         b.   Will not increase the gross floor area of any
nonresidential use by the smaller of ten percent or 10,000 square feet (NOTE:
Such limitations shall be cumulative and shall be based on the gross floor
area of the conditional use permit as originally approved);



         c.   Will not decrease the off-street parking ratio
below the minimum number of parking spaces required by this chapter or reduce
the yards provided at the periphery of the site by the lesser of ten (10)
feet or ten (10) percent;



         d.   Will not increase the height of any structure to
the extent that additional usable floor space could be added;



         e.   Will not result in an increase in the number of
dwelling units constructed; or



         f.   Will not alter the uses permitted.



   J.   Period of Validity of Conditional Use Permit



      1.   Unless the City Council issues a conditional use permit
which either is specifically exempt from any time constraints or has some
other specified time period for implementation, the applicant must secure a
valid building permit (or certificate of occupancy) within twenty-four (24)
months from date of issuance of the conditional use permit. If a building
permit or certificate of occupancy is not issued at the end of said time
period, the conditional use permit shall automatically expire and shall be
deemed rescinded. Such rescission shall not occur if the applicant has
secured the vesting of a site development plan (in accordance with Section
5.10) for a period of greater than two years.



      2.   If the conditional use permit is rescinded, the City
shall immediately take steps to rezone the property to a general zoning
district.



14.1.5   Zoning Map Amendments- Conditional Use Districts (CD)



   A.   Application



      1.   Petitioning for a CD zoning district is a voluntary
procedure and can be initiated only by the owner(s) of the property (ies) in
question or by his/her authorized agent.  Every application for the rezoning
of property to a CD district shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to
scale containing all of the information outlined in Section 5.11.2 (B) of
this Ordinance.  The Administrator shall schedule a meeting with the
applicant, prior to any public involvement meeting (PIM) being advertised
and/or held to review the rezoning application and site plan to make sure
that it meets, at a minimum, all minimum requirements of this Ordinance.



      2.   Furthermore, no application shall be considered complete
unless it is accompanied by a fee, in accordance with a fee schedule approved
by the governing board for the submittal of an application for rezoning to a
CD district. Said fee shall be waived for any application submitted by any
official or agency acting on behalf of the City of Bessemer City, or the
State of North Carolina



      3.   The Administrator may require the petitioner to submit
more than one copy of the rezoning application in order to have enough copies
available to circulate to other government agencies for review and comment. 
When dealing with the conditional zoning district process, it may be
desirable to request additional information in order to evaluate a proposed
use and its relationship to the surrounding area. Therefore, the Planning
Board and/or City Council may request additional information [in addition to
that required above], as they deem necessary.



   B.   Public Involvement Meeting



      1.   Once the requisite number of complete applications has
been submitted to the Administrator and the requisite fees have been paid,
and prior to the public hearing on the rezoning request, a Public Involvement
Meeting (PIM) shall be scheduled and held.  Such meetings shall occur prior
to any recommendation by the Planning Board and approval by the City
Council.  The PIM is designed to provide a framework for creating a shared
vision with community involvement directed by the applicant in accordance
with the following requirements:



         a.   The applicant shall provide an agenda, schedule,
location, and list of participants such as landscape architects, engineers,
etc. to answer questions from citizens and service providers for the PIM in
cooperation with the Administrator.



         b.   It is recommended that the PIM last 2-4 hours,
depending on the nature of the proposed development and its location.  A
minimum of one (1) hour should be scheduled during normal business hours to
allow service providers and other public agencies (such as public works
officials, NCDOT, NCDENR, QNRC, etc) to participate as needed and to allow
for citizens to drop in at a convenient time throughout the period. It is
recommended (but not mandated) that this portion of the PIM take place at the
proposed development site.  In addition, a second one (1) hour (minimum)
meeting should be scheduled at a conveniently located meeting site agreed
upon by the applicant and the Administrator. 



   Notwithstanding the above, a PIM may last for different amounts of
time, depending on the nature of the development, its location, and the
number of parties involved and/or attending the meeting. 



         c.   Notice of the PIM shall at a minimum, be given as
follows:



            i.   A public notice shall be sent by the City to
a newspaper having general circulation in Bessemer City not less than 10 days
nor more than twenty-five (25) days prior to the date of the PIM.



            ii.   A notice shall be sent by first class mail
by the City to the applicant and to the owners of all properties that lie in
Gaston County within one-thousand (1,000) feet as measured from the exterior
boundaries of the proposed development and which are located within an
annexation agreement boundary that such City/Town has with any other
municipality.  The applicant shall furnish the City with mailing labels that
depict the names and addresses of the owners of all properties within said
one-thousand (1000) foot area.  Such notice shall be sent not less than ten
(10) days prior to the date of the PIM.  The notification shall contain
information regarding the PIM time and location(s) as well as a general
description of the proposal.



            iii.   With respect to Subsection (c) above, the
applicant shall reimburse the City for all postage and advertising expenses
incurred for such notifications.



            iv.   A PIM notification sign shall be posted by
the City in a conspicuous place at the property not less than 10 days prior
to the PIM.  The sign shall indicate date, time, and location(s) of the
PIM.  In lieu of any or all of this information to be contained on this
posted notice, the notice may give a phone number where interested parties
may call during normal business hours to get further information on the PIM.



         d.   The Administrator will keep notes of comments
received during the PIM.  A summary of the comments made shall be included
in any staff report prepared by the Administrator relative to the rezoning
request.



      2.   Following the PIM, the applicant shall have the
opportunity to make changes to the application to take into account
information and comments received.  One or more revised copies of the
application shall be submitted to the Administrator for review.  No
additional fee shall be required to be paid for making such changes provided
the Administrator receives the revised application within thirty (30) days
following the PIM.  If a revised application is not received during said
thirty (30) day period, the Administrator shall review the original
application submitted.



   C.   Administrator Approval



   The Administrator shall have up to thirty (30) days following any
revision of the application to make comments.  If the Administrator forwards
no comments to the applicant by the end of any such thirty-day period, the
application shall be submitted to the Planning Board for their review without
any further comment.



   D.   Plans and Other Information to Accompany Petition



      1.   Every application for the rezoning of property to a CD
district shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale containing all
of the information outlined in Section 5.11.2(B) of this Ordinance.



      2.   Furthermore, no application shall be considered complete
unless it is accompanied by a fee, in accordance with a fee schedule approved
by the governing board for the submittal of an application for rezoning to a
CD district. Said fee shall be waived for any application submitted by any
official or agency acting on behalf of the City of Bessemer City, or the
State of North Carolina



   E.   Public Hearing Notification Requirements



      1.   Any public hearing notice published or mailed shall state
the nature of the public hearing, the date, time, and place at which the
hearing is to occur, and who to call and/or see for more information.



      2.   Before any property is rezoned to a CD district, the
governing board must hold a public hearing after the public information
meeting has been concluded and after the Planning Board has had an
opportunity to review and make a recommendation on the application.  Any
complete application shall be submitted to the Administrator at least 30 days
prior to the public hearing.  This shall be sufficient time period for the
staff to review the application and produce a staff report and to ensure that
all applicable notification requirements can be met.  Notification of the
public hearing shall be as follows:



         a.   A notice shall be published in a newspaper having
general circulation in Bessemer City once a week, for two successive weeks;
the first notice to be published not less than ten (10) days or more than
twenty-five (25) days prior to the date established for the governing board
public hearing.



         b.   The Administrator shall post at least one notice on
the site proposed for rezoning or an adjacent public street or highway
right-of-way at least ten (10) days prior to the governing board public
hearing.  Where multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map
amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not required, but the City
shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested
persons.  Such notice shall state the nature of the public hearing and its
date, time, and location at which it is to be held. The notice shall be
removed only after final action has been taken on the matter. In lieu of any
or all of this information to be contained on this posted notice, the notice
may give a phone number where interested parties may call during normal
business hours to get further information on the conditional use permit
requested.



         c.   A notice of the public hearing shall be sent by
first class mail by the Administrator to the applicant and to all adjacent
property owners at least ten (10) days prior to the governing board’s
public hearing.



   D.   Planning Board Review



   The Planning Board shall have thirty (30) days to make a recommendation
on the proposed change, said thirty (30) days being measured from the date of
the date of initial referral of the amendment by staff to the Planning
Board.  If a recommendation is not made during said time period, the
application shall be forwarded to the governing board without a
recommendation.  Any such Planning Board recommendation shall be accompanied
by statements that address (1) whether the proposed amendment is consistent
with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted by the governing board and
any other officially adopted plan that is applicable, and (2) other matters
that the Planning Board deems appropriate and (3) why it considers the action
taken to be reasonable and in the public interest.



   E.   Action by City Council



   Conditional zoning district decisions are a legislative process subject
to judicial review using the same procedures and standard of review as apply
to general use district zoning decisions.  Once the public hearing has been
held, the City Council shall take action on the petition.  The public
hearing, once opened, can be continued to a later date and action take at
that time.  The governing board shall have the authority to:



      1.   Approve the application as submitted.



      2.   Deny approval of the application



      3.   Approve the application with modifications that are
mutually agreed to by the applicant and the governing board.  Such
conditions shall be in compliance with Subsection F herein.



      4.   Submit the application to the Planning Board for further
study.  The Planning Board shall have up to thirty (30) days from the date
of such submission to make a report to the governing board.  If no report is
issued, the governing board can take final action on the petition.  The
governing board reserves the right to schedule and advertise a new public
hearing based on the Planning Board’s report.



   F.   Conditions to Approval of Petition



   In approving a petition for the reclassification of a piece of property
to a CD district, the Planning Board may recommend, and the governing board
may require that reasonable and appropriate conditions be attached to
approval of the petition.  Such conditions shall be limited to those that
address the conformance of the development and use of the site to City
ordinances and an officially adopted comprehensive or other plan and those
that address the impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the
development or use of the site.  The petitioner will have a reasonable
opportunity to consider and respond to any additional requirements prior to
approval or denial by the governing board.  In no instance shall any of
these conditions be less restrictive than any requirements that would
otherwise pertain to that particular development if it were located in a
general or parallel conditional use zoning district. Such conditions may
exceed any performance criteria or minimum requirements listed elsewhere in
this Ordinance that pertain to that development.  Statements that (1)
analyze whether the rezoning is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan
and any other officially adopted plan, and (2) other matters that the City
Council deems appropriate and (3) why it considers the action taken to be
reasonable and in the public interest shall be prepared and accompany each
final decision relative to the CD rezoning request



   G.   Effect of Approval; Zoning Map Designation



   If a petition for a CD district is approved, the development and use of
the property shall be governed by the predetermined ordinance requirements
applicable to the district’s zoning classification, the approved site plan
for the district, and any additional approved rules, regulations, and
conditions, all of which shall constitute the zoning regulations for the
approved district and are binding on the property as an amendment to these
regulations and to the Zoning Map.  Following the approval of the petition
for a CD district, the subject property shall be identified on the Zoning Map
by the appropriate district designation followed by the letters CD (i.e.,
CD-R-1.)  Notwithstanding, the Administrator may make minor changes (per
Section 14.1.4(I)(2) to the approved site plan administratively without
necessitating a need to rezone the property to a different conditional
district classification.



Section 14.2   Changes to the Ordinance Text



14.2.1   Authority



   Upon compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the City Council
shall have the authority to amend the text of this Ordinance.



14.2.2   Initiation Of A Text Amendment



   Any proposed amendment to the text of this Ordinance may be initiated
by the governing board, Planning Board, by any owner of a legal or equitable
interest in a piece of property located within the geographical boundaries of
this Ordinance, by a local government agency, or by any other person in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein.



14.2.3   Filing of Petitions; Determination of Completeness



   Any petition to amend the text of this Ordinance shall be made using an
application form prescribed by the Administrator and accompanied by a fee in
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the governing board.  Said
application form, signed by the applicant and accompanied by the requisite
fee shall be filed with the Administrator. Said application fee shall be
waived for any petition submitted by any official or agency acting on behalf
of the City of Bessemer City, or the State of North Carolina.  No
application shall otherwise be considered complete unless accompanied at the
time of submittal by said fee.  The completed application shall contain,
among other things, a reference to the specific section, subsection,
paragraph or item proposed for change, as well as the wording of the proposed
change, and the reasons therefore.



14.2.4    Submittal and Notification Requirements



   A.       In order for an amendment to the text of this Ordinance
to be made, a public hearing must be held by the governing board after the
Planning Board has had an opportunity to review and make a recommendation on
the application.  Any complete application shall be submitted to the
Administrator at least 30 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting
of the Planning Board.  This shall be sufficient time period for the staff
to review the application and produce a staff report and to ensure that all
applicable notification requirements can be met.  Notification of the
governing board public hearing shall be as follows:



      1.   A notice shall be published in a newspaper having general
circulation in Bessemer City once a week, for two successive weeks, the first
notice to be published not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty-five
(25) days prior to the date of the governing board public hearing.



   B.   Any public hearing notice published shall state the nature of
the public hearing(s), the date, time, and place at which the hearing(s) is
to occur, and who to call and/or see for more information.



14.2.5   Planning Board Action



   A.   The Planning Board shall have at least thirty (30) days from
the date the application was first referred to it by the Administrator to
forward a written recommendation to the governing board.  If a
recommendation is not made during said time period, the application shall be
forwarded to the governing board without a recommendation from the Planning
Board.  Statements that (1) analyze whether the amendment is consistent with
an adopted comprehensive plan and any other officially adopted plan, and (2)
other matters that the Planning Board deems appropriate and (3) why it
considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest shall
be prepared and accompany each recommendation relative to the text amendment
request.



   B.   A Planning Board recommendation shall be in one of the
following manners:



      1.   Grant the amendment as requested; or



      2.   Grant the amendment with changes as recommended; or



      3.   Reject the amendment.



14.2.6   Governing Board Action



   A.   Once the governing board public hearing has been closed, the
governing board shall render a decision on the petition.  The decision of
the governing board shall be in the form of any of the various options listed
in Section 14.2.5 above.  Statements that (1) analyze whether the amendment
is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and any other officially
adopted plan, and (2) other matters that the governing board deems
appropriate and (3) why it considers the action taken to be reasonable and in
the public interest shall be prepared and accompany each final decision
relative to the text amendment request.  Furthermore, the governing board
shall have the authority to make additional amendments to the text change
request, based on the proceedings of the public hearing so long as such
changes are in keeping with the spirit and intent of the originally requested
amendment.  Alternately, the governing board may send the application back
to the Planning Board for further study and consideration.  (NOTE: Such
resubmittal by the governing board to the Planning Board may occur not more
than one time for any text amendment request.) If a resubmittal to the
Planning Board occurs, the Planning Board shall hear the case and have an
additional thirty (30) day period (from the date of re-referral by the
governing board) to resubmit a recommendation to the governing board.



Section 14.3   Protest Petition 



   A.   A written petition of protest may be filed with reference to
any proposed change to the Zoning Map.  In case of a protest against such
change, an amendment shall not become effective except by three-fourths (3/4)
vote of the City Council.  For purposes of this subsection, vacant positions
on the City Council and members who are excused from voting shall not be
considered ‘members of council’ for calculation of the requisite
three-fourths vote. To qualify as a protest, the petition must be signed by
the owners of either (i) twenty percent (20%) or more of the area included in
the proposed change or (ii) five percent (5%) of a 100-foot-wide buffer
extending along the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area
proposed to be rezoned. A street right-of-way shall not be considered in
computing the 100-foot buffer area as long as that street right-of-way is 100
feet wide or less. When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the
proposed zoning map amendment, the 100-foot buffer shall be measured from the
property line of that parcel. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the
City may rely on the Gaston County tax listing to determine the 'owners' of
potentially qualifying areas. A person who has signed a protest petition may
withdraw his or her name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on
the proposed zoning amendment.  Only those protest petitions that meet the
qualifying standards set forth in this Ordinance at the time of the vote on
the zoning amendment shall trigger the supermajority voting requirement.



   B.   This section shall not be applicable to: (1) any amendment
which initially zones property added to the territorial coverage of this
Ordinance as a result of annexation or otherwise; (2) an amendment to an
adopted conditional use district (CUD) or conditional district (CD) if the
amendment does not change the types of uses that are permitted within such
district or increase the approved density for residential development, or
increase the total approved size of nonresidential development, or reduce the
size of any buffers or screening approved for the CD or CUD district.



   C.   No protest against any change in or amendment to the text of
this Ordinance or to the Official Zoning Map shall be valid or become
effective unless it is in the form of a written petition actually bearing the
signatures of the requisite number of property owners and states that the
signers do protest the proposed change or amendment, and unless it is
received by the City clerk in sufficient time to allow the City at least two
normal working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before
the date established for a public hearing on the proposed change or amendment
to determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition. The governing
board may require by ordinance that all such protest petitions be on a form
prescribed and furnished by the City, and such form may prescribe any
reasonable information deemed necessary to permit the City to determine the
sufficiency and accuracy of the petition.



CHAPTER 15:
VIOLATIONS AND REMEDIES



15.1   Violations



15.2   Continuing Violations



15.3   Enforcement Powers



15.4   Remedies



15.5   Notice of Violation Procedures



15.6   Penalties for Violations



15.7   Other Powers



15.8   Remedies Cumulative



Section 15.1   Violations



   A.   It shall be deemed unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct,
alter, maintain, expand, move or use any building, structure or sign or
engage in development or subdivision of land contrary to the provisions of
this Ordinance.  Whenever, by the provisions of this Ordinance, the
performance of any act is required, or the performance of any act is
prohibited, or whenever any regulation or limitation is imposed on the use of
land and water, or on the erection of a structure, a failure to comply with
such provision(s) shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance.



   B.   Any of the following shall be a violation of this Ordinance and
shall be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this Ordinance:



      1.   To place any use, structure, or sign upon land that is
subject to this Ordinance without all of the approvals required by this
Ordinance.



      2.   To subdivide land in violation of this Ordinance or
transfer or sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of an
unapproved plat. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring
land does not exempt the transaction from being deemed as a violation.



      3.   To erect, construct, reconstruct, remodel, alter,
maintain, move, or use any building, structure or sign, or to engage in
development or subdivision of any land contrary to any zoning, subdivision,
sign or other regulation contained in this Ordinance.



      4.   To engage in any subdividing, development, construction,
remodeling or other activity of any nature upon land that is subject to this
Ordinance without all of the approvals required by this Ordinance.



      5.   To engage in any development, use, construction,
remodeling, or other activity of any nature in any way inconsistent with the
terms and conditions of any permit, approval, certificate or other form of
authorization required in order to engage in such activity.



      6.   To violate, by act or omission or otherwise, any term,
condition, or qualification placed by a decision-making body upon any permit
or other form of authorization.



      7.   To reduce or diminish any lot area so that the setbacks
or open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed by this Ordinance.



      8.   To increase the intensity of use of any land or
structure, except in accordance with the procedural requirements and
substantive standards of this Ordinance.



      9.   To remove, deface, obscure or otherwise interfere with
any notice required by this Ordinance.



      10.   To otherwise undertake any development or to establish
any use in a manner which does not comply with this Ordinance.



Section 15.2   Continuing Violations



   Each day that a violation remains uncorrected after receiving proper
notice shall constitute a separate violation of this Ordinance.  Any
violation of the zoning, subdivision, or other provisions as contained in
this Ordinance that were in effect prior to the adoption of this Ordinance
shall continue to be a violation under this Ordinance, and shall be subject
to the penalties and enforcement procedures described in Section 15.4 of this
Ordinance, unless the use, development, construction, or other activity
complies with the provisions of this Ordinance.  Nothing in this Ordinance
shall prohibit the continuation of previous enforcement actions, undertaken
by a local government pursuant to previous and valid ordinances and laws.



Section 15.3   Enforcement Powers



   A.   The Administrator shall enforce this Ordinance as shall any
other persons so designated by the governing board to enforce the provisions
of this Ordinance.  Any and all persons so designated to enforce this
Ordinance shall be referred to as the “Administrator.”



   B.   Failure to comply with any provision of this Ordinance is
hereby declared unlawful. The following remedies and enforcement powers may
be used to administer and enforce this Ordinance:



      1.   The Administrator may withhold all permits or approvals
if there is:



         a.   A repeat violation of this Ordinance; or



         b.   There is a condition or qualification of approval
granted by a permit issuing body that has not been met.



      2.   The Administrator may deny or withhold all permits,
certificates, or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or
improvements owned or being developed by a person who owns, developed or
otherwise caused an uncorrected repeat violation of this Ordinance. This
provision shall apply whether or not the property for which the permit or
other approval is sought is the property in violation.



      3.   Any zoning permit or other form of authorization
stipulated under this Ordinance may be revoked for any reason set forth in
NCGS 160A-422.



      4.   With or without revoking permits, the Administrator may
order that work be stopped on any land or structure on any land on which
there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this Ordinance or of a
permit or other form of authorization issued hereunder, in accordance with
the power to stop work pursuant to NCGS 160A-421. The stop work order shall
be in writing, directed to the person doing the work, and shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons thereof, and the conditions
under which the work may be resumed.



      5.   Where a violation of this Ordinance involves a failure to
comply with approved plans or conditions to which the approval of such plans
was made subject, the Administrator may, upon notice to the applicant and
other known parties in interest (including any holders of building permits
affected), revoke the plan approval pursuant to NCG.S 160A-422. Any permit
mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local law may also
be revoked.



      6.   The Administrator may impose remedies as called for in
Sections 15.4-15.8 of this Ordinance.



Section 15.4   Remedies



   A.   This Ordinance may be enforced by any means or any remedy
provided for in NCGS 160A-175 and 160A-389. An action for injunction of any
illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance, or sale of land may be prosecuted
by the Administrator pursuant to NCGS 160A-375.



   B.   Moreover, the Administrator and the governing board shall have
such other remedies as are, and as may be from time to time, provided by
North Carolina law for the violation of zoning, subdivision, sign or related
Ordinance provisions.



Section 15.5   Notice of Violation Procedures



   The following notice procedures shall be used to enforce the provisions
of this Ordinance.  Notwithstanding, depending on the nature of the
violation, the Administrator shall have the authority to bypass the ensuing
“notice of violation” provisions and immediately serve the alleged
violator or property owner with a penalty, as called for in Section 15.6. 
In addition, the City may also use any other means at its disposal to address
the violation.  Additional provisions for addressing violations within the
FH Floodplain Overlay District are found in Section 6.6.2.1(D)(3) and the WS
Water Supply Watershed Overlay District in Section 6.6.2.2(F).



   A.   Whenever the Administrator has reason to believe that a person
is violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any plan, order, or
condition that has been approved, issued, or imposed pursuant to this
Ordinance, the Administrator shall notify that person of this violation. 
Notice of violation shall normally be provided to the property owner, but the
City reserves the right to send a notice of violation to any other person who
can be contacted and has an identifiable relationship to the violation and/or
owner.  Any notices of violation issued by the City shall be sent by
certified return receipt mail or equivalent delivery method that clearly
identifies the date the violation was received.



   B.   Except as provided above, no penalty shall be assessed pursuant
to this Ordinance unless and until the person alleged to be in violation has
been notified of the violation in accordance with this section, with the
exception of violation of a stop work order or illegal placement of a sign in
a public street right-of-way.  In the case of stop work orders, violations
shall be subject the violator to immediate imposition of a penalty.  In the
case of a sign illegally placed in a public street right-of-way, the
Administrator shall be authorized to remove such sign immediately without
notice.



   C.   The notice of violation shall describe the violation, shall
identify the provision(s) of this Ordinance that are alleged as having been
violated, shall specify what actions must be taken to correct the violation,
shall direct the person to correct the violation within a specified period of
time, and shall warn that more severe measures may be brought against the
person if he/she fails to take appropriate and timely actions to cure or
correct the violation.  The notice shall also state that the alleged
violator or property owner shall have a period of up to fifteen (15) days
from the date the notice was received to either correct the situation or
appeal the Administrator’s decision to the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with Section 5.13 of this Ordinance.  Depending on the nature of
the violation, the Administrator may grant one or more extension of time to
cure or correct said violation.  Such extension of time shall not be granted
unless the alleged violator or property owner can demonstrate to the
Administrator that the violation can not be cured or corrected within the
time period specified in the notice of violation due to extraordinary
circumstances or to circumstances beyond the control of the alleged violator
or property owner. 



   D.   If the violation is corrected or cured within the time period
specified by the Administrator, the City shall take no further action against
the alleged violator.



   E.   Once the warning period has expired, the Administrator may
issue civil citations pursuant to Section 15.6. 



   F.   The Administrator may deny or withhold all permits,
certificates, or other form of authorization to use or develop any land,
structure, or improvement until an alleged violation and, where applicable,
associated civil penalty associated with that violation are properly
corrected and/or addressed.  This provision shall apply whether or not the
current owner applicant for the permit or other approval is responsible for
the violation.



   G.   Any development permit, certificate or other form of
authorization required under this Ordinance may be revoked by the
Administrator if it is determined that:



      1.   There is a departure from the approved plans,
specifications, or  conditions as required under such permit.



      2.   The development permits was procured by false
representation.



      3.   The development permit was issued in error.



      4.   There is a violation of any provision of this Ordinance
as it relates to such permit.



   H.   The Administrator shall serve written notice of such revocation
upon the alleged violator or property owner.



Section 15.6   Penalties for Violation



   If following the issue of a “notice of violation” as called for in
Section 15.5, the Administrator determines that the alleged violation has not
been cured or corrected during the stated “warning period”, he shall have
the authority to issue a penalty as outlined herein.



15.6.1   First Offense



   Any violation occurring once within a (12) month period shall be
considered a first offense. A notice of violation shall be issued by the
Administrator and shall provide for a warning period as provided for in
Section 15.5(C) to correct the violation.  Upon the expiration of the
warning period, the violator shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00
for each day that the violation remains on the property. Should a violation
continue to exist by the twenty-first (21st) day past the date of original
notification, the City may seek to recover the penalty together with all
costs by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice in the nature
of a suit to collect a debt. The collection of a penalty pursuant hereto
shall not foreclose further proceedings for penalties coming due subsequent
to the date of the filing of a prior proceeding. The provisions of this
section may also be enforced through any other appropriate remedies as
prescribed in Section 15.4 herein.



15.6.2   Repeat Offense



   Any violation of reoccurring on the same property by the same violator
more than once within a (12)-month period shall be considered a repeat
offense provided the reoccurrence is a violation of the same Section of this
Ordinance. A notice of violation shall be issued by the Administrator and
shall have an immediate civil penalty of $300.00. No warning period shall be
granted since this provision applies only to violations that occur more than
once in a (12)-month period and proper notice was given for the initial
violation as prescribed under Section 15.5.  For each day the repeat
violation remains, the violator shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$300.00. Should a violation continue to exist by the seventh (7th) day after
such notification, the City may seek to recover the penalty together with all
costs by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice in the nature
of a suit to collect a debt. The collection of a penalty pursuant hereto
shall not foreclose further proceedings for penalties coming due subsequent
to the date of the filing of a prior proceeding. The provisions of this
section may also be enforced through any other appropriate remedies as
prescribed in Section 15.4 herein.



Section 15.7   Other Powers



   In addition to the enforcement powers specified in this Section, the
governing board may exercise any and all enforcement powers granted by North
Carolina law.



Section 15.8   Remedies Cumulative



   The remedies and enforcement powers established in this Chapter shall
be cumulative, and the City may exercise them in any order.



PARALLEL REFERENCES



 

Resolution Passed
 
Section




3-8-2010
 
5.3


3-8-2010
 
8.1.5


11-8-2010
 
6.1, 6.2.1, 6.3, 6.3.1, 6.3.2, 6.3.3, 6.3.4, 6.4, 7.1, 7.2, 7.9.1, 7.9.2,
7.9.3, 7.9.4


1-10-2011
 
10.11


6-13-2011
 
7.4


6-13-2011
 
Table 7.1-1


6-13-2011
 
Table 7.1-2(D)


6-13-2011
 
Table 7.1-3(A)


6-13-2011
 
9.4.1, 9.4.2


7-9-2012
 
2.7, Table 7.1-1, 8.4.23, Table 10.5.1


12-10-2012
 
Table 7.1-1


12-10-2012
 
Table 7.1-1


4-14-2014
 
4.5.6, 4.5.11, 5.13.1, 5.13.2, 5.14.5


4-14-2014
 
7.9.2


6-8-2015
 
2.7, Table 7.1-1, 8.2.37


 
 
 




 



 

Ordinance Passed
 
Section


9-12-2016
 
10.3


8-13-2018
 
4.4, 4.4.1 - 4.4.4, 4.5, 4.5.1 - 4.5.10


 
 
 



 


