
Elkin, NC Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF ELKIN, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation adopted and/or effective through 5-14-2018; and
State legislation current through North Carolina Legislative Service,
2017 Regular Session, Pamphlet #5



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF ELKIN, NORTH
CAROLINA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWN OF ELKIN DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES



WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Elkin
are currently not arranged and classified in an easily accessed format; and



WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of North Carolina empower
and authorize the Town of Elkin to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and



WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Elkin has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town
of Elkin of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance
in book form; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary that this ordinance take effect at an early date.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWN OF
ELKIN OF NORTH CAROLINA:



Section 1. The general ordinances of the Town of Elkin as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Elkin, North Carolina."



Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:



   CHARTER



Chapter



   TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty



   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



30.   Board of Commissioners



31.   Town Officials



32.   Town Organizations and Departments



33.   Emergency Management



34.   Purchasing



35.   Finances and Taxation



   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



50.   General Regulations



51.   Garbage Collection



52.   Water Regulations



   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



70.   General Traffic Regulations



71.   Operation of Vehicles



72.   Stopping, Standing and Parking



73.   Traffic Schedules



74.   Parking Schedules



   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



90.   Recreation and Park Facilities



91.   Abandoned, Junked and Hazardous Motor Vehicles



92.   Airport Operations; Standards



93.   Fire Protection and Prevention



94.   Animals



95.   Nuisances, Sanitation and Environment



96.   Streets and Sidewalks



97.   Cemeteries



98.   Alarm Systems



99.   Public Library



   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



110.   Business Licensing



111.   Begging, Soliciting and Transient Merchants



112.   Residential Sales



113.   Cable Television Services



   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



130.   General Offenses



   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



150.   Building Codes



151.   Flood Damage Protection



152.   Subdivisions



153.   Zoning



   TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   (Reserved)



   PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to North Carolina General Statutes



References to 1940 Code



References to Resolutions



References to Ordinances



INDEX



Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds
or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal
property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to
public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public
places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the
Code.



Section 4. Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Board of Commissioners, and the Clerk of the Town of
Elkin is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.



Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of
the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.



Section 6. This ordinance will aid in the preservation of the peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the people of the Town of Elkin, and shall take
effect at the earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Elkin on this
fifth day of August, 2013.



Lestine H. Hutchens /s/     



Lestine H. Hutchens, Mayor



ATTEST:



Catherine C. Tilley /s/ 



Catherine C. Tilley, Town Clerk



CHARTER



Section




   Sec. 1.   [Revision and consolidation of Charter]





Article I.  Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries





      1.1   Incorporation





      1.2   Powers





      1.3   Corporate limits





Article II.  Governing Body





      2.1   Mayor and Board of Commissioners





      2.2   Board; composition; terms of office





      2.3   Mayor; term of office; duties





      2.4   Mayor pro tempore





      2.5   Meetings





      2.6   Voting requirements; quorum





      2.7   Compensation; qualifications for office; vacancies





Article III.  Elections





      3.1   Regular municipal elections





      3.2   Election of Commissioners





      3.3   Election of the Mayor





      3.4   Special elections and referendums





Article IV.  Organization and Administration





      4.1   Form of government





      4.2   Town Manager





      4.3   Town Clerk





      4.4   Tax Collector





      4.5   Town Attorney





      4.6   Other administrative officers and employees





Article V.  Special Provisions





      5.1   Acceptance of conveyance of real property for liens





      5.2   Elkin employees’ retirement





      5.3   Elkin Firemen’s Supplemental Retirement Fund





      5.4   Alcoholic Beverage Control stores




   Sec. 2.   [Purpose]



   Sec. 3.   [Acts not repealed or affected]



   Sec. 3.1.   [Section 3 of Chapter 730, Session Laws of 1987 not
repealed]



   Sec. 4.   [Acts expressly repealed]



   Sec. 5.   [Chapter 691, Session Laws of 1971, amended]



   Sec. 6   [Chapter 806, Session Laws of 1965, amended]



   Sec. 7.   [Mayor and Commissioners to serve remainder of terms]



   Sec. 8.   [Repealed provisions not affected]



   Sec. 9.   [Other provisions to continue]



   Sec. 10.   [Actions or proceedings not affected]



   Sec. 11.   [Severability]



   Sec. 12.   [Amendments of General Statutes]



   Sec. 13.   [Effective]



   GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA



   1987 SESSION



   CHAPTER 740



   SENATE BILL 423



   AN ACT TO REVISE AND CONSOLIDATE THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF ELKIN.



The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:



   Section 1.  [Revision and consolidation of Charter].  The Charter of
the Town of Elkin is hereby revised and consolidated to read as follows:



   “THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF ELKIN



“ARTICLE I.  INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS AND BOUNDARIES



   “Section 1.1.  Incorporation.  The Town of Elkin, North Carolina,
and the inhabitants thereof, is a municipal body politic and corporate, under
the name of the ‘Town of Elkin,’ hereinafter at times referred to as the
‘Town.’



   “Section 1.2.  Powers.  The Town has and may excercise all of the
powers, duties, rights, privileges and immunities conferred upon the Town of
Elkin specifically by this Charter or upon municipal corporations by general
law. The term ‘general law’ is employed herein as defined in G.S. 160A-1.



   “Section 1.3.  Corporate Limits.  The corporate limits are those
existing at the time of ratification of this Charter, as set forth on the
official map of the Town, and as they may be altered from time to time in
accordance with law. An official map of the Town, showing the current
boundaries, shall be maintained permanently in the office of the Town Clerk
and shall be available for public inspection. Immediately upon alteration of
the corporate limits made pursuant to law, the appropriate changes to the
official map shall be made, and copies shall be filed in the office of the
Secretary of State, either the Surry or Wilkes County Register of Deeds, and
the appropriate boards of elections.



Editor’s note:



   Chapter 525 of the Session Laws of 1989, S.B. 480, “An Act to Annex
Certain Described Territory to the Town of Elkin,” ratified and effective
June 30, 1989, amends these limits and is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in full herein.



“ARTICLE II. GOVERNING BODY



   “Section 2.1.  Mayor and Board of Commissioners.  The Mayor and
Board of Commissioners, hereinafter referred to as the ‘Board,’ shall be
the governing body of the Town.



   “Section 2.2.  Board; Composition; Terms of Office.  The Board is
composed of five Commissioners elected by all the qualified voters of the
Town for staggered terms of four years.



   “Section 2.3.  Mayor; Term of Office; Duties.  The Mayor is elected
by all the qualified voters of the Town for a term of four years; is the
official head of the Town government and presides at meetings of the Board;
has the right to vote only when there is an equal division on any question or
matter before the Board; and exercises the powers and duties conferred by law
or as directed by the Board.



   “Section 2.4.  Mayor Pro Tempore.  The Board elects one of its
members as Mayor Pro Tempore to perform the duties of the Mayor during his or
her absence or disability, in accordance with general law. The Mayor Pro
Tempore serves in such capacity until the organizational meeting following
the next regular municipal election, despite the contrary provisions of G.S.
160A-70.



   “Section 2.5.  Meetings.  The Board sets a suitable time and place
for its regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings may be held as
provided by general law.



   “Section 2.6.  Voting Requirements; Quorum.  Official actions of
the Board and all votes are taken in accordance with applicable provisions of
general law, particularly G.S. 160A-75. The quorum provisions of G.S. 160A-74
apply.



   “Section 2.7.  Compensation; Qualifications for Office; Vacancies. 
The compensation and qualifications of the Mayor and Commissioners are in
accordance with general law. Vacancies that occur in any elective office of
the Town are filled by appointment of the Board as provided in G.S. 160A-63.



“ARTICLE III. ELECTIONS



   “Section 3.1.  Regular Municipal Elections.  Regular municipal
elections shall be held in each even-numbered year in accordance with the
uniform municipal elections laws of North Carolina. Elections are conducted
on a nonpartisan basis and the results determined using the plurality method
as provided in G.S. 163-292.



   “Section 3.2.  Election of Commissioners.  Two or three
Commissioners are elected in each regular municipal election, as the
respective terms expire.



   “Section 3.3.  Election of the Mayor.  A Mayor is elected in the
regular municipal election each four years.



   “Section 3.4.  Special Elections and Referendums.  Special
elections and referendums may be held only as provided by general law or
applicable local acts of the General Assembly.



Editor’s note:



   Section 3.1, Regular Municipal Elections, was amended by House Bill
1045, ratified 6-26-2014 and effective 1-1-2015.



“ARTICLE IV. ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION



   “Section 4.1.  Form of Government.  The Town operates under the
council-manager form of government, in accordance with G.S. Chapter 160A,
Article 7, Part 2.



   “Section 4.2.  Town Manager.  The Board appoints a Town Manager who
is responsible for the administration of all departments of the Town
government. The Town Manager has all the powers and duties conferred by
general law, except as expressly limited by the provisions of this Charter.



   “Section 4.3.  Town Clerk.  The Board appoints a Town Clerk to keep
a journal of the proceedings of the Board; to maintain official records and
documents; to give notice of meetings; and to perform such other duties
required by law or as the Board may direct.



   “Section 4.4.  Tax Collector.  The Board appoints a Tax Collector
to collect all taxes owed to the Town, subject to general law, this Charter
and Town ordinances.



   “Section 4.5.  Town Attorney.  The Board appoints a Town Attorney
licensed to practice law in North Carolina. The Town Attorney represents the
Town, advises Town officials and performs other duties required by law or as
the Board may direct.



   “Section 4.6.  Other Administrative Officers and Employees.  The
Board may provide for appointment of other officers and employees by the Town
Manager, and may organize the Town government as deemed appropriate,
including combining any of the offices provided for in this Article, subject
to the requirements of general law.



“ARTICLE V. SPECIAL PROVISIONS



   “Section 5.1.  Acceptance of Conveyance of Real Property for
Liens.  Despite G.S. 105-357(a) and other provisions of law, the Board, by
resolution, may accept conveyance of real property on which the Town has a
lien, in full or partial satisfaction of the tax, special assessment, or
other charge or liability underlying the lien, including the expense of
transferring title to the Town. The resolution shall order the lien cancelled
of record, or reduced to the extent the liability underlying the lien is
satisfied. Acceptance of conveyance by the Town does not affect a lien on the
property held by a person or entity other than the Town. Property conveyed to
the Town under this section may be disposed of subsequently by the Town under
any of the methods provided in Article 12 of G.S. Chapter 160A, including
private sale under G.S. 160A-267.



   “Section 5.2.  Elkin Employees’ Retirement.  The Town of Elkin
participates in the N.C. Local Governmental Employees’ Retirement System,
as provided in Article 3 of G.S. Chapter 128, and under the rules and
regulations of the Retirement Systems Division of the Office of State
Treasurer. Any member employed by the Town may purchase additional creditable
service in the System for employment with the Town before establishment of
the Town’s previous private retirement plan. Such additional creditable
service may be purchased as if the provisions of G.S. 135-4(t) were
applicable, but without the necessity of completing 10 years of membership
service. The purchase must be made within one year after the member first
becomes eligible to make such purchase.



   “Section 5.3.  Elkin Firemen’s Supplemental Retirement Fund.  The
Elkin Firemen’s Supplemental Retirement Fund shall continue as authorized
by Chapter 391, Session Laws of 1971, as amended.



   “Section 5.4.  Alcoholic Beverage Control Stores.  Alcoholic
beverage control stores shall operate in the Town of Elkin as provided in
Chapter 806, Session Laws of 1965, as amended.”



   Sec. 2.  [Purpose.]  The purpose of this act is to revise the Charter
of the Town of Elkin and to consolidate certain acts concerning the property,
affairs and government of the Town. It is intended to continue without
interruption those provisions of prior acts which are expressly consolidated
into this act, so that all rights and liabilities which have accrued are
preserved and may be enforced.



   Sec. 3.  [Acts not repealed or affected.]  This act does not repeal
or affect any acts concerning the property, affairs of government of public
schools, or acts validating official actions, proceeds, contracts or
obligations of any kind.



   Sec. 3.1.  [Section 3 of Chapter 730, Session Laws of 1987 not
repealed.]  This act does not repeal Section 3 of Chapter 730, Session Laws
of 1987.



   Sec. 4.  [Acts expressly repealed.]  All acts in conflict with this
act are repealed. The following acts, having served the purposes for which
they were enacted or having been consolidated into this act, are expressly
repealed:



   Chapter 86, Private Laws of 1889



   Chapter 368, Private Laws of 1893



   Chapter 88, Private Laws of 1901



   Chapter 119, Private Laws of 1903 



   Chapter 5, Private Laws of 1911 



   Chapter 44, Private Laws of 1911 



   Chapter 25, Private Laws of 1913 



   Chapter 282, Private Laws of 1913 



   Chapter 186, Private Laws of 1929



   Chapter 348, Public-Local Laws of 1931, except for Section 6



   Chapter 138, Private Laws of 1931



   Chapter 520, Public-Local Laws of 1933



   Chapter 71, Public-Local Laws of 1933



   Chapter 30, Private Laws of 1933



   Chapter 82, Private Laws of 1933, except for Section 1



   Chapter 142, Private Laws of 1933



   Chapter 258, Private Laws of 1935



   Chapter 190, Private Laws of 1935



   Chapter 150, Public-Local Laws of 1937, as to Elkin



   Chapter 77, Public-Local Laws of 1937



   Chapter 178, Public-Local Laws of 1937



   Chapter 297, Public Laws of 1939



   Chapter 436, Public-Local Laws of 1941



   Chapter 710, Session Laws of 1943, as to Elkin



   Chapter 865, Session Laws of 1951



   Chapter 832, Session Laws of 1951



   Chapter 128, Session Laws of 1957



   Chapter 127, Session Laws of 1957



   Chapter 822, Session Laws of 1963



   Chapter 96, Session Laws of 1967



   Chapter 712, Session Laws of 1969



   Chapter 254, Session Laws of 1973



   Chapter 175, Session Laws of 1981



   Chapter 742, Session Laws of 1985



   Chapter 992, Session Laws of 1985 (Regular Session 1986)



   Sec. 5.  [Chapter 691, Session Laws of 1971, amended.]  Chapter 391,
Session Laws of 1971, is amended in the third line of Section 4 by deleting
“G.S. 159-28.1” and substituting “G.S. 159-30”.



   Sec. 6.  [Chapter 806, Session Laws of 1965, amended.]  Chapter 806,
Session Laws of 1965, as amended, is deemed amended further to change each
reference to Chapter 18 of the General Statutes or to particular sections or
Articles of the former Chapter 18 of the General Statutes to refer to the
provisions of the current Chapter 18B of the General Statutes which most
closely correspond.



   Sec. 7.  [Mayor and Commissioners to serve remainder of terms.]  The
Mayor and Commissioners serving on the date of ratification of this act shall
serve for the remainder of their terms. Thereafter, those offices shall be
filled by election as provided in Articles II and III of the Charter.



   Sec. 8.  [Repealed provisions not affected.] This act does not affect
any rights or interests which arose under any provisions repealed by this act.



   Sec. 9.  [Other provisions to continue.]  All existing ordinances,
resolutions and other provisions of the Town of Elkin not inconsistent with
the provisions of this act shall continue in effect until repealed or amended.



   Sec. 10.  [Actions or proceedings not affected.]  No action or
proceeding pending on the effective date of this act by or against the Town
or any of its departments or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected
by this act.



   Sec. 11.  [Severability.]  If any provision or application of this
act is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid
provisions or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are
declared to be severable.



   Sec. 12.  [Amendments of General Statutes.]  Whenever a reference is
made in this act to a particular provision of the General Statutes, and such
provision is later amended, superseded or recodified, the reference shall be
deemed amended to refer to the amended section of the General Statutes, or to
the General Statute section which most clearly corresponds to the statutory
provision which is superseded or recodified.



   Sec. 13.  [Effective.]  This act is effective upon ratification.



   In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 7th day
of August, 1987.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time; computing time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Elkin shall be
designated as the “Code of Elkin, North Carolina” and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CHARTER.  The Charter of the Town of Elkin, North Carolina.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This  municipal
code as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters
or sections.



      COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last
day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.



      COUNCIL.  The Mayor and Council, or governing body, of the Town
of Elkin, North Carolina.



      COUNTY.  The Counties of Surry and Wilkes, North Carolina.



      GENDER.  Words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter.



      GOVERNOR.  The Governor of North Carolina.



      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES.  The latest edition of the GENERAL
STATUTES of North Carolina, as amended.



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to three or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a
majority of persons or officers.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      NUMBER.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and the
plural includes the singular number.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.  Whenever certain hours are named in
this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in this town.



      OWNER.  Applied to any property, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of the property.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property except real
property.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK.  Any portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of North Carolina.



      STREET.  Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches
thereto within the town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way
between abutting property lines.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading. Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT.  When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land,
whether alone or with others.



      TENSE.  Words used in the past or present tense include the
future as well as the past and present.



      TOWN.  The Town of Elkin, in the Counties of Surry and Wilkes,
North Carolina.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  One designated by the Council.



Statutory reference:



   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by
an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall
be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:



      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before
the effective date of this code;



      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the town or any evidence of the town’s indebtedness;



      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;



      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or
employee;



      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the town;



      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or
public way in the town;



      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;



      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for
a stated or limited term;



      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and
assessing taxes therefor;



      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;



      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision
plat;



      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of
the town;



      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the
town not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;



      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included
herein;



      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades
in the town; and/or



      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.



   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance
or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is
repealed by this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at
length herein.



Statutory reference:



   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take
effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection, or any portion thereof,
the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by omission from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or
omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the
town.



   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made
by amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in language substantially similar to the following: “Section      
        of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Elkin, North Carolina, is
hereby amended as follows: [. . .] .” The new provisions shall then be set
out in full as desired.



   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be
added, language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The
Code of Ordinances, Town of Elkin, North Carolina, is hereby amended by
adding a section, to be numbered               , which section shall
read as follows: [. . .] .” The new section shall then be set out in full
as desired.



   (D)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number,
as the case may be.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example: 



(Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: 



(G.S. § 160A-11)



      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



   § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of
ordinances of the town, the prior code section number shall be indicated in
the history by “(1940 Code, §       ).” The history notes following
sections and the references scattered throughout the code are not part of the
code, but are merely for the benefit for the user of the code.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a fine not
to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, and each day that any of
the provisions of this code of ordinances are violated shall constitute a
separate offense.



(G.S. § 14-4(a))



Statutory reference:



   Provisions concerning enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



      31.   TOWN OFFICIALS



      32.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS AND DEPARTMENTS



      33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      34.   PURCHASING



      35.   FINANCES AND TAXATION



      36.   DONATION AND SPONSORSHIP



CHAPTER 30:  BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



Section




Governing Body




   30.01   Governing body



   30.02   Compensation; bond; oaths




Meetings




   30.15   Regular meetings



   30.16   Special meetings



   30.17   Business of special meeting



   30.18   Adjourned meetings



   30.19   No quorum; Mayor may summon absentees



   30.20   Quorum



   30.21   The Mayor shall preside



   30.22   Mayor pro tem



   30.23   Mayor may vote, when




Board Business




   30.35   Order of business



   30.36   Robert’s Rules of Order



   30.37   Motions having precedence



   30.38   Election by ballot



   30.39   Vacancies




Ordinances




   30.55   Ordinances in writing



   30.56   Ordinances to be confined to one subject



   30.57   How adopted



   30.58   When effective



   30.59   Official copy



GOVERNING BODY



§ 30.01  GOVERNING BODY.



   The governing body of the Town of Elkin shall consist of a Mayor and
five Commissioners.



(1940 Code, Ch. B, Art. I, § 1)



§ 30.02  COMPENSATION; BOND; OATHS.



   The Board of Commissioners shall have power to fix compensation and
bonds for all officers and employees as it may deem necessary and in
conformity with the statutes. The Board shall also assume responsibility for
the administration of all oaths where required by statutes, and where an oath
may be advisable.



(1940 Code, Ch. B, Art. I, § 2)



MEETINGS



§ 30.15  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The Board of Commissioners shall hold a regular meeting on the second
Monday in each month.



(Res. eff. 5-4-1998)



§ 30.16  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   The Mayor, or a majority of the Board, may call special meetings, by
first giving written notice thereof to every member of the Board, setting
forth the time and date of meeting and specifying what matters will be
considered.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 2)



§ 30.17  BUSINESS OF SPECIAL MEETING.



   At any special meeting, the Board shall consider or act only on those
subjects that were mentioned in the notice of the special meeting.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 3)



§ 30.18  ADJOURNED MEETINGS.



   Any regular or special meeting of the Board of Commissioners, and any
adjourned meeting thereof, may adjourn to any time prior to the next regular
meeting date as may be fixed by the Board of Commissioners.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 4)



§ 30.19  NO QUORUM; MAYOR MAY SUMMON ABSENTEES.



   If a quorum of the Board of Commissioners be not present, the Mayor may
summon absentees, and if a quorum fails to attend, the meeting shall stand
adjourned to a time as may be agreed upon by a majority of the members
present. The Mayor shall have authority to require attendance of members.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 5)



§ 30.20  QUORUM.



   A majority of the Board of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 6)



§ 30.21  THE MAYOR SHALL PRESIDE.



   The Mayor or, in his or her absence, the Mayor pro tem shall preside at
all meetings of the Board.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 7)



§ 30.22  MAYOR PRO TEM.



   In the absence of the Mayor, the Board of Commissioners shall appoint
one of its members to act as Mayor pro tem. He or she shall have all the
authority and power conferred upon the Mayor.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 8)



§ 30.23  MAYOR MAY VOTE, WHEN.



   When there is an equal division upon any question, the Mayor shall
determine the matter by his or her vote. He or she shall vote in no other
case.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 9)



BOARD BUSINESS



§ 30.35  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The order of business at all regular meetings of the Board of
Commissioners shall be stated in the Town of Elkin Board of Commissioners
Rules of Procure.



(Ord. adopted 4-14-2008)



§ 30.36  ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER.



   Except where otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the procedure of
business of the Board of Commissioners shall be governed by Robert’s Rules
of Order.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 11)



§ 30.37  MOTIONS HAVING PRECEDENCE.



   If the Board direct any matter to be the special business of a future
meeting, the same shall have precedence over all other business at the
meeting.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 12)



§ 30.38  ELECTION BY BALLOT.



   All elections by the Board of Commissioners shall be by ballot, and a
majority of the votes of all members present shall be necessary for an
election; provided, that this requirement of voting by ballot may be
suspended by a majority vote of the Commissioners.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 14)



§ 30.39  VACANCIES.



   If a vacancy due to death, disability or resignation shall occur on the
Board, a successor shall be elected by a majority vote of the Board to fill
the unexpired term.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 20)



ORDINANCES



§ 30.55  ORDINANCES IN WRITING.



   All ordinances shall be submitted in writing and signed by the
Commissioner introducing same.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 16)



§ 30.56  ORDINANCES TO BE CONFINED TO ONE SUBJECT.



   All ordinances shall be confined to one subject, excepting ordinances
for appropriations.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 17)



§ 30.57  HOW ADOPTED.



   No ordinance shall be passed finally on the date on which it is
introduced, unless by two-thirds vote of those present. No ordinance making a
grant, renewal or extension, whatever its kind or nature, of any franchise or
special privilege shall be passed until voted on at two regular meetings, and
no grant, renewal or extension shall be made otherwise than by ordinance.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 18)



§ 30.58  WHEN EFFECTIVE.



   All ordinances passed by the Board of Commissioners shall be in force
and effect on the day of their passage unless otherwise provided.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 21)



§ 30.59  OFFICIAL COPY.



   A true copy of any ordinance or resolution, which has been duly enacted
by the Board of Commissioners, and has been signed by the Town Clerk, and the
official seal of the town has been attached thereto, shall be known and
recognized as the official copy.



(1940 Code, Ch. A, § 23)



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN OFFICIALS



Section




Board of Commissioners




   31.01   Election



   31.02   Claims against the town



   31.03   Officers not pecuniarily interested in contracts




Mayor




   31.20   Election



   31.21   Powers



   31.22   Presiding Officer



BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



§ 31.01  ELECTION.



   A Board of Commissioners composed of five members shall be elected to
hold office for staggered terms of four years.



(1940 Code, Ch. B, Art. II, § 1)



§ 31.02  CLAIMS AGAINST THE TOWN.



   All claims against the town shall be presented and allowed in the name
of the party with whom the Board or its authorized agent has contracted, and
no person shall do or perform a service, or contract a debt against the town,
without first being so authorized by the Board or the Mayor.



(1940 Code, Ch. B, Art. III, § 4)



§ 31.03  OFFICE NOT PECUNIARILY INTERESTED IN CONTRACTS.



   No Commissioner or other officer of the town shall be directly or
indirectly interested in the contracts for work to be done for the town or be
pecuniarily interested in any contract with the town.



(1940 Code, Ch. B, Art. III, § 5)



MAYOR



§ 31.20  ELECTION.



   The Mayor shall be elected in accordance with provisions made and
provided for by statute and Town of Elkin Board of Commissioners Rules of
Procedure, which election is to be held every four years.



(1940 Code, Ch. B, Art. II, § 1)  (Ord. eff. 4-14-2008)



§ 31.21  POWERS.



   The Mayor shall have and exercise all powers of a member of the Board
of Commissioners except the right to vote, which right is permissible only in
case of a tie.



(1940 Code, Ch. B, Art. II, § 2)



§ 31.22  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The Mayor shall preside over the meetings of the Board of Commissioners.



(1940 Code, Ch. B, Art. II, § 3)



CHAPTER 32:  TOWN ORGANIZATIONS AND DEPARTMENTS



Section



General Rules of Procedure for Town Advisory Boards



   32.01   Purpose; adoption date



   32.02   Name of organization



   32.03   Purpose and duties



   32.04   Membership



   32.05   Officers and duties



   32.06   Meetings



   32.07   Subcommittees



   32.08   Compensation



   32.09   Other provisions



   32.10   Amendments



   32.11   Signatures



   32.12   Complaints against advisory board members



GENERAL RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR TOWN ADVISORY BOARDS



§ 32.01  PURPOSE; ADOPTION DATE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide the standard
operating procedures to be used by the Town Board for the acceptance of
names, selection and appointment of citizens interested in serving on
advisory boards. This subchapter will serve as a guideline to the Town Board
and the information contained herein will be utilized by all advisory boards
in the creations and/or revisions of their bylaws. Advisory boards created by
the Town Board may include language or procedures in addition to the
standards established herein, as long as the language or procedure does not
violate any state or federal law or conflict with the guidelines herein
established.



   (B)   This subchapter was adopted on September 13, 2010.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.02  NAME OF ORGANIZATION.



    Each advisory board will state the official name of the organization
in the bylaws. In addition, the Town Hall will be listed as the principal
office of the advisory board with all postal mail being sent to the attention
of the town staff liaison. All records to include minutes of meetings will be
kept in the Town Hall.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.03  PURPOSE AND DUTIES.



    Each advisory board will establish its purpose and duties to be
performed as a board, to include any statutory requirements set forth by
state and/or federal law. At no time will any advisory board have
administrative or operational duties or responsibilities (i.e., supervision
of employees).



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.04  MEMBERSHIP.



    Each advisory board will state the number of members it has along with
any extraterritorial jurisdiction members and/or alternate members.



   (A)   Appointment.  All applicants desiring an initial appointment
to an advisory board must fill out an application which is available at Town
Hall, on the town’s website, or by contacting the staff liaison for that
advisory board. The application will be turned in to the staff liaison for
the advisory board and will in turn be presented at the next scheduled
advisory board meeting in which a vacancy exists. If more applications are
presented than existing vacancies, the advisory board will conduct an open
vote. The applicant(s) receiving the highest number of votes will be
forwarded to the Town Board for final approval. No applicant applying for a
vacancy on an advisory board will serve in an official capacity until his or
her approval has been finalized by the Town Board.



   (B)   Reappointment.  Members may succeed themselves with no limit
on the number of terms one may serve on the advisory board. Stronger
consideration will be granted to those applicants seeking reappointment to
the advisory board, provided their past performance is satisfactory as
defined by the Town Board. Recommendation for reappointment will be forwarded
to the Town Board by the advisory board.



   (C)   Terms of office.  Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws,
advisory board members will serve three-year staggered terms. Members will
continue to serve until their successors have been appointed by the Town
Board. All advisory board members serve at the pleasure of the Town Board and
can be removed at any time with a majority vote by the Town Board.



   (D)   Qualifications for membership.  Unless otherwise noted on the
summary sheet, all applicants must reside in the corporate limits of the
town. Extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) members (Planning Board/Board of
Adjustment) must reside in the ETJ of the town. Some advisory boards may have
a specialized purpose which makes it somewhat difficult to fill all seats of
the board. In these situations, the Town Board may allow appointments for
persons having a sincere interest in the purpose of the advisory board or
possessing special skills which uniquely qualify him or her for appointment
to that advisory board. In addition, citizens are limited to serving on no
more than two advisory boards concurrently.



   (E)   Vacancies.  If a vacancy occurs prior to the end of a full
term, the Town Board will fill the vacancy, with the recommendation of the
advisory board, for the remainder of the term. If a vacancy occurs due to a
member not seeking reappointment, the advisory board will consider
application(s) for the vacancy and forward its recommendation for appointment
to the Town Board, who will make the final approval. In the case of ETJ
appointments, the appointment process will have an additional step in which
the Town Board’s recommendation for appointment will go to the Surry County
Board of Commissioners for final approval. Vacancies will be posted on the
town website and staff will work with the local media to announce vacancies,
as well. The Town Manager will update the contact list for advisory boards
each month showing current or upcoming vacancies and include this report on
the agenda for the regular scheduled monthly Town Board meeting.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.05  OFFICERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Each advisory board will elect its own officers from among its
membership. No Town Board approval is needed for this action. The election of
officers will occur at the first official meeting after July 1 of each year.
The term of office will be for one year, and all officers may succeed
themselves.



   (B)   (1)   Chair.  A chair will be elected from the membership.
The role of the chair includes but is not limited to the following: calling
and presiding over all meetings, developing the agenda with the staff
liaison, signing all minutes, appoint any subcommittees, call
special/emergency meetings, shall decide on all points of order and
procedure, and shall vote on all matters brought before the advisory board.



      (2)   Vice chair.  A vice chair will be elected from the
membership. The role of the vice chair will be to fulfill all of the duties
of the chair in his or her absence.



      (3)   Secretary.  A secretary will be appointed by the chair.
The role of the secretary includes but is not limited to the following:
recording minutes for all meetings of the advisory board, preparing minutes
for the agenda packet, getting chair’s signature on all approved minutes,
coordinating with the staff liaison for the safe-keeping of all minutes and
other documents of the advisory board, coordinate with the staff liaison on
all communication for the advisory board, and perform any other secretarial
duties as needed.



      (4)   Staff liaison.  A town staff member will serve as the
staff liaison to all advisory boards in an ex officio, non-voting role. The
role of the staff liaison includes but is not limited to the following:
advise the chair and advisory board on matters pertinent to the discussions
of the advisory board, ensure the approved minutes are sent to the Town
Manager for dissemination to the Town Board each month, may serve as the
secretary for the advisory board upon concurrence with the Town Manager, work
with the chair on agenda preparation, and perform other duties as needed for
the advisory board.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.06  MEETINGS.



    Each advisory board will develop clear and concise language on how
their meetings are to be conducted.



   (A)   Regular meetings.  All advisory boards will meet at least
quarterly. The specific date, time and location of its regularly scheduled
meeting will be prescribed in the advisory board’s bylaws.



   (B)   Special meetings.  All special and/or emergency meetings
conducted by the advisory board will be called in accordance with G.S.
Chapter 143, Article 33C. Proper notice will be given for the meetings and in
addition, notice will be provided to and published in Town Hall by way of the
advisory board’s staff liaison. The chair, vice chair or two or more
members of the advisory board may call for a special or emergency meeting.



   (C)   Open meetings.  All regular, special, emergency and recessed
meetings are open to the public in accordance with G.S. Chapter 143, Article
33C. Closed session meetings may be called in accordance with G.S. §
143-318.11 and only for the listed reason(s) contained therein. Public input
is encouraged at all official meetings of the advisory board.



   (D)   Quorum.  A quorum shall be defined as a majority of the
membership of the advisory board minus vacancies. A quorum is necessary for
an official meeting to be held as defined by G.S. § 143-318.10(d).



   (E)   Minutes.  All advisory boards will take minutes as defined by
G.S. § 143-318.10(e). Minutes will be adopted by the advisory board and will
be signed by the chair upon adoption. Official (signed) minutes will be
housed and maintained at the Town Hall by the advisory board’s staff
liaison. All official (signed) minutes will be available for inspection by
the public. In addition, the advisory board’s staff liaison will provide a
copy of the official (signed) minutes to the Town Manager who will provide
the minutes to the Town Board on a monthly basis. This will serve the purpose
of ensuring the Town Board is well informed on the discussions and activities
of its advisory boards.



   (F)   Voting and conflict of interest.  All advisory board members
will vote on every item which has been brought to a vote unless they have
been excused from voting due to a direct personal or financial interest. If a
member feels he or she has a conflict of interest on a matter, the advisory
board by a majority vote may excuse the member from voting and having any
discussion on that issue. The minutes will reflect the member was excused by
the advisory board. If a member is absent from the meeting, he or she must be
officially excused by the advisory board. Otherwise, the absent member’s
vote will be recorded as an affirmative vote for whatever motions are made
during the meeting.



   (G)   Attendance.  Advisory board members, albeit volunteers, must
demonstrate a commitment to the advisory board on which they serve. Members
who miss three consecutive meetings or 50% or more of all official meetings
within a 12-month period conducted by the advisory board will be subject to
removal from the advisory board by the Town Board. The recommendation for
removal for the member may come from the advisory board to the Town Board, or
the Town Board may take action to remove the member without the
recommendation of the advisory board.



   (H)   Cancellation.  Whenever there is no business for the advisory
board to consider, the chair may cancel the regularly scheduled meeting after
all members have been notified along with the local media. Notice will be
posted on the door of the meeting place to inform the public of the meeting
cancellation.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.07  SUBCOMMITTEES.



   The chair of the advisory board shall have the right to establish
subcommittees, as needed, to further the work and goals of that advisory
board. Subcommittees will follow the provisions set forth in G.S. Chapter
143, Article 33C.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.08  COMPENSATION.



    Advisory board members will not be compensated for their time while
serving on the committee unless otherwise provided in the advisory board’s
bylaws. Reimbursement for expenses directly attributed to activities of the
committee, such as travel, attendance at out-of-town meetings and
reimbursements for purchases made as part of an ongoing project or event are
allowed, following the established reimbursement procedures for the town.
Expenses must have prior approval by the advisory board’s staff liaison or
Town Manager.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.09  OTHER PROVISIONS.



    The advisory board may include additional internal rules, policies or
other guidelines to its bylaws which are not inconsistent with this
established regulation. For example, the Board of Adjustment has a
quasi-judicial function which could be described. Also, the ABC Board has
statutory requirements/restrictions which could be placed here to distinguish
itself from other advisory boards. Likewise, if an advisory board has a
financial or fiduciary responsibility, the responsibilities of that advisory
board will be detailed in this section.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.10  AMENDMENTS.



   No amendments to an advisory board’s bylaws will be official unless
approved by the Town Board. Amendments can be recommended by the advisory
board to the Town Board for approval or can be dictated by the Town Board, as
needed.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.11  SIGNATURES.



   Bylaws will contain the signature and date of the advisory board chair
along with the signature and date of the Town Mayor. Bylaws not containing
both signatures and dates will not be official.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



§ 32.12  COMPLAINTS AGAINST ADVISORY BOARD MEMBERS.



   Advisory board members hold a position of trust and responsibility
within the community. Complaints made regarding the actions or behavior of an
advisory board member must be made in writing with as much detail as possible
regarding the circumstances of the complaint. Complaints will be reviewed by
the Town Manager and reported to the Town Board for further review and
action, as needed.



(Ord. eff. 9-13-2010)



CHAPTER 33:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   33.01   State of emergency; deemed to exist



   33.02   Proclamation by Mayor



   33.03   Powers of Mayor



   33.04   End of emergency



   33.05   Restrictions



   33.06   Extension, modification or repeal of state of emergency



   33.07   Violations



   33.08   Activities of people during emergency



 



   33.99   Penalty



§ 33.01  STATE OF EMERGENCY; DEEMED TO EXIST.



   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public
emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to
maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1970)



§ 33.02  PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.



   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the
town, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor of the
town is hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation
declaring to all persons the existence of the state of emergency, and, in
order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the
town, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter
authorized.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1970)



§ 33.03  POWERS OF MAYOR.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the
proclamation the application of all or any part of the restrictions to any
area specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the
town and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any
part of the restriction law enforcement officers, firefighters and other
public employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical
facilities; on-duty military personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty
employees of public broadcasting, and television broadcasting corporations
operated for profit; and any other classes of persons as may be essential to
the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the
safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the town.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1970)



§ 33.04  END OF EMERGENCY.



   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of the state of emergency or all or
any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant, or
when directed to do so by the governing body.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1970)



§ 33.05  RESTRICTIONS.



   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:



   (A)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one’s own premises
of explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and
prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;



   (B)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off
one’s own premises;



   (C)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil
or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon
any public property;



   (D)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naptha or
any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;



   (E)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley or
roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of
medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to sustain
the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof; or



   (F)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying-on of
any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment and any other places of public assembly.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1970)



§ 33.06  EXTENSION, MODIFICATION OR REPEAL OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed in any particular
during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the
issuance of a subsequent proclamation.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1970)



§ 33.07  VIOLATIONS.



   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed
by any proclamation authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1970)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.08  ACTIVITIES OF PEOPLE DURING EMERGENCY.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or other police officer in charge at the
scene of a parade, fire, accident, disturbance, crime scene, natural or
artificial disaster or emergency, or any large gathering of people, shall
have the authority to provide barricades, ropes, signs or other means of
restraint.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a law
enforcement officer, firefighter or other person having official business at
the scene, to cross a duly established police emergency line without express
permission of a police officer at the scene, or to remain within the area
bounded by the police emergency line after being ordered by a police officer
to leave.



(Ord. eff. 11-13-1970)  Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.99  PENALTY. 



   (A)   The violation of any provision of §§ 33.01 through 33.07, or
any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by
those sections, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by
a fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided
by G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)    Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
§ 33.08 shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1970; Ord. eff. 11-13-1970)



CHAPTER 34:  PURCHASING



Section




Delegating Authority to Purchase Apparatus, Supplies, Materials or Equipment




   34.01   Grant of authority



   34.02   Report



   34.03   Extent of authority



   34.04   No limitation of other authority



   34.05   Appropriation required



   34.06   Application of state law



   34.07   Authority; adoption




Procedures for Disposing of Personal Property Valued at Less Than $30,000




   34.20   Authorization of disposal of property



   34.21   Means of disposal



   34.22   Sold to whom



   34.23   Records



   34.24   Authority; adoption



DELEGATING AUTHORITY TO PURCHASE APPARATUS, SUPPLIES, MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT



§ 34.01  GRANT OF AUTHORITY.



   Subject to the restrictions and conditions hereinafter provided, when
purchasing apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment for use by the town,
in addition to such authority as may be provided by law and/or otherwise
delegated by the Board of Commissioners, the Town Manager shall have the
authority to:



   (A)   Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and/or specifications
setting forth a complete description of the item(s) to be purchased and the
characteristics, features and/or requirements therefor;



   (B)   Include, where appropriate, in specifications for the item(s)
to be purchased an opportunity for bidders to purchase as trade-in specified
personal property owned by the town;



   (C)   Advertise, or otherwise secure bids, for those item(s), if
required under applicable law;



   (D)   Award contracts for the purchase of the item(s) and, where
applicable, award contracts for the purchase of the item(s) and the sale of
trade-in property;



   (E)   Reject bids;



   (F)   Re-advertise to receive bids;



   (G)   Waive bid bond or deposit requirements;



   (H)   Waive performance and payment bond requirements; and



   (I)   Execute and deliver the purchase contract(s).



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.02  REPORT.



   At the first meeting of the Board of Commissioners following the award
of any contract(s) pursuant to this subchapter, the Town Manager shall submit
a report to the Board of Commissioners summarizing the bids received and the
contract(s) awarded. The report shall be included in the minutes of the
meeting at which it is received.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.03  EXTENT OF AUTHORITY.



   Except in cases of sole source purchases pursuant to G.S. § 143-129(e)
and cases of purchases from established contracts pursuant to G.S. §
143-129(g), unless otherwise provided by law, the provisions of this
subchapter shall apply to the purchase of apparatus, supplies, materials or
equipment requiring the estimated expenditure of municipal funds in an amount
not to exceed $90,000 for any one item or group of similar items.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.04  NO LIMITATION OF OTHER AUTHORITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter are not intended to limit, restrict
or revoke, in any manner, authority otherwise granted and/or delegated to the
Town Manager by statute, law or action of the Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.05  APPROPRIATION REQUIRED.



   No purchase shall be made by the Town Manager under authority of this
subchapter unless an appropriation for that purpose has been authorized in
the annual budget, or by supplemental appropriation or budget appropriation
amendment duly adopted by the Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.06  APPLICATION OF STATE LAW.



   In acting pursuant to the authority delegated by this subchapter, the
Town Manager shall comply with the requirements of G.S. Chapter 143, Article
8, as from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or
superseded, to the same extent as would have otherwise applied to the Board
of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.07  AUTHORITY; ADOPTION.



   (A)   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S.
§ 143-129.



   (B)   This subchapter was adopted on September 8, 2008.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



PROCEDURES FOR DISPOSING OF PERSONAL PROPERTY VALUED AT LESS THAN $30,000



§ 34.20  AUTHORIZATION OF DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY.



   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to dispose of any surplus
personal property owned by the town, whenever he or she determines, in his or
her discretion, that:



   (A)   The item or group of items has a fair market value of less
than $30,000;



   (B)   The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public
business; and



   (C)   Sound property management principles and financial
considerations indicate that the interests of the town would best be served
by disposing of the property.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.21  MEANS OF DISPOSAL.



   The Board of Commissioners may dispose of any surplus personal property
by any means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to yield the
highest attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including but
not limited to the methods of sale provided in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 12.
The sale may be public or private, and with or without notice and minimum
waiting period.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.22  SOLD TO WHOM.



   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the highest
offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to the town if
greater value may be obtained in that matter, and the Town Manager is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If no
offers are received within a reasonable time, the Town Manager may retain the
property, obtain any reasonable available salvage value, or cause it to be
disposed of as waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any
individual or organization except by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.23  RECORDS.



   The Town Manager shall keep a record of all property sold under
authority of this subchapter and that record shall generally describe the
property sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and
the amount of money or other consideration received for each sale or exchange.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



§ 34.24  AUTHORITY; ADOPTION.



   (A)   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S.
§ 160A-266(c).



   (B)   This subchapter was adopted on September 8, 2008.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



CHAPTER 35:  FINANCES AND TAXATION



Section




Taxation




   35.01   Authority to levy taxes



   35.02   Exclusive of bond taxes



Franchise Tax on Electric Power Companies



   35.15   Title



   35.16   Definitions



   35.17   Ratification of existing permits



   35.18   Levy of tax



   35.19   Period for which tax due



   35.20   Report and payment of tax



   35.21   Refunds



   35.22   Administration



   35.23   Confidentiality of records



   35.24   Provisions cumulative



   35.25   Service upon electric power companies



   35.26   Adoption date



 



   35.99   Penalty



TAXATION



§ 35.01  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAXES.



   In order to raise sufficient funds to pay the current expenses of the
town, the Board of Commissioners may each year levy and collect upon all the
real and personal property within the town an annual ad valorem tax not in
excess of $1.50 on each $100 in valuation of that property.



(1940 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 1)



§ 35.02  EXCLUSIVE OF BOND TAXES.



   The rate fixed for taxation in § 35.01 shall be exclusive of all rates
levied for the payment of principal and interest upon bonds or notes of the
town heretofore or hereafter issued, as to which taxes, bonds and notes there
shall be no limit as to rate and for the payment of which the Board of
Commissioners shall have authority to levy and collect upon all of the real
and personal property within the town an unlimited tax.



(1940 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 2)



FRANCHISE TAX ON ELECTRIC POWER COMPANIES



§ 35.15  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Town of Elkin
of North Carolina’s Franchise Tax on Electric Power Ordinance,” and shall
be codified as this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the definitions of words,
terms and phrases as set forth and/or applied in G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof. Reference to any
provision or provisions in the General Statutes shall include the same as may
be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded.



   CITY/TOWN/VILLAGE. The Town of Elkin.



   REVENUE ACT.  G.S. Chapter 105, Subchapter I.



   SECRETARY OF REVENUE.  The Secretary of Revenue of this state.



   STATE FRANCHISE TAX.  G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3.



   STATE FRANCHISE TAX ACT.  The franchise or privilege tax imposed on an
electric power company engaged in the business of furnishing electricity,
electric lights, current or power, as provided in G.S. Chapter 105, Article
3, entitled “Franchise Tax.”



   TAYPAYER(S).  Any electric power company liable for the taxes imposed
by this subchapter.



   TAX COLLECTOR.  The department of the town government or the official
agency of the state designated by law and authorized by law to administer the
collection of the tax herein levied.



   TOWN FRANCHISE TAX.  The franchise enacted by this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.17  RATIFICATION OF EXISTING PERMITS.



   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Secretary
of Revenue pursuant to the Revenue Act are for the purposes of this
subchapter hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu of any requirement
for an additional town permit for the same purpose.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.18  LEVY OF TAX.



   A franchise tax is hereby levied and imposed for the period(s)
designated in § 35.19 upon the electric power companies engaged in the
business of furnishing electricity, electric lights, current or power within
the corporate limits of the town. The tax shall be 3.09% of the companies’
taxable gross receipts from the business of furnishing electricity, electric
lights, current or power. It is intended that taxable gross receipts
hereunder shall be the same as those taxable under the State Franchise Tax
Act.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.19  PERIOD FOR WHICH TAX DUE.



   When a distribution to the town as required under the State Franchise
Tax Act shall not be made, the town franchise tax shall be levied for the
periods herein described. A period for which the tax shall be due shall begin
on the first day of the first calendar month following the month during which
a distribution under the State Franchise Tax Act was due, but not made, to
the town and shall continue from month to month until such time as a
distribution as required under the State Franchise Tax Act shall be made. The
town shall notify taxpayers within a reasonable time after a required
distribution is or is not made by the Secretary of Revenue.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.20  REPORT AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   The tax shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in the form
and manner provided for the payment of sales and use taxes pursuant to and in
accordance with G.S. § 105-164.16 as the same applies to a taxpayer who is
consistently liable for more than $100 but less than $10,000 a month. As
applicable to sales and use taxes, the taxpayer must file a return and pay
the taxes due on a monthly basis. The tax shall be due and payable when a
return is required to be filed.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.21  REFUNDS.



   Upon the resumption of distributions by the Secretary of Revenue as
required under the State Franchise Tax Act, a refund may be due to a taxpayer
as specified in this section. A refund in the amount indicated herein below
shall be due to a taxpayer within 30 days after presentation to the town by
the taxpayer of a written certification made by the Secretary of Revenue
stating that portion of the town’s percentage distribution amount of the
state franchise tax that was paid by the taxpayer and allocable to the
calendar quarter for which the most recent distribution was made. The amount
of a refund shall equal the portion of the percentage distribution amount
designated by the Secretary of Revenue.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.22  ADMINISTRATION.



   In addition to the provisions herein and to the extent that the same
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter, the levy and
collection of taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the
same manner as the State Franchise Tax Act as contained in G.S. Chapter
105,  Subchapter 1, Article 9.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.23  CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.



   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and files
concerning the administration of the town franchise tax is legislatively
recognized and declared, and to protect the same provision of G.S. Chapter
105 is adopted by reference and made fully effective and applicable to
administration of the tax levied herein as if set forth in full.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.24  PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.



   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and
all other taxing provisions of the town ordinances.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.25  SERVICE UPON ELECTRIC POWER COMPANIES.



   The town shall serve a copy of this subchapter upon the registered
agent for any electric power companies affected hereby.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.26  ADOPTION DATE.



   This subchapter was adopted on June 10, 2002.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



§ 35.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties
applicable to the State Franchise Tax Act as contained in G.S. Chapter 105,
Subchapter 1, Article 9, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax
authorized to be levied and collected under §§ 35.15 through 35.24, to the
extent that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The
governing body of the town may exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue
may exercise in collecting the State Franchise Tax.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-2002)



CHAPTER 36:  DONATION AND SPONSORSHIP



Section



   36.01   Purpose



   36.02   Objectives



   36.03   General policies



   36.04   Criteria



   36.05   Procedures



§ 36.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This donation and sponsorship chapter provides those in the
community with various philanthropic interests the opportunity to give
through memorials, gifts and donations. It is not intended to compete with
other non-profits or friend groups with which the town works; but, rather, to
provide those that specifically are interested in town projects the
opportunity to give. All donations are dependent on the specific needs of the
town.



   (B)   This chapter shall cover all donations and gifts to the town
and any of its departments. The town retains sole discretion to determine
whether to accept or decline any proposed gift or donation. This chapter
shall not be construed to create any right for any individual or organization
to make any improvement or place any items on any public property within the
town regardless of whether the proposal meets any or all of the criteria laid
out herein.



   (C)   It shall ultimately be the responsibility of the Board of
Commissioners to approve the donation and naming of any public facility, or
portion thereof, owned by the town.



(Ord. eff. 4-11-2016)



§ 36.02  OBJECTIVES.



   (A)   Encourage the donation of facilities, cash, services and/or
equipment to the town by establishing clear guidelines for giving.



   (B)   Ensure that donations fulfill a specific need as identified by
the town and is consistent with the aesthetic and functional integrity of the
town’s existing and proposed facilities and goals.



   (C)   Ensure that donations do not cause unbudgeted expenditures or
significant ongoing maintenance responsibility for the town.



   (D)   Ensure that donations do not create liability for the town
with regard to the health and safety of facility users.



   (E)   Encourage gifts made in memory of or in recognition of a
person.



(Ord. eff. 4-11-2016)



§ 36.03  GENERAL POLICIES.



   (A)   The town shall encourage donations. Donations for town
facilities and equipment, memorials or other items must be made in cash. The
town will purchase and install the item using town resources on town property.



   (B)   The town shall encourage "in-kind" donations for volunteer
services by community groups and individuals for the purpose of making
beautification or other facility improvements as well as for recreation and
athletic programs.



   (C)   Those wishing to donate must complete a formal application
provided by the town. Applications shall be reviewed by town staff and
approved by the Town Manager (or his/her designee) or the Board of
Commissioners. Depending on the date of application, approval and
installation may take up to 90 days. A donation application may be obtained
at the Elkin Recreation Center, the town website or the Elkin Recreation and
Parks website.



   (D)   (1)   Any donors that wish to recognize or memorialize
their donation may do so by placing a plaque on the item. The plaque shall be
of like make, color, length and width as well as placed in similar locations
of other like donated amenities. The town shall approve all text for donation
plaques and the town will purchase from a town approved vendor to ensure the
highest quality, life and durability. Donors may choose from the following
acknowledgment/memorial recognition for individuals or businesses in good
community standing.



         Donated by:    Name          In Memory of:   
Name   



         In Honor of:    Name          Dedicated to:   
Name   



      (2)   The plaque will be a bronze three inches by eight inches
in dimension. All other text on any plaque shall be approved by the Elkin
Town Board of Commissioners.



   (E)   Any donor who is interested in providing financial support of
athletic programs and facilities may do so through athletic sponsorships and
athletic facility signage. This signage and sponsorships will be represented
at children/youth games at town-owned facilities and shall meet the following
criteria:



      (1)   Represent a focal business of good community standing;



      (2)   Represent a local professional/social organization of
good community standing (i.e. Jaycees, Rotary, Lions Club, etc.).



      (3)   The sign or sponsorship logo/design shall not represent
alcohol, tobacco, illegal drug use, and must be appropriate for youth,
children and a family environment.



   (F)   Donations must comply with an adopted plan or standard, or be
similar and compatible with existing amenities and must be identified as a
need to fulfill a portion of said adopted plan or standard. The donation may
not interfere with the intended current or future use of the facility, and
the donation may not require the relocation of other equipment or
infrastructure.



   (G)   Donations to town programs must be consistent with established
goals and objectives for the individual program, and/or the town as a whole.



   (H)   In cases where the donation is not consistent with the towns
adopted policies, staff will attempt to identify alternatives for the
donor’s consideration and approval.



   (I)   All donations, other than cash, shall be considered “gifts
for public improvements” to the town for the enjoyment of the town’s
citizens. They will not be considered private or proprietary assets. Receipt
of gifts or donations are not automatically guarantee placement or
recognition of the donation, gift or other to be placed on town property.



   (J)   If the proposed gift/donation is a work of art, the following
criteria shall be considered as well as any other criteria which may be
relevant on a case by case basis.



      (1)   Quality of the work based upon a professional assessment
of the work, detailed written proposal, drawing or photographs, and a
portfolio review of relevant work;



      (2)   Suitability of the subject-matter/theme of artwork to a
public venue;



      (3)   Appropriateness of the artwork to the site, in the case
where a particular site has been requested or identified;



      (4)   Appropriateness of the process for selecting the artist
or artwork;



      (5)   Qualifications of the artist based on documentation of
past work and the artist’s professional qualifications;



      (6)   Proposed medium and physical substance of the art work
must be able to withstand outdoor elements, be vandal resistant and not cause
undue liability due to form or access to public safety.



   (K)   All items purchased or accepted by donation will receive
standard levels of maintenance during their normal life expectancy.



   (L)   Items that are vandalized will be repaired or replaced as
feasible, but the town does not guarantee replacement of any items damaged
beyond repair or where the cost to do so is not considered cost effective.



   (M)   Any current equipment/amenities placed on town property that
have been approved by the Town of Elkin Board of Commissioners will not
require any adjustment to conform to these standards unless it be
sub-standard due to age, disrepair, vandalism or other.



   (N)   The town reserves the right to deny any donation or to remove
any donated item due to expiration of normal life expectancy, liability,
safety, construction, aesthetic or other.



   (O)   If construction of a public improvement project is coordinated
or contracted for by the donor, the donor will be responsible for complying
with all Federal, state and local laws which may include competitive bidding
and state wage rate laws. The donor will also bear the cost of all necessary
permits, approvals, project management, design, installation, and manufacture
of the gift/donation unless these costs are specifically accepted or waived
by the town.



      (1)   Proof of compliance with the town’s insurance
requirements for contractors will be required before work may commence on any
public improvement project.



      (2)   Improvements made in a public place become the property
of the town and are subject to the laws, policies, and procedures of the town.



   (P)   In and of themselves, contributions of land or money for
public facilities shall not be considered sufficient justification for naming
or renaming facilities after individuals, in tribute or memoriam.



   (Q)   If the donor’s proposal is not acceptable, the donor has the
right after the review process is complete to appeal to the Board of
Commissioners for reconsideration of their proposal.



   (R)   Conversely, if a donation is approved and a citizen opposes
the project, that citizen also has the right to appeal to the Board of
Commissioners for reconsideration of the proposal.



   (S)   The Board of Commissioners shall revise this chapter as
necessary.



   (T)   The decision of the Board of Commissioners shall be final and
binding.



(Ord. eff. 4-11-2016)



§ 36.04  CRITERIA.



   The following criteria will apply to all individuals, groups, or
organizations wishing to make a donation to the town:



   (A)   Cash donations.



      (1)   All cash donations shall be directed to the town.



      (2)   The town for the purpose of enhancing programs,
educational opportunities or improving facilities will accept cash donations.
The donor has two options:



         (a)   Allow the town to specify best use of the funds; or



         (b)   Specify the use of funds with approval from the
town, consistent with the conditions of this chapter.



      (3)   Items typically purchased by means of cash donations
include basic amenities such as park amenities and equipment, landscaped
areas, recreation facilities, team athletic sponsorships, baseball field
signage etc. Donors are by no means limited to these items, as any
improvements or items that are consistent with amenity standards and
aesthetics will be considered.



      (4)   Cash donations may be made for any expense associated
with the establishment, maintenance, or operation of a town facility.



   (B)   Materials and equipment donations. The town may accept
materials or equipment donations under the following conditions:



      (1)   Donations of materials and equipment must be consistent
with adopted standards and specifications or policies, ordinances and plans.



      (2)   Criteria for approval of materials and equipment not
contained in adopted standards and specifications or policies and plans shall
include:



         (a)   Be identified as a need by the town;



         (b)   Consistency/likeness with adopted design,
character, and use at proposed location;



         (c)   Consistency with national and local health and
safety standards and regulations such as ASTM standards for product
performance, the Americans with Disabilities Act, local building codes, etc;



         (d)   Compatibility with current town maintenance
practices;



         (e)   Does not cause unbudgeted expenditure or
significant ongoing maintenance responsibility for the town; and



         (f)   Must be consistent with adopted long-range goals
for specified facilities or programs as contained in existing, comprehensive
town plans, master plans or land use plans.



(Ord. eff. 4-11-2016)



§ 36.05  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Solicitation of gifts.



      (1)   When a staff member recognizes a need to solicit a
donation for goods or services, approval must be obtained from their
immediate supervisor and the staff member must contact the respective
Department prior to the solicitation if the amount is in excess of $5,000.
The Department Head and staff member will review and discuss the solicitation
request to avoid multiple requests of the same donor and provide ideas
regarding other possible strategies and suggestions on asking for donations
which best meet the needs of the town and donor.



      (2)   Donations should be solicited from businesses located
within the town prior to contacting those outside the area.



   (B)   Donation procedures.



      (1)   Donors will be provided with a donor application and
town’s donation and sponsorship ordinance.



      (2)   Cash donations cannot be accepted above the amount of
$5,000 without prior approval of the Town Manager and/or the Town Board of
Commissioners. Cash donation must be received before the purchase or program
expenditure is made. However, when advance payment is not possible, the donor
may make special arrangements to reimburse the town for a specific item
already purchased.



      (3)   Cash donations will be deposited to the town and
distributed to specified Departments. The Director of Finance will ensure
such funds are expended as the donor designated and approved.



   (C)   Receipt of donations.



      (1)   The town is able to accept donations of land, materials,
in-kind services and cash. Donations of land require Board approval and shall
be consistent with other town policies. All donors of land, materials and
cash shall be issued a receipt incorporating specific information. All
in-kind donations (services) shall be acknowledged upon request, unless
requested otherwise by the donor.



      (2)   Town employees accepting donations shall issue receipts
via that Department. The receipt shall include information regarding the
donation to include cash amount and memo description of purpose.



   (D)   Receipt guidelines.



      (1)   All receipts must include:



         (a)   Verification that no goods or services were
provided in exchange, in whole or in part, for the donation.



         (b)   The cash receipt should reflect the amount of the
cash donation.



         (c)   The land, material and services receipt shall
include a clear description of the land, goods or services donated. Do NOT
affix a value to the land, materials or services donated. It is incumbent
upon the donor to provide the proper justification and fair market value of
the donation. The IRS has regulations that determine the value for donated
items; i.e., the donor might need to provide an appraisal to the IRS to
declare full deduction. In cases of land donations, the Finance Director or
designee shall sign the donor’s IRS Form 8283 (Non-cash Charitable
Contribution).



         (d)   Statement indicating donation is tax deductible to
the extent allowed by law and it is the responsibility of the donor to
determine the fair market value of the contribution.



         (e)   If donated for a specific purpose, donor should
include a statement that the donation will be used for a specific project
located on memo section of check. Town staff shall note specific donation on
receipt memo line.



      (2)   The town will retain a copy of all donation receipts.
The town will make receipts and other required information available in the
event of an IRS audit of a donor’s return.



      (3)   In cases where a property is jointly owned by the town
and other entities, all parties will negotiate and sign a written agreement
indicating ownership of the donated asset.



   (E)   Failure to comply with application and approval process. The
town reserves the absolute right to remove, confiscate, and destroy any item
placed on public grounds by any individual or group that has not been through
the proper application and approval process for donations, sponsorship or
memorials.



(Ord. eff. 4-11-2016)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL REGULATIONS



      51.   GARBAGE COLLECTION



      52.   WATER REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



   50.01   Partial payment of utility bills; order of allocation



§ 50.01  PARTIAL PAYMENT OF UTILITY BILLS; ORDER OF ALLOCATION.



   (A)   The order in which partial payments to town are to be applied
among the below listed enterprise services, which are covered by a single
bill for the services from the town, is as follows:



      (1)   First.  Any penalty for late payment or failure of
payment for the fees charged for any services previously billed which are now
in existence under town policy, or any future changes for late payment which
may be established by the Board of Commissioners at a future time;



      (2)   Second.  Payment for fees charged for sewer
availability charges as outlined in “An Ordinance Relating to Sewer
Connection and Charges, and to the Use of Said Septic Tanks” which was
passed on November 7, 1984 or any changes of those fees that may be passed by
the Board of Commissioners in the future;



      (3)   Third.  Payment for fees charged for collection of
recycling materials under the town’s recycling program as set out in the
ordinance entitled “Ordinance Setting Fees for Payment of Collection of
Recycling Materials” as passed on April 3, 1995 and any changes of those
fees passed by the Board of Commissioners in the future;



      (4)   Fourth.  Payment for charges for collection of garbage
as set out in the ordinance entitled “Ordinance Setting Fees for Garbage
Collection” as passed on April 3, 1995 or any changes in those fees passed
by the Board of Commissioners in the future;



      (5)   Fifth.  Payment for charges for sewer services to the
owners or occupant of buildings whose sewer systems are connected to the
town’s sewer facilities as set out in the ordinance entitled “Ordinance
Setting Fees for Sewer Services” as passed on April 3, 1995 or any changes
made in those fees by the Board of Commissioners in the future; and



      (6)   Sixth.  Payment for charges for furnishing water
services as set out in the ordinance entitled “Ordinance Setting Fees for
Water Services” as passed on April 3, 1995 or any changes made in those
fees by the Board of Commissioners at any time in the future.



   (B)   This section shall not have the effect of changing any
schedule of fees or policies previously set for the amount of fees or
collection methods or penalties for late payment covering the period of time
up to the effective date of the passage of this section.



   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect,
notwithstanding any statement of the payment check, any letter setting out
that the money paid is for one specific service or any other statement that
the payment is for any specific charge or charges.



(Ord. eff. 4-4-1995)



CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE COLLECTION



Section




General Regulations




   51.01   Purpose



   51.02   Definitions



   51.03   Supervision of collection; rules and regulations



   51.04   Collection routes, schedules and placement of containers



   51.05   Container, storage and collection practices



   51.06   Charges and fees



   51.07   Additional rollout container request



   51.08   Physically disabled service



   51.09   Control of solid waste



   51.10   Town-served nonresidential units



   51.11   Bulk containers



   51.12   Recyclables



   51.13   Ownership of materials




Dumping; Unauthorized Collections




   51.30   Scavenging, private collection



   51.31   Improper preparation



   51.32   Unauthorized collection prohibited



   51.33   Removal from unimproved premises



   51.34   Illegal dumping



   51.35   Burning garbage and yard waste



   51.36   Dumping by nonresidents



   51.37   Dumping of building and demolition materials



   51.38   Transportation of loose materials and wastes




Special Collections




   51.50   Special collections – yard waste



   51.51   Special collections – bulk item pick up week, residential
bulk item truck rental




Prohibited Accumulations




   51.65   Solid waste the town will not collect



   51.66   Accumulation of solid wastes prohibited



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 51.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The town provides its comprehensive solid waste management
program, including weekly curbside garbage collection, weekly yard waste
collection, annual bulk item pickup and biweekly recycling service.



   (B)   Citizen cooperation and preparation in these services help the
town provide solid waste management in the most environmentally sensitive and
efficient manner possible. With the citizens and the town working together,
the town can protect the environment while controlling costs for waste
management.



   (C)   This chapter is determined and declared to be a health,
sanitary and safety measure necessary for the promotion, protection and
preservation of the general welfare of the people in the town. Whenever this
chapter conflicts with any other portion of the town code, this chapter shall
prevail with respect to any matters relating to solid waste services.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHES.  Residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal or other
combustible material.



   BUILDING MATERIAL.  Lumber, brick, stone, carpet, plumbing materials,
plaster, concrete, floor coverings, roofing material, gutters or other
materials or substances accumulated as a result of construction, repairs or
additions to existing structures or accessory structures or demolition of
them.



   BULK CONTAINER. A metal container of a minimum size of two cubic yards
and a maximum of eight cubic yards, made of watertight construction with
doors opening on two sides and top, constructed so that it can be emptied
mechanically by specially equipped trucks.



   BULKY ITEMS. Items such as household furnishings, household appliances,
mattresses, box springs, lawn equipment (i.e., mowers, wheelbarrows) and
similar household items. No large white goods, such as refrigerators,
washers, dryers or dishwashers, will be accepted.



   BUSINESS BUILDING.  Any structure, whether public or private, that is
adapted for the transaction of business, for rendering of professional
services, for amusement, for the display or sale or storage of goods, wares,
merchandise, articles or equipment, including hotels, apartment houses,
rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters,
markets, restaurants, abattoirs (slaughterhouses), warehouses, sheds, barns
and other structures on premises used for or adapted to business purposes.



   BUSINESS TRASH.  Any waste accumulation of paper, cardboard, packaging
materials, rags or accumulations of incidental garbage other than household
trash, which is associated with the operation of stores, offices and
nonresidential units.



   COLLECTION.  The act of removing solid waste from a point of
generation to an approved disposal site. COLLECTION shall be at the curb for
rollout (or backyard in special circumstances), yard waste and recyclable
collection.



   DESIGNATED COLLECTION AREA(S).  The geographic location to which the
town is responsible for providing solid waste collection services. Collection
points shall be at the curb for rollout, yard waste and recyclables
collection.



   ESTABLISHMENTS.  Single-family units, special residential units,
multi-family units, nonresidential units and town-owned nonresidential units.



   FOUL ODOR.  Offensive odors emanating from but not limited to garbage.



   GARBAGE.  The byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other
matter subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction and/or the generation of
noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during and/or after decay may
serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects and/or animals. All
refuse resulting from the use and maintenance of property, regardless of the
nature of the activity thereon, except GARBAGE. (Sometimes referred to as
TRASH.)



   HAZARDOUS WASTES.  The following is an explanation of hazardous waste
as published in the State Hazardous Waste Law adopted for the Federal
Environment Protection Agency (EPA). For the purposes of this chapter, the
definition HAZARDOUS WASTE has been condensed. The items defined are not
inclusive of all items specified by the EPA regulations. HAZARDOUS WASTE is
defined as potentially dangerous byproducts of our highly industrialized
society that cannot be handled, treated or disposed of without special
precautions. It includes ignitable, corrosive, reactive and toxic wastes such
as acetone, gasoline and industrial alcohol, alkaline cleaners, acids,
cyanide and chlorine, arsenic, pesticide wastes, drugs, paint, caustics,
infected material, offal, fecal matter (human and animal), explosives and any
other material of similar nature.



   HOUSEHOLD TRASH.  Any waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, rags,
bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, which is usually attendant to
housekeeping, excluding recyclables and garbage.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  All waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges
and liquids created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing
enterprises.



   INSPECTOR.  The person or persons designated by the Town Manager to
perform the duties and responsibilities assigned by this chapter to the
Inspector.



   LITTER.  Any discarded humanmade materials, including but not limited
to solid waste materials, industrial materials, household trash, business
trash, building materials, scrap materials and hazardous waste as those terms
are defined in this chapter.



   MULTI-FAMILY UNIT.  Any apartment, group of apartments or condominiums
used for dwelling places of three or more families.



   NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT.  Any retail, manufacturing, wholesale,
institutional, religious, nonprofit organization, governmental or other unit
not primarily used for residential purposes.



   PERSON.  Any person, owner, agent, corporation, partnership,
association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator,
fiduciary, occupant, lessee, tenant or representative or group of individuals
or entities of any kind.



   PHYSICAL DISABILITY.  A medical condition, verified by a registered
physician, that makes an individual either physically unable to bring a
rollout container to the curbside for collection, and/or that makes
undertaking such an act clearly and seriously threatening to that person’s
health.



   PORTABLE PACKING UNIT.  A metal container, not exceeding 4,500 pounds
gross weight, with a four- to eight-cubic-yard capacity, that contains a
packing mechanism and an internal or external power unit.



   PREMISES.  Lots, sidewalks, right-of-way, grass strips or curbs up to
the edge of the pavement of any public street.



   RECYCLABLE.  Material designated as capable of being sorted,
processed, transported and sold to markets for the remanufacture of like or
different products. Items include newspapers and accompanying inserts, glass
food and beverage containers, plastic soft drink and liquor bottles, aluminum
cans, bi-metal cans, steel or tin cans, yard waste and other items determined
to be recyclable by the Solid Waste Department.



   RECYCLABLES CART.  A plastic cart furnished by the town or
town-designated private collector, and distributed for use in the residential
recyclables collection program.



   REFUSE.  Solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household
trash, yard waste and business trash as herein defined.



   REFUSE CONTAINER.  A metal or plastic container resistant to rust,
corrosion or rapid deterioration.



   REGULAR COLLECTION.  All collection services offered recurrently, at
least once per week, which include the collection of vegetable and food
wastes in a manner safe to public health.



   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE.  Garbage and trash, which may include glass
jars, bottles, steel cans, plastic soda and liquor bottles, newspaper and
inserts, plastic milk and water jugs, and other solid waste including yard
waste. RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE shall not include discarded building
materials, trees, brush and other material resulting from the activities of
building contractors or lawn services, larger quantities of sod, dirt and
trash from land clearing or other material requiring special handling.



   ROLLOUT CART.  A container, having wheels and a hinged lid, issued by
the town or by a firm under contract with the town, for the disposal of
refuse as defined and prepared in accordance with this subchapter.



   SCRAP METAL.  Any item creating a littered condition, including but
not limited to dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment,
building material, automotive parts, tires or other similar items that are
either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or in
inoperative condition.



   SEPARATE COLLECTION.  All collection of specifically defined materials
not associated with regular collection practices.



   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT.  Any dwelling occupied by one family.



   SOLID WASTE.  Accumulations consisting of any combination of business
trash, garbage, household trash, bulky items, yard waste, recyclables and
scrap materials, and shall be collected through curbside trash, rollout,
recyclables, yard waste, bulky items or business trash collection activities.



   SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL UNIT.  Any duplex, triplex or quadruplex.



   TRASH.  The byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other matter
subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction and/or the generation of
noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which, during and/or after decay, may
serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects and/or animals. All
refuse resulting from the use and maintenance of property, regardless of the
nature of the activity thereon, except garbage. (Sometimes referred to as
GARBAGE).



   WASTE.  All useless, unwanted or discarded materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential activities (excluding
sewage).



   YARD WASTE.  Grass, weeds, leaves, tree trimmings, plants, shrubbery
prunings and other similar materials generated in the maintenance of yards
and gardens, and which are separated from other solid waste materials and
placed in a designated recycling collection area. YARD WASTE shall not
include trees, tree limbs, brush and other material resulting from commercial
tree trimmers and/or commercial lawn care services.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.03  SUPERVISION OF COLLECTION; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Public Works Director shall supervise the collection,
removal, disposition, processing and sale of all refuse, bulky items, yard
waste and recyclables.



   (B)   The Public Works Director, with the approval of the Town
Manager, may prepare and publish rules for the effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with these rules and regulations.



   (C)   The Town Manager and Public Works Director shall have all
authority to vary the level of refuse collection service for experimental
purposes and on a temporary basis at the direction of the Board of
Commissioners. Service elements that may be altered include but are not
limited to frequency of collection, container type and allowable volume per
customer per pickup.



   (D)   No owner or occupant of a residential premises shall prohibit
or prevent weekly solid waste collection services, including recyclables
collection, at the premises.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.04  COLLECTION ROUTES, SCHEDULES AND PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS.



   (A)   The Public Works Director shall establish collection routes
and schedules, and may alter these routes and schedules from time to time. A
copy of the current routes and schedules shall be kept on file in Town Hall
and in the office of the Public Works Director, as well as on the town
website.



   (B)   The Board of Commissioners may establish and revise from time
to time a policy relating to the number of times per week the town will
collect solid wastes from various classifications of premises, and the
maximum number of solid waste receptacles that the town will service on any
one premises.



   (C)   Normal refuse collection service will consist of at least one
collection per week of refuse, prepared in accordance with this subchapter
and placed in one or more rollout carts or other approved containers.



   (D)   Rollout carts shall be set out for collection only upon those
days designated for the premises involved in the schedule provided for in
this chapter.



   (E)   Where curbside collection is available, carts shall be out no
longer than a 24-hour period, 7:00 p.m. the night prior to collection and
removed by 7:00 p.m. the day of collection. Containers shall be placed at the
street within three feet of the curb line, or where the rollout is delivered,
whichever is closest to the street.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.05  CONTAINER, STORAGE AND COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   (A)   Each customer will be provided a rollout cart by either the
town or the town’s contractor. A yearly schedule with collection dates will
be provided to the customer, and will be available on the town website.



   (B)   In addition, the Public Works Director may exempt customers
from using curbside service if requiring its use causes a hardship related to
a topographic site restriction or other similar type of hardship.



   (C)   Rollout carts used in the garbage collection program are
property of the town. The town provides general maintenance for them at no
cost. A replacement fee will be charged for rollout carts that are damaged,
defaced or removed from the premises.



   (D)   Rollout carts shall be used for the disposal of residential
and approved commercial garbage only.



   (E)   Spilled materials or overflow caused by the property owner or
occupant shall be cleaned up by the owner or occupant immediately after the
spillage or overflow occurs.



   (F)   Spilled solid waste materials caused by the town collection
crew of the town’s authorized collection agent shall be cleaned up by the
crew immediately after the spillage occurs.



   (G)   Rollout carts will be collected from the curbside, provided
they are easily accessible to collection personnel, without having to unlock
or open a door, unlock a gate or similar obstacle, or encounter a vicious
animal. Town collection personnel shall not provide service if required to
ascend or descend multiple steps to obtain access to rollout containers, or
if denied reasonable access by parked vehicles, equipment or other objects.



   (H)   Garbage placed in rollout carts shall be wrapped, bagged or
enclosed in paper or plastic material. Any liquid waste, such as grease,
shall be sealed in its own separate container before being placed in the
rollout container.



   (I)   All potentially dangerous trash items and all waste material
of a hazardous nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of
metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes, shall be securely wrapped to
prevent injury to the collection crews.



   (J)   Trash of a hollow or bulky nature shall be flattened out or
broken up prior to depositing it in authorized containers.



   (K)   Containers other than those described in this section will be
treated as refuse and may be collected by the town.



   (L)   For those residents exempt from curbside service, no refuse
receptacles will be picked up from enclosed areas used to store anything
besides refuse, or from locations or storage areas that create an
unreasonable risk of injury to personnel. When personnel must pass through
gates or other barriers to pick up refuse, the town will not be responsible
for damage caused to the barrier or by leaving it open.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.06  CHARGES AND FEES.



   (A)   For the service of collecting and disposing of refuse, the
owner or occupant of all premises from which refuse is collected by the town
or the town’s contractor shall be charged rates as may be established, from
time to time, by the Board of Commissioners on recommendation of the Town
Manager. The charges shall be considered a debt owing to the town from the
owner or occupant of the premises and other persons using the disposal area.
No owner or occupants of premises within the town limits receiving water,
sewer or both services shall be exempt from the collection and disposal
service provided by the town or by individual collectors and licensees. Fees
for the collection and disposal of refuse by the town shall be charged to the
owner or occupant of all premises, in the amount specified in the fee
schedule.



   (B)   The collection fee will be billed in the same manner as water
and wastewater services. Per G.S. 160A-314(b), payment made to this
cumulative water, wastewater and solid waste bill will first be applied to
outstanding solid waste collection fees. Payment will be applied to water and
wastewater charges only after the collection fee is paid in total.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



Cross-reference:



   Order of allocation of partial payments, see § 50.01



§ 51.07  ADDITIONAL ROLLOUT CONTAINER REQUEST.



   Request for additional rollout containers at the same property address
shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Approval of additional
container(s) shall be contingent upon an investigation by the town to
determine whether an actual need exists. The owner or occupant will be billed
for the rollout container, based on the schedule of fees.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.08  PHYSICALLY DISABLED SERVICE.



   (A)   The Public Works Director may exempt customers from using the
rollout cart(s) if requiring that use causes a hardship related to the
customer’s age, an infirmity, or a topographic site restriction or other
similar type of hardship. These exemptions will be recorded in writing and
kept in the office of the Public Works Director. All exempt customers must
comply with the requirements of § 51.05.



   (B)   Every member of the household shall be physically disabled as
verified by a physician. Based on a physician’s note, the Solid Waste
Division will grant physically disabled status.



   (C)   For physically disabled persons, rollout containers will be
collected from a location mutually agreed upon by the Public Works Director
and resident. The Public Works Director shall have final authority to
determine the most advantageous and safe location during disputed situations.



   (D)   The town reserves the right to request a disabled household to
use a smaller 65-gallon rollout cart before completely eliminating curbside
service.



   (E)   The town reserves the right to verify the need to continue
physically disabled services to residents that have been approved to receive
the services. The town shall also reserve the right to continue or
discontinue service.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.09  CONTROL OF SOLID WASTE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying
property to cause or allow solid waste to be placed, deposited or to
accumulate on his or her property, except in proper solid waste receptacles
authorized by this chapter. All solid waste stored shall be stored so as to
eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter on the property. Any
spillage or overflow shall be cleaned up and containerized immediately. Once
properly stored, all solid waste that the town will collect shall be
immediately placed in an appropriate location for removal by the town. All
other waste not subject to town collection shall be immediately removed from
the property. Any unauthorized accumulation of litter is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and is prohibited.



   (B)   The person in possession of property shall maintain the
property, including sidewalks, grass strips, one-half of alleys, curbs or
rights-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street in a clean
and litter-free manner.



   (C)   All commercial establishments shall, particularly with respect
to their loading and unloading areas, store their refuse in containers so as
to eliminate wind-driven debris and litter in and about the establishments.
Approved methods of containerization include refuse receptacles and bulk
containers. The establishment shall immediately clean up spillage and
overflow when and as it occurs.



   (D)   Parking lots shall be maintained by the person in possession
in a clean, litter-free manner, with all trash generated therein
containerized and prevented from spreading to adjoining property. It shall be
the responsibility of the person in possession of the parking lot to collect
the refuse and trash deposited on the lot, and to place this material in
containers serviced by the town or a private contractor.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person undertaking any
construction, renovation or demolition activities to fail to provide on-site
receptacles for containerizing all debris and waste material produced by
those working on site, which is capable of being windblown or scattered from
the site. Examples of appropriate receptacles shall include but not be
limited to dump trucks, trailers, bulk containers and containers made of
fencing material. All waste shall be containerized and secured so as to
prevent it from being windblown by the end of each day, and the site shall be
kept in a reasonably clean condition. Dirt, mud, construction materials or
other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a result of the
construction or demolition shall be immediately removed by the contractor.
Construction sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times.



   (F)   Every owner and every occupant of any premises shall maintain
that area of the street right-of-way, between the edge of the traveled road
curbline and the adjacent property line, in a reasonably safe condition, and
shall remove dangerous plantings, shrubbery, limbs, tall grass and weeds and
other noxious growth from that area of the street right-of-way.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.10  TOWN-SERVED NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS.



   (A)   (1)   Generally.  Service to town-served nonresidential
units shall be once a week, and limited to two 96-gallon carts. Any
commercial customers requiring more capacity would have to contract with a
private company or as described in § 51.03.



      (2)   With the exception of downtown merchants.  Downtown
merchants shall be allowed three roll out carts and provided a once a week
collection.



   (B)   Until the time that collection practices are amended by the
Board of Commissioners, when refuse accumulates at stores, hotels,
apartments, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, condominiums, theaters, office
buildings, schools, clubs, commercial establishments, industrial
establishments or at any other place in two 96-gallon carts, the same will be
collected by the Public Works Department if the refuse is placed either in
one or more 96-gallon rollout carts, and meets the standards set forth in
other sections of this chapter.



   (C)   If the refuse at any of the indicated establishments exceeds
two 96-gallon carts, exclusive of special collections, the owner shall be
required to contract with a private company providing bulk container refuse
service. The Public Works Director or designee will determine the type of
service to be provided. Unless refuse is placed in the appropriate container
as outlined in this chapter, the town will not collect it.



   (D)   Service to town-served nonresidential units shall comply with
§ 51.05.



   (E)   The Public Works Direct or designee shall have the authority
to determine whether a unit is generating more than the maximum capacity per
collection and, if so, the units shall be required to convert from rollout
service to bulk container service with a private contractor.



   (F)   Nonresidential units will be charged a monthly collection and
disposal fee as established by the Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.11  BULK CONTAINERS.



   All premises served by bulk containers shall be subject to the
following requirements.



   (A)   Any apartment, group of apartments, condominium, mobile home
park or any structure containing 12 or more dwelling units shall provide one
or more bulk containers for refuse collection. The town will not provide
rollout curbside service to these units.



   (B)   The Public Works Director or designee shall have the authority
to assist in determining the quantity, size and location of bulk containers,
and to determine whether the containers are serviceable. In making this
determination, the Public Works Director shall consider the needs of the
occupants of the premises, the welfare of the occupants and neighbors, and
the town’s need to facilitate collection and minimize the cost of service.



   (C)   The owner of the premises shall provide one or more bulk
containers so that the following criteria relating to capacity are satisfied:



      (1)   Approximately one-half cubic yard of storage capacity
shall be provided for each dwelling unit or fraction thereof; and



      (2)   The owner shall provide the smallest number of bulk
containers capable of satisfying the requirements stated in division (C)(1)
of this section.



   (D)   The containers shall at all times be kept clean, neat,
painted, in a good state of repair, and easily accessible to collection
personnel. No bulk containers shall be placed in front of a residence, in
front of the building setback line closest to the street, or in a public
right-of-way. Container lids shall be kept closed at all times. All doors and
lid springs will be in working condition. Businesses leasing these containers
shall be responsible for notifying their service contractor of any damaged
conditions. Cleaning up spilled materials shall be the responsibility of the
property owner or occupant and shall occur immediately after any spillage or
overflow occurs.



   (E)   All containers that can be viewed from West Main Street,
Market Street and Bridge Street must be screened from view.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.12  RECYCLABLES.



   The following regulations shall govern those persons in town-served
residential units required to participate in the town’s recyclables
collection program.



   (A)   Recycling bins are to be used for recyclable items only.



   (B)   All recyclables, except yard waste, shall be placed in a
town-authorized recyclables bin, with the overflow being permitted in a brown
paper bag or clear plastic bag placed on top of or beside the recyclable
container.



   (C)   Recyclables collection service will be provided biweekly on a
day designated by the Public Works Director or designee for curbside
collection service. The recyclable roll cart shall be placed at curbside.



   (D)   Recycle roll carts shall be out no longer than a 24-hour
period, 7:00 p.m. the night prior to collection and removed by 7:00 p.m. the
day of collection. Containers shall be placed at the street within three feet
of the curb line or where the roll cart is delivered, whichever is closest to
the street.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.13  OWNERSHIP OF MATERIALS.



   Recyclable materials and yard waste, which are properly placed by an
owner or occupant of a property at curbside for collection, are deemed to be
abandoned by the person(s) and become property of the town or its authorized
agent.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



DUMPING; UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTIONS



§ 51.30  SCAVENGING, PRIVATE COLLECTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to scavenge, sort,
pick through or remove refuse, trash, yard wastes or recyclables stored or
set out for collection, or for any person other than the town or its
contractors to collect recyclables in the town, where those materials have
been prepared and set out for collection by the town in accordance with this
chapter.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.31  IMPROPER PREPARATION.



   All refuse not prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, which is located within the public right-of-way, causing a potential
public health or public safety hazard, will be subject to the town’s
nuisance ordinance.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.32  UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the town to
collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any solid waste,
including recyclables and yard waste.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.33  REMOVAL FROM UNIMPROVED PREMISES.



   Refuse shall not be removed from unimproved property, except when the
refuse meets the conditions set forth in this chapter, such as creating a
health and safety hazard, and then not in excess quantities and only when the
property owner can be identified. All applicable fees apply in accordance
with this chapter.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.34  ILLEGAL DUMPING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, discard, throw,
drop or deposit, or cause to be placed, discarded, thrown, dropped or
deposited any solid waste on:



      (1)   Any public street, sidewalk or alley within the town or
on any property owned or operated by the town or any other public property,
except in properly designated receptacles;



      (2)   Any property not owned by a person without the written
consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof; or



      (3)   In any stream or body of water.



   (B)   This section shall not prohibit the dumping or placing of fill
on private or public property with the owner’s permission of clean sand,
dirt, broken brick, blocks, concrete, broken pavement and natural land
debris, uncontaminated by other materials, or other material deemed suitable
by the Public Works Director that would not create a nuisance or health
hazard. The town shall deem the consent of the Town Manager permission for
its own property.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.35  BURNING GARBAGE AND YARD WASTE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or set fire to garbage for
the purpose of disposal, and garbage shall be disposed of only as authorized
by this chapter.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.36  DUMPING BY NONRESIDENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring construction
debris, business trash, garbage, household refuse, household trash,
industrial waste, litter, refuse, solid waste, yard waste or any other kind
of trash or rubbish into the town from a point outside the town, for the
purpose of the materials becoming subject to pickup by the town or its
designee.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit the
use of his or her receptacles, or any other portion of his or her property,
by any other person for the disposal of any construction debris, business
trash, garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, industrial waste, litter,
refuse, solid waste, yard waste or any other kind of trash or rubbish brought
into the town from a point outside the city, for the purpose of disposing of
the materials to become subject to pickup by the city.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.37  DUMPING OF BUILDING AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate a disposal site for the
burial of material resulting from building, construction, renovation or
demolition; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit dumping or
depositing clean fill material as set forth in § 51.34.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.38  TRANSPORTATION OF LOOSE MATERIALS AND WASTES.



   (A)   No person may transport or cause to be transported any solid
waste on the public streets of the town unless the solid wastes are secured
so as not to escape from the transporting vehicle. In addition, any garbage
so transported shall be carried in closed containers that prevent the escape
of noxious odors or liquids.



   (B)   No person may transport or cause to be transported on the
public streets of the town any loose, solid or liquid materials capable of
being easily blown, dropped, scattered or otherwise deposited on the streets
or adjacent areas, unless the materials are properly covered, secured and
contained to prevent escape from the transporting vehicle. This division
shall not apply to the transportation of poultry,  livestock, silage or
other grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any refuse collector to haul refuse
over the streets of the town, unless he or she uses a watertight vehicle
provided with a tight cover, and so operates it as to prevent offensive odors
escaping therefrom and refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SPECIAL COLLECTIONS



§ 51.50  SPECIAL COLLECTIONS – YARD WASTE.



   (A)   Yard waste collection shall be provided only to single-family
and special residential units served by the town. Yard waste collection shall
be limited to one-half truckload per resident per week.



   (B)   Residents must call Public Works Department to schedule a yard
waste pick up. The town will make every effort to pick up the yard waste
within 72 hours of notification from resident.



   (C)   If yard waste exceeds one-half truckload (more than four cubic
yards), a notice will be given, either personally to the occupant or by
placing a written notice on the door of the residence, informing the resident
that it is an oversized load and must be disposed of by the resident. The
resident may contact the Public Works Department to request the delivery of a
truck to be loaded by the resident. A fee for truck delivery and collection
will be assessed, based on the schedule of fees. The resident may dispose of
an oversized load of yard waste themselves. Additional service may be
approved by the Public Works Director for an additional fee as set by the
Board of Commissioners. Residents must complete and sign a town truck policy
statement.



   (D)   Yard waste shall be separated from curbside trash and shall be
placed together to constitute a single, separate collection in order for the
town to carry out its other collection program. Collection forces shall
collect an amount of yard waste that is customarily and reasonably associated
with the residential unit(s) served, so long as it is properly prepared or
containerized and in compliance with these regulations.



   (E)   Yard waste, such as grass trimmings, twigs, hedge trimmings,
plant trimmings, hay, straw, pine straw and pine cones, shall be collected at
curbside, provided that it is placed in plastic bags for collection. Bags
shall be in good condition and of a size and weight that, when full, do not
weigh more than 50 pounds each, and are such that one individual can easily
pick up each bag, one at a time, for disposal. Plastic bags shall not be
secured at the top when placed at curbside for collection.



   (F)   Containers used for yard waste shall have all lids removed and
shall not exceed 32 gallons in size. Each container shall be equipped with
handles. The town-provided rollout cart or wheelbarrows should not be used.



   (G)   Limbs collected by collection forces shall be no larger than
three inches in diameter and no longer than four feet in length. Tree
shrubbery and limbs shall have all protruding branches trimmed. Limbs must be
stacked in small, neat piles such that a reasonable person would expect one
individual to easily pick up each pile, one at a time, for disposal. Each
pile shall weigh no more than 50 pounds, and shall not exceed four feet in
height nor four feet in length.



      (1)   Town collection forces or its authorized agent will not
collect tree stumps or trunks.



      (2)   Loose leaves shall be bundled, packaged or boxed into
one-person loads, and may be placed, pending collection by the town, at the
front of the premises in the grass strip between the street and the sidewalk
where those strips are available; otherwise, they may be placed just off that
portion of the street right-of-way normally used by vehicles or pedestrians
or used for surface drainage purposes. During the portion of the year when
special leaf collection equipment is used, which shall be from November
through December, leaves may be piled loosely adjacent to and behind the curb
or in front of ditch (not in street, gutter or roadside ditch) for collection
by special equipment. Loose piles of leaves will not be collected unless they
are free of trash such as broken glass, rocks, twigs, cans or other debris
that might damage collection equipment.



      (3)   The Public Works Department may decline to collect any
yard waste that is not prepared or placed for collection in accordance with
these regulations or that exceeds the maximum amount.



      (4)   The Public Works Department shall not collect any tree
or tree limbs from unimproved property, or when the service has been
performed for a fee or results from land clearing work by a commercial yard
service.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



§ 51.51  SPECIAL COLLECTIONS – BULK ITEM PICK UP WEEK, RESIDENTIAL BULK
ITEM TRUCK RENTAL.



   (A)   Bulk item pickup is for residential use only. The town will
pick up bulk items curbside at residences for one week during the month of
April, as noted on Public Works yearly calendar and listed on  the town
website, except as authorized on a case-by-case basis as per the Board of
Commissioners.



      (1)   During bulk item pick up week, the town will collect
normal household items, including sofas, chairs, beds, carpets, box springs
and other discarded household items.



         (a)   Large furniture items shall be dismantled prior to
collection such that a reasonable person can expect two individuals to easily
load them onto or off of the special collection vehicle. The only exception
to this policy is for pianos, which do not have to be dismantled for
collection;



         (b)   Gasoline must be removed from all lawn mowers
prior to collection;



         (c)   Tires must be removed from all bicycles prior to
collection;



         (d)   All glass in windows, doors, mirrors and other
items with large expanses of glass must have the glass taped with an “X”
mark so that it will not shatter in the collection process; and



         (e)   Any bulky item or scrap material collected shall
be of a weight or size that a person would reasonably expect two individuals
to easily pick each item up for disposal.



      (2)   Items not collected by the town include but are not
limited to:



         (a)   Furnaces, central air conditioning units, roofing
materials, tires, hazardous materials, batteries, washers, dryers, hot water
heaters, white goods or similar items;



         (b)   Any items from businesses operated from a
residential unit;



         (c)   Items that are the consequence of a fire at a
business or residential structure;



         (d)   Any tanks, including: oxygen tanks and other
medical equipment; propane tanks; large oil tanks used for household purposes;



         (e)   Any parts of campers, boats, camper shells,
trailers; automotive parts, including but not limited to motors, doors,
tires, fenders, car seats or batteries from a residentially used premises and
the like.



      (3)   The Public Works Director shall have the authority to
require items to be prepared for ease of collection, and to ensure the safety
of the employees performing the collection task. An item not prepared
properly may be refused for collection at the Director’s discretion.



      (4)    It shall be unlawful to place junk appliances at
curbside for collection. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside
any building, in a place accessible to children, any appliance, refrigerator
or container without its being strapped or locked so that it is impossible
for a child to obtain access to it.



   (B)   Residential truck rental for removal of household bulk items
is available from the town throughout the year. Residents may request an
overnight rental for a town truck per notification. A truck will be delivered
and loaded by the resident. A service fee will be assessed, based on the
schedule of fees. Each resident must complete and sign a town truck policy
statement. Charges will be applied to the monthly water bill for collection.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PROHIBITED ACCUMULATIONS



§ 51.65  SOLID WASTE THE TOWN WILL NOT COLLECT.



   The town will not collect the following types of solid wastes, and no
person may place any of the following in any container or receptacle intended
for collection by the town.



   (A)   Hazardous refuse and industrial use.  All hazardous refuse
and industrial waste shall be stored in suitable leakproof containers
sufficient to ensure that no refuse or waste leaks or spills onto any public
or private property. It shall be the responsibility of the person in
possession on the premises where hazardous refuse or industrial waste is
generated to see that it is disposed of properly.



   (B)   Contagious diseases refuse.  The removal of clothing, bedding
or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases
have occurred shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the
County Health Department.



   (C)   Building materials.  The materials shall be removed by the
owner of the property or by the contractor. No new certificate of compliance
or occupancy shall be issued until the owner or contractor has removed the
material.



   (D)   Human and animal tissues.  Human and animal tissues or waste
from an operation, autopsy or obstetrical procedure, or any other material of
a similar nature.



   (E)   Fire or live coals.  Material of any kind or nature,
including ashes, that contains any hot or live coals or fire.



   (F)   Hypodermic instruments. No person may dispose of or discard
any hypodermic syringe, needle or any instrument or device for making
hypodermic injections in the waste stream of the town. Medical or other
biohazard materials shall be removed and disposed of under the supervision
and direction of the County Health Department.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.66  ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person may cause, suffer or permit refuse to accumulate or
remain on premises under their control except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The remaining divisions of this section are not
intended to limit the generality of the foregoing.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the general contractor to
see that all construction and demolition contractors keep the site in a
reasonable clean and litter-free condition as possible for a construction or
demolition site. All loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap
building materials and other trash produced by those working on the site
shall be containerized or disposed of in any other reasonable manner by the
contractor. Construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public
or private property as a result of construction or demolition shall be
immediately removed by the contractor.



(Ord. eff. 12-10-2001; Ord. eff. 11-10-2014)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER REGULATIONS



Section




Use of Water from Town Water System




   52.01   Control and supervision



   52.02   Connection to water required



   52.03   Permit for connection required



   52.04   Work on connections



   52.05   Maintenance and repair of connections



   52.06   Damaging or obstructing system



   52.07   Water service charges



   52.08   Water from fire hydrants; unauthorized and unlawful uses



USE OF WATER FROM TOWN WATER SYSTEM



§ 52.01  CONTROL AND SUPERVISION.



   The water system of the town shall be under the general control and
supervision of the Town Manager and the system shall be regulated and
operated as the Town Manager shall from time to time ordain and direct. The
Town Manager shall appoint a qualified person to supervise the operation and
regulation of the system, under the direction of the Town Manager, and the
person appointed shall be known as the Public Works Director; or the Town
Manager may assign the duties of supervising the water system to an employee
of the town in addition to his or her other duties.



(Ord. eff. 6-6-1977)



§ 52.02  CONNECTION TO WATER REQUIRED.



   Every person, group of persons, firm or corporation owning a dwelling,
building or other structure which is used for human habitation or occupancy
within the town, situated on a lot or parcel of land which abuts or adjoins a
street or other public way along which is located a water main, shall connect
the buildings, dwelling or structure to the water system of the town;
provided, however, a connection shall not be required to the system unless
the lot or parcel of land on which the dwelling, building or structure is
situated is accessible within 200 feet of the water system; provided,
further, that no person shall be required to cross the private property of
any other person to make the connection.



(Ord. eff. 6-6-1977)



§ 52.03  PERMIT FOR CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall make any connection to the water
system unless and until a permit therefor has been issued by the town.
Permits shall be issued for connections only after the Public Works Director
or designee has determined the type of connection required.



(Ord. eff. 6-6-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.04  WORK ON CONNECTIONS.



   All connections to the water system shall be made by authorized
employees of the town in accordance with specification for those connections
that may be adopted by the town from time to time.  If authorized by the
Board of Commissioners, connections may be made by plumbers licensed to
perform plumbing work in this state, and if required by the town, licensed to
perform plumbing work by the town.  Any water connections made by an
authorized, licensed plumber shall be inspected by the Superintendent of
Public Works after the work has been completed and prior to the time the
connection is covered.



(Ord. eff. 6-6-1977)



§ 52.05  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF CONNECTIONS.



   Whenever any service to any building or premises becomes clogged,
broken, out of order or in any condition detrimental to the use of the water
service, the owner, agent or occupant having charge of the building or
premises shall be held responsible for the immediate renewal or repair of the
water service necessary to maintain an uninterrupted water system. Renewal or
repair of water services from the building to the water meter shall be made
at the expense of the property owner, agent or occupant.  Whenever any
repair work is performed as required by this section, the work shall be
performed only by a licensed plumber authorized to perform the work by the
town.



(Ord. eff. 6-6-1977)



§ 52.06  DAMAGING OR OBSTRUCTING SYSTEM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, tamper with or otherwise
do harm to the mains, pipes, apparatus or other part of the water sewer
system.



(Ord. eff. 6-6-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.07  WATER SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   Generally. 



      (1)   A charge for the use of the water system and the water
flowing into the pipes of the property owner shall be those rates in
existence at this time and as hereafter changed by regulation or ordinance of
the town.  Copies are available through town offices.



      (2)   The water service charge and charge for the water shall
be billed to each customer according to the present system employed by the
town and as hereafter changed by regulation or ordinance of the town and if
the water bills and sewer service charges are not paid within 60 days of
issuance of the bill, then the water service and water to the building shall
be cut off, and further water or water services shall not be supplied to the
property until the time that all delinquent water bills and sewer charges
have been paid in full and an additional payment based on the schedule of
fees is made for the cutting on of the water to the town.



   (B)   Fees for water services.  See the town’s schedule of fees.



(Ord. eff. 6-6-1977; Ord. eff. 6-30-1995)



§ 52.08  WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS; UNAUTHORIZED AND UNLAWFUL USES.



   (A)   Unauthorized use prohibiting.  It shall be unlawful for any
person except a town officer or employee while performing his or her official
duties to touch, tamper with or in any manner manipulate or turn the cutoffs
on any water main forming a part of the town water system or to touch, tamper
with or turn on the valve of any fire hydrant.



   (B)   Unlawful use of water.  It shall be unlawful for any person
except an officer or employee of the town while performing his or her
official duties to release any water from or to take or carry any water from
any fire hydrant.



   (C)   Adoption date. This section was adopted on December 5, 1966.



(Ord. eff. 12-5-1966)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



      71.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES



      72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



      73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Definitions




Required Obedience to Traffic Regulations and Police Officers




   70.30   Required obedience to traffic ordinance



   70.31   Obedience to police



   70.32   Authority of police in special cases



   70.33   Public employees to obey traffic regulations



   70.34   Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles



   70.35   Persons propelling push carts, or riding bicycles or
animals, to obey traffic regulations




Obedience to Official Traffic-Control Devices




   70.50   Obedience to official traffic-control devices



   70.51   Obedience to no-turn signs and turning markers



   70.52   Obedience to no-parking zone and safety zone markers



   70.53   School zones



   70.54   Traffic-control signal legend



   70.55   Flashing signals




Truck Routes




   70.70   Trucks required to follow routes; marking of routes



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. I, § 1)



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.  Vehicles of the Fire Department,
police vehicles and those ambulances designated or authorized by the Chief of
Police.



   BLOCK. A portion of any street located between two intersections next
adjacent to each other.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway when 50% or
more of frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business.



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections.



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.



   DRIVER.  Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   INTERSECTION.  The area embraced within the prolongation of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or
more highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one highway
crosses the other.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled, and every
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails.



   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.  Whenever certain hours are named herein, they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
this town.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of
the governing body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS.  Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop
and to proceed.



   PARK.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   PERSON.  Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the Municipal Police Department or
any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.  Every road or driveway not open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   PUBLIC CONVEYANCE.  Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train
for transporting for fare.



   RAILROAD.  A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
street cars, operated upon stationary rails.



   RAILROAD TRAIN.  A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except street cars.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway not
comprising a business district when the frontage on the highway for a
distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings
and buildings in use for business.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.



   SAFETY ZONE.  The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.



   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.



   STOP.  When required, means complete cessation of movement.



   STOP or STOPPING.  When prohibited, means any STOPPING of a vehicle
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purpose of vehicular traffic.



   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars
and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for
purposes of travel.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided, that for
the purpose of this title, a bicycle or a ridden animal shall be deemed a
VEHICLE.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. I, §§ 2, 3, 4)



REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND POLICE OFFICERS



§ 70.30  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC ORDINANCE.



   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden by or fail
to perform any act required in this chapter.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. III, § 1)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.31  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.



   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order, or direction, by a police officer.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. III, § 2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.32  AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN SPECIAL CASES.



   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to
expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic
as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. III, § 3)



§ 70.33  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by, or used in the service of the United States Government, this state,
county or town and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, or
by state statute.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. III, § 4)



§ 70.34  EXCEPTIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation,
parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, as defined in this chapter, except as follows. A driver, when
operating such a vehicle in any emergency, except when otherwise directed by
a police officer, may:



      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal, or stop sign, but
only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he or she
does not endanger life or property; or



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement,
or turning in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger
life or property.



   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the
driver of the vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard
of the safety of others.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. III, § 5)



§ 70.35  PERSONS PROPELLING PUSH CARTS, OR RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS, TO
OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   Every person propelling any push cart, or riding a bicycle or an animal
upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which, by their very nature,
can have no application.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. III, § 6)



OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.50  OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle, street car and/or trackless trolley
shall obey the directions of any official traffic-control device applicable
thereto and placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of this town,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in § 70.34.



   (B)   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of
the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and
sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section does not state that signs are required, that section shall be
effective without signs being placed to give notice thereof.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. IV, § 1)



§ 70.51  OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating
that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the directions of any sign, and when authorized markers, buttons or
other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to
be traveled by vehicles traversing, or turning therein, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. IV, § 2)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.52  OBEDIENCE TO NO-PARKING ZONE AND SAFETY ZONE MARKERS.



   Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected or installed
indicating no-parking zones or safety zones, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the regulations in connection therewith.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. IV, § 3)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.53  SCHOOL ZONES.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating
any street, or parts thereof, as school zones, all drivers of motor vehicles
and operators of street cars using the streets, or parts thereof, shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon the streets, or parts thereof, for
the protection of children.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. IV, § 6)



§ 70.54  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
the words “Go,” “Caution” or “Stop” or exhibiting differently
colored lights successively, one at a time, the following colors only shall
be used, and the terms and lights shall indicate as follows:



   (A)   Green alone, or “Go.”



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through, or turn right or left unless a sign at that place prohibits either
turn. But vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time the signal is
exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   Yellow alone or “Caution,” when shown following the green
or “Go” signal.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if the stop cannot be
made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing this signal are hereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.



   (C)   Red alone, or “Stop.”



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at any other point as
may be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain standing until
green or “Go” is shown alone.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing such a signal shall enter the
roadway unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with any
vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Red with green arrow.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing this signal may cautiously
enter the intersection, only to continue the movement in the direction
indicated by the arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing this signal shall enter the roadway
unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. IV, § 7)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.55  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal).  When a red lens is illuminated
by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line when marked, and
the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal).  When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. IV, § 8)



TRUCK ROUTES



§ 70.70  TRUCKS REQUIRED TO FOLLOW ROUTES; MARKING OF ROUTES.



   (A)   All trucks and trailers entering the town destined to a point
outside of the town and not taking on or discharging any goods, wares or
merchandise within the town limits shall travel exclusively on the truck
routes established in Chapter 73, Schedule VIII, and all that part of the
truck routes shall constitute the shortest and most direct routes from the
point of entrance into the town and departure from the town.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall cause to be erected and maintained
at points where through truck routes enter the town and at all junction
points and turns where necessary, and at all approaches to the parts of
streets on which trucks are prohibited, signs of dimensions and at locations
as shall be seen and read without difficulty, and at locations as to
reasonably notify the public.



(Ord. eff. 1-1-1962)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified, if any person shall violate an
ordinance regulating the operation or parking of vehicles, he or she shall be
responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of not
more than $50.



(G.S. § 14-4(b))



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
70.70 and Chapter 73, Schedule VIII, division (A) shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 1-1-1962)



CHAPTER 71:  OPERATION OF VEHICLES



Section




Operation of Vehicles




   71.01   Stop before entering a through street



   71.02   Stop before entering certain street intersections



   71.03   Stop when traffic obstructed



   71.04   One-way streets



   71.05   Left turns at certain intersections as indicated



   71.06   No right or left turns to be made



   71.07   Limitations on turning around



   71.08   Limitations on backing



   71.09   Emerging from alley or private driveway



   71.10   Clinging to moving vehicles



   71.11   Riding on handlebars prohibited



   71.12   Riding on sidewalks, or without hands on handlebars,
prohibited



   71.13   Use of coasters, roller-skates and similar devices restricted



   71.14   Lights on parked vehicles



   71.15   Speed limit on through highways



   71.16   Driving on roadways laned for traffic



   71.17   Driving over fire hose



   71.18   Heavy equipment; tires and the like causing damage to streets



   71.19   Prohibiting the unlawful use of engine and compression brakes




Miscellaneous Regulations




   71.35   Boarding or alighting from public conveyances or other
vehicles



   71.36   Unlawful riding



   71.37   Entering, jumping on or riding vehicles without permission



   71.38   Persons riding must stay inside



   71.39   Not more than three persons permitted in front seat



   71.40   Prohibiting stopping vehicles on main traveled portions of
streets




Cruising Prohibited




   71.55   Definitions



   71.56   Signs posted



   71.57   No cruising area



   71.58   Cruising prohibited



   71.59   Exceptions



   71.60   Enforcement



 



   71.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Driving on sidewalks, see § 72.16



OPERATION OF VEHICLES



§ 71.01  STOP BEFORE ENTERING A THROUGH STREET.



   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets, as may be described in a
future traffic schedule, are hereby declared to be “through streets” for
the purpose of this section.



   (B)   When stop signs are placed, erected or installed upon highways
intersecting a through street at the entrance thereto, or at the entrance to
any intersection, every driver of a vehicle or street car, shall stop in
obedience to the signs before entering the intersection and shall not proceed
into or across the through street until he or she has first determined that
no conflict with traffic will be involved.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 1)



§ 71.02  STOP BEFORE ENTERING CERTAIN STREET INTERSECTIONS.



   Those intersections described in Chapter 73, Schedule II are hereby
declared to be stop intersections when entered from the streets first named,
and when stop signs are placed, erected or installed at the intersections,
every driver of a vehicle or street car shall stop in obedience to the signs
before entering the intersection, and shall not proceed into or across the
through street until he or she has first determined that no conflict with
traffic will be involved.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 2)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.03  STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 3)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.04  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   Upon those streets, and parts of streets, described in Chapter 73,
Schedule VII, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction,
when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at
every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 4)



§ 71.05  LEFT TURNS AT CERTAIN INTERSECTIONS AS INDICATED.



   In making left turns at street intersections described in Chapter 73,
Schedule III, all traffic, when approaching an intersection, shall keep close
to the centerline of the street and the left turn shall then be made beyond
the center of the intersection as may or may not be indicated by buttons,
markers or other directing signs, and shall proceed in the new direction
along the right-hand lane.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 6)



§ 71.06  NO RIGHT OR LEFT TURNS TO BE MADE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall make a left turn at any street intersection
as may be described in a future traffic schedule.



   (B)   No vehicle shall make a right turn at any intersection as may
be described in a future traffic schedule.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 7)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.07  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING ABOUND.



   No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite
direction in the business district, except at street intersections; and no
vehicles shall make such a turn, even at street intersections, in the
streets, or portions of streets, described in Chapter 73, Schedule IV.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 8)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.08  LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection
or over a crosswalk, and shall not in any event, or at any place, back a
vehicle unless the movement can be made in safety, and he or she shall have
given ample warning to those who may be behind by hand and horn or other
signal.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 9)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.09  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or into
the sidewalk areas extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the
roadway he or she shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on
the roadway.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 10)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.10  CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.



   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled,
rollerskates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself or
herself to any public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 12)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.11  RIDING ON HANDLEBARS PROHIBITED.



   The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not
carry any person upon the handlebar, frame or tank of the vehicle, nor shall
any person so ride upon any such vehicle.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 13)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.12  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS, OR WITHOUT HANDS ON HANDLEBARS; PROHIBITED.



   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without
having his or her hands upon the handlebars, nor shall any person ride a
bicycle upon any sidewalk or walkway within the town.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 14)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.13  USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER-SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   No person upon roller-skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway, unless it be while
crossing a street at a crosswalk or intersection, except upon streets set
aside as play streets.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 15)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.14  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   The displaying of lights upon a vehicle, when lawfully parked at night
upon a street of the town in accordance with this chapter, shall not be
required when there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a
distance of 200 feet upon the street.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 16)



§ 71.15  SPEED LIMIT ON THROUGH HIGHWAYS.



   A vehicle may be operated on any street of the town, unless otherwise
posted, at a rate of speed not exceeding 35 mph.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 18)



§ 71.16  DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.



   All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with
lanes for traffic shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 19)



§ 71.17  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   No vehicle shall be driven over any hose of the Fire Department when
laid down on any street or driveway, to be used at any fire, without the
consent of the Fire Department Official in command.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VI, § 20)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.18  HEAVY EQUIPMENT; TIRES AND THE LIKE CAUSING DAMAGE TO STREETS.



   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-296, it shall be unlawful for tractors, motor
graders, vehicles or heavy equipment of any kind which have metal tracks,
metal lugs, metal cleats or metal tires to be operated on paved streets or
paved municipally operated parking lots in the town.



(Ord. eff. 6-23-1971)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.19  PROHIBITING THE UNLAWFUL USE OF ENGINE AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.



   The purpose of this section is to prohibit the excessive, loud, unusual
or explosive use of engine and compressed air-braking devices within the town
limits.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE. Any engine retarding brake system, transmission
brake, or any other retarding brake system that alters normal compression,
including but not limited to DYNAMIC BRAKE, JAKE BRAKE, JACOBS BRAKE,
C-BRAKE, PACCAR BRAKE, or any other make or model of engine braking system,
or other braking system that alters the normal compression of the engine and
subsequently releases that compression.



   (B)   Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any
vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the town,
any engine brake, compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to
aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle unless such use is
necessary to avoid imminent danger.



   (C)   Areas of prohibition. The prohibition set forth herein shall
apply to all public streets and highways in the town.



   (D)   Signage. Signs stating "ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE ORDINANCE
ENFORCED" may be installed at locations deemed appropriate by the Board of
Commissioners to advise motorists of the prohibitions contained in this
section. Except that, no sign stating "ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE ORDINANCE
ENFORCED" shall be installed on a state highway without the approval from the
North Carolina Department of Transportation. The provisions of this section
shall be in full force and effect upon passage by the Town Board.



   (E)   Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating the
provisions of this section, shall upon G.S. § 14-4. A violation of this
section is a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a $50 fine.



   (F)   Exceptions. Emergency vehicles shall be exempt from the
application of this section.



(Ord. 2016-11-0453, passed 11-14-2016; Ord. 2017-02-0456, passed 2-13-2017)



MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS



§ 71.35  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM PUBLIC CONVEYANCES OR OTHER VEHICLES.



   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other
vehicle while the conveyance or vehicle is in motion.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VII, § 1)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.36  UNLAWFUL RIDING.



   No person shall ride on any public conveyance, or vehicle, or any
portion thereof, not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This
provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge
of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for
merchandise.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VII, § 2)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.37  ENTERING, JUMPING ON OR RIDING VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile, or other
vehicle, without the consent of the owner or driver.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VII, § 3)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.38  PERSONS RIDING MUST STAY INSIDE.



   No person when riding shall allow any part of his or her body to
protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding,
except to give any signals as are by law required, and no person shall hang
on to any vehicle whatsoever.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VII, § 4)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.39  NOT MORE THAN THREE PERSONS PERMITTED IN FRONT SEAT.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver, or the person in charge, of any
motor vehicle to permit more than three persons (including driver) to ride in
the front, or driver’s seat of motor vehicle.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. VII, § 5)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.40  PROHIBITING STOPPING VEHICLES ON MAIN TRAVELED PORTIONS OF STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stop on main traveled portion
of any street within the town limits for the purpose of an occupant or
operator of the vehicle speaking to or entering into conversation with the
driver or occupant of any other vehicle.



(Ord. eff. 6-10-1985)  Penalty, see § 71.99



CRUISING PROHIBITED



§ 71.55  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CRUISING.  The unnecessary, repetitive driving of a motor vehicle in a
continuous or circular pattern on the public streets or alleys in a manner so
as to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; the driving
of any motor vehicle past a traffic-control point three or more times within
a two-hour period within any street or alley designated below as a “No
Cruising” area; driving aimlessly through private parking lots within the
town where the owner has posted a sign prohibiting that activity; or driving
aimlessly in and out of the premises of a drive-in establishment without
apparent intent of patronizing the establishment.



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL POINT. Any point or points within a “No Cruising”
area established by the acting police officer(s) on duty in the area.



(Ord. eff. 3-12-1999)



§ 71.56  SIGNS POSTED.



   The Police Chief or his or her designee is authorized and directed to
cause signs to be posted at appropriate points within the “No Cruising”
areas, which signs to designate the area as a “No Cruising” area and to
provide the time period during which this chapter shall be enforced.



(Ord. eff. 3-12-1999)



§ 71.57  NO CRUISING AREA. 



   The streets or parts of streets set forth in Chapter 73, Schedule VI,
are designated as “No Cruising Areas” within the town at any time between
6:00 p.m. on Fridays and 3:00 a.m. on Saturdays, between 6:00 p.m. on
Saturdays and 3:00 a.m. on Sundays and between 6:00 p.m. on Sundays and 3:00
a.m. on Mondays; it being determined that cruising on the streets or parts of
streets set out in Chapter 73, Schedule VI during the times herein prohibited
results in traffic congestion, obstruction of public streets, limited access
to shops, store, office and other public building activities; presents
imminent danger to the public safety and welfare; and limits or impairs the
ability of the Police Department, Fire Department and other emergency
vehicles responding to emergency situations to reach the area in which an
emergency exists.



(Ord. eff. 3-12-1999)



§ 71.58  CRUISING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive a
motor vehicle in such manner as to constitute cruising on the streets or
alleys listed in Chapter 73, Schedule VI during the time listed in § 71.57.



(Ord. eff. 3-12-1999)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.59  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Any vehicle licensed for public transportation; and



   (B)   Any publicly owned vehicle of any town, city, county,
municipality, metropolitan government, public district, state or federal
agency.



(Ord. eff. 3-12-1999)



§ 71.60  ENFORCEMENT.



   This chapter will be in full force and effect and enforced only at any
time between 6:00 p.m. on Friday and 3:00 a.m. on Saturday, between 6:00 p.m.
on Saturday and 3:00 a.m. on Sunday and between 6:00 p.m. on Sunday and 3:00
a.m. on Monday.



(Ord. eff. 3-12-1999)



§ 71.99  PENALTY. 



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
71.18 shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
§§ 71.55 through 71.60 shall upon conviction be responsible for an
infraction and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S. §
14-4.



(Ord. eff. 6-23-1971; Ord. eff. 3-12-1999)



CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section



Along or Near Streets



   72.01   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited



   72.02   Parking parallel to curb



   72.03   Parking in alleys



   72.04   Parking signs required



   72.05   Notice of illegal parking; duty of police



   72.06   Operator to comply with regulations; effect of proof of
ownership



   72.07   Impoundment



   72.08   Parking prohibited at all times in designated places



   72.09   Parking or stopping of vehicles to the left side to curb;
not permitted in business district



   72.10   Parking within lines where provided



   72.11   Double diagonal parking



   72.12   Parking at 45-degree angle



   72.13   Unlawful parking



   72.14   Standing or parking vehicles for primary purpose of
advertising prohibited



   72.15   Moving vehicles of other operators into restricted areas
prohibited



   72.16   Parking on or driving on or over sidewalks



   72.17   Trailer and recreational vehicle parking on streets



   72.18   Blocking of an entrance to public street from private
property




Restricted Parking




   72.20   Authority; adoption date



   72.21   Applicability



   72.22   More restrictive provisions



   72.23   Person in control; proof of ownership



   72.24   Definitions



   72.25   Time limited parking by erecting signs; violations



   72.26   Civil penalties for violations



   72.27   Contesting a parking violation under this subchapter



   72.28   Civil remedy




In Public Parking Lots




   72.40   Authority; adoption date



   72.41   Applicability



   72.42   More restrictive provisions



   72.43   Person in control; proof of ownership



   72.44   Enforcement




Disabled Parking




   72.70   Disabled parking; properly marked vehicle; parking without
charge



 



   72.99   Penalty



ALONG OR NEAR STREETS



§ 72.01  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 12 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, unless
signs or markings indicate a lesser distance;



      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;



      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within
30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless signs or markings indicate a different length;



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing. However, where permanent structures are located closer than 50
feet, parking is permitted in front of the structures unless otherwise
prohibited and if the parked vehicle will not block the view in either
direction of a locomotive or train;



      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within 75 feet of the entrance;



      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (12)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street;



      (13)   On any bridge or other elevated structure on a highway
or within a highway tunnel;



      (14)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking; or



      (15)   On any part of the paved portion of any street, the
width of the paved portion of which is 12 feet or less.



   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her
control into any prohibited area or away from a curb the distance as is
unlawful.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1982)



§ 72.02  PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB.



   In residential areas and other areas where parking spaces are not
marked on the pavement and not designated as no parking zones, all vehicles
shall be parked parallel to the curb or the edge of the pavement and as far
to the right of the centerline as possible, leaving at least 12 feet of clear
unobstructed roadway for the safe passage of other vehicles. At no time may a
vehicle be parked directly across the street from another vehicle unless
there will be 12 feet of roadway open between the two vehicles.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1982)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park a
vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under conditions as to leave
available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
within an alley in a position as to block the driveway entrance to any
abutting property.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1982)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED.



   Whenever by this or any other chapter any parking time limit is imposed
or parking is prohibited in designated streets, there shall be appropriate
signs giving notice thereof. No parking regulations shall be effective unless
the signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1982)



§ 72.05  NOTICE OF ILLEGAL PARKING; DUTY OF POLICE.



   If any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or
other police officers of the town to attach to the vehicle a notice to the
owner or operator thereof, if the owner or operator is absent, or to deliver
to the owner or operator, if he or she is present, a notice to the effect
that the vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this chapter.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1982)



§ 72.06  OPERATOR TO COMPLY WITH REGULATIONS; EFFECT OF PROOF OF OWNERSHIP.



   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the
vehicle at the time that the vehicle is parked shall be charged with the duty
of complying with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that proof of
ownership of any vehicle found parked in violation of this chapter shall be
prima facie evidence that the owner parked the vehicle.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1982)



§ 72.07  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Police officers are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street
or highway to a garage designated by the Police Department under the
circumstances enumerated below:



   (A)   When any vehicle is left unattended on any bridge, viaduct or
causeway, or in any other place where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic;



   (B)   When a vehicle on a highway is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable
to provide for its custody or removal; and



   (C)   When any parked vehicle is left unattended on a street and is
parked illegally so as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the
normal movement of traffic.



   (D)   Sections 72.01 through 72.08 were adopted on July 12, 1982.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1982)



§ 72.08  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES IN DESIGNATED PLACES.



   When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, or
the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of the signs, no person shall
park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets described in Chapter 74,
Schedule I.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 3)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.09  PARKING OR STOPPING OF VEHICLES TO THE LEFT SIDE TO CURB; NOT
PERMITTED IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   Under and by virtue of the authority granted in the General Statutes of
this state granting municipalities the power to regulate vehicular traffic
upon public streets within the corporate limits, it shall be unlawful for any
vehicle to park or stop, either attended or unattended, with the left side
(driver’s side) of the vehicle to the curb on any street in the downtown
business district of the town.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 12)  (Ord. eff. 8-8-2011)  Penalty, see §
72.99



§ 72.10  PARKING WITHIN LINES WHERE PROVIDED.



   On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking
spaces for cars, the same shall be parked between the lines.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 13)



§ 72.11  DOUBLE DIAGONAL PARKING.



   Double diagonal parking shall not be allowed on any street.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 14)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.12  PARKING AT 45-DEGREE ANGLE.



   Automobiles and other vehicles shall be parked at an angle of
approximately 45 degrees with the curb on those streets, or parts of streets,
as may be described in a future parking schedule.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 15)



§ 72.13  UNLAWFUL PARKING.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purposes of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale;



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;



   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when the
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the automobile
or other vehicles; or



   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van, when the towing unit
has been disconnected, or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or
freight, from one vehicle to another.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 16)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.14  STANDING OR PARKING VEHICLES FOR PRIMARY PURPOSE OF ADVERTISING
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park on any street any vehicle for the primary purpose
of advertising.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 17)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.15  MOVING OF VEHICLES OR OTHER OPERATORS IN RESTRICTED AREAS
PROHIBITED.



   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by that person into any
prohibited area, or sufficiently away from curb to make the distance unlawful.



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 19)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.16  PARKING ON OR DRIVING ON OR OVER SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on or drive on or
over any sidewalk within the corporate limits of the town.



   (B)   This section shall repeal any single ordinance previously
passed by the Board of Commissioners which prohibits parking on sidewalks
within the corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2011)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.17  TRAILER AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING ON STREETS.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the purpose and intent of this section to
prevent the impediment of all traffic, especially emergency response
vehicles, i.e., fire, police, EMS and rescue squad vehicles, by certain
parked motor vehicles and all towed vehicles, and or trailers of any kind, on
any street or street right-of-way which is maintained by the town.



   (B)   Authority.  Under and by virtue of the authority granted in
the General Statutes of this state granting municipalities the power to
regulate vehicle traffic upon public streets within the corporate limits.



   (C)   Restrictions.  Except in parking spaces designated by the
town either with signs or on street markings allowing parking, it shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park or allow to be parked
any boat and trailer, camper, recreational vehicle motorized or
non-motorized, and any towed vehicle or trailer, whether commercial or
private and the like, on any portion of any street or street right-of-way
which is maintained by the town.



   (D)   Exemptions.  However, any vehicle or trailer which the use of
is necessary for the purpose of business or residential construction or
remodeling, loading or unloading, i.e., moving vans, delivery trucks and the
like, may be temporarily parked on town-maintained streets for no longer than
three hours within a 24-hour period, provided the parking of the vehicle does
not impede the flow of traffic in both directions simultaneously.



   (E)   Presumption.  Parked vehicles or trailers as described in
this section found to be in violation of this section shall raise a
rebuttable presumption that the owner of the vehicle was the person who
parked the vehicle in violation of this section.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.18  BLOCKING OF AN ENTRANCE TO PUBLIC STREET FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for two or more persons to congregate, assemble,
gather or park their vehicles on privately owned property of any business
establishment so as to block or partially block entrance to a public street
from any part of the property, without the consent of the owner, lessor or
other persons having right to possession of the private property.



(Ord. eff. 11-27-1974)  Penalty, see § 72.99



RESTRICTED PARKING



§ 72.20  AUTHORITY; ADOPTION DATE.



   Under and by virtue of the authority granted in G.S. § 160A-301 and
other state law granting municipalities the power to regulate parking within
the corporate limits, the herein codified ordinance is hereby passed on
February 8, 2016 and is in full force and effect as hereinafter set out.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



§ 72.21  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter restricting the parking of a vehicle
in the downtown business district shall apply at those times and days
specified on official signs erected by the town on certain blocks in the
downtown business district.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



§ 72.22  MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter imposing a time limit on parking
shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



§ 72.23  PERSON IN CONTROL; PROOF OF OWNERSHIP.



   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the
vehicle at the time that the vehicle is parked shall be charged with the duty
of complying with the provisions of this subchapter; provided that proof of
ownership of any vehicle found parked in violation of this subchapter shall
be prima facie evidence that the owner parked the vehicle.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



§ 72.24  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this subchapter unless context
indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK. A portion of a street that is not intersected by another street
or alley.



   DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT. The entire B-l business district as
designated on the zoning map of the town and shall include all streets within
this district.



   PARK. Includes the act of parking a vehicle and allowing the vehicle to
remain parked, and the act of failing to move such vehicle at the request of
a police official.



   RESTRICTED PARKING AREA. The blocks which are designated by signs where
parking times are limited.



   VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle as defined by the State of North Carolina
including but not limited to cars, trucks, vans, buses, limousines,
motorcycles, scooters, mopeds and other transportation devices.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



§ 72.25  TIME LIMITED PARKING BY ERECTING SIGNS; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   When signs are erected on selected street blocks in the
downtown business district giving notice of a time limit for parking on
specified days during specified hours, it shall be a violation of this
subchapter for a person to park a vehicle on the specified days, and during
the specified hours, for longer than the time limit set forth on the signs
which are erected designating a restricted parking area.



   (B)   The intent of this subchapter is to limit the parking of a
vehicle in the entire restricted parking area for the designated time period.
For example, an owner or operator of a motor vehicle cannot extend the total
designated time limit by moving the vehicle from one parking space to another
parking space in the restricted parking area. Nor can they move to a
different block within the restricted area to reset the clock. Time notated
for parking violations, is cumulative throughout the day in all areas where
limited parking is specified.



   (C)   Downtown visitors may park during normal business hours in
public parking lots, without time limits, during the day.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



§ 72.26  CIVIL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Civil penalty. Upon receiving a written citation of a
violation of § 72.25 above, the owner or operator of the vehicle shall pay a
civil penalty in the amount of $5. The civil penalty shall be paid at the
town hall within ten calendar days from the date of the citation. If the
citation is not paid within the ten calendar days, the civil penalty shall
increase to $10. If the citation is not paid within 30 days of the date of
the citation, the amount of the penalty shall increase to $20.



   (B)   Immobilization and/or Impoundment of vehicles having unpaid
parking tickets.



      (1)   The Chief of Police or his designee may immobilize, by
use of wheel locks, or tow or impound any vehicle which is illegally parked
and for which there have been two or more previous parking citations issued
within the past 30 days. When a wheel lock is attached to a vehicle, a notice
shall be affixed to the windshield or other part of the vehicle so as to be
readily noticed. The notice shall warn the operator that any attempt to move
the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle. The town shall not be
responsible for damage due to someone trying to move an immobilized vehicle.
All civil penalties for parking citations, plus a $50 fee for removing the
wheel lock shall be paid at the Town Hall within 24 hours of the
immobilization or the vehicle is subject to being towed and impounded by the
town police.



      (2)   Once a vehicle has been towed and impounded, the
investigating officer shall mail or cause to be mailed to the registered
owner a “notice of impoundment” which shall include the civil penalties
due plus the cost of removing the wheel lock and the towing and impoundment
fees.



      (3)   Upon payment of all civil penalties, wheel lock removal
and the cost of towing and impoundment at the Town Hall, the vehicle shall be
released to the registered owner or to any other person or entity entitled to
the possession of the vehicle.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



§ 72.27  CONTESTING A PARKING VIOLATION UNDER THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   Any parking violation under this subchapter that is contested will be
brought before the Chief of Police to determine if there is cause for the
parking violation to be voided.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



§ 72.28  CIVIL REMEDY.



   Upon failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to appear and pay
the civil penalty within the prescribed period, the town shall have the
rights and remedies for enforcement of a civil claim or equitable remedy
provided in G.S. § 160A-175(c), (d) and (e). It is specifically provided
that violations of this downtown business district parking ordinance are not
subject to the penal laws of the state and, therefore, not subject to the
penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 11-9-2015; Ord. eff. 2-8-2016)



IN PUBLIC PARKING LOTS



§ 72.40  AUTHORITY; ADOPTION DATE. 



   Under and by virtue of the authority granted in G.S. § 160A-301(b) and
other state law granting municipalities the power to regulate parking within
the corporate limits, the herein codified ordinance is hereby passed on
February 6, 1989 and is in full force and effect as hereinafter set out.



(Ord. eff. 4-1-1989)



§ 72.41  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter prohibiting the standing or parking
of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or
as indicated on official signs, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of
a police officer or official traffic-control device.



(Ord. eff. 4-1-1989)



§ 72.42  MORE RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter imposing a time limit on parking
shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.



(Ord. eff. 4-1-1989)



§ 72.43  PERSON IN CONTROL; PROOF OF OWNERSHIP.



   The person actually operating or in control of the operation of the
vehicle at the time that the vehicle is parked shall be charged with the duty
of complying with the provisions of this subchapter; provided that proof of
ownership of any vehicle found parked in violation of this subchapter shall
be prima facie evidence that the owner parked the vehicle.



(Ord. eff. 4-1-1989)



§ 72.44  ENFORCEMENT.



   The administration of civil sanctions of this subchapter shall be under
the direction of the Town Manager. He or she may assign one or more employees
of the town to assist him or her in the administration and enforcement.



(Ord. eff. 4-1-1989)



DISABLED PARKING



§ 72.70  DISABLED PARKING; PROPERLY MARKED VEHICLE; PARKING WITHOUT CHARGE.



   (A)   Any other person, firm or corporation parking in spaces
properly marked for disabled parking, unless the person, firm or corporation
is legally parked in the parking space for loading or unloading as permitted
in loading and unloading zones, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S.
§ 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 1-5-1982)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   If any person(s) shall violate § 72.09, he or she shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, and shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $50 or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days as provided by
G.S. § 14-4(a).



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Art. V, § 12)



   (C)   If any person(s) shall violate the provisions of § 72.16, he
or she shall upon conviction be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $50 or imprisoned not to exceed 30 days as
provided by G.S. § 14-1(a).



   (D)   A violation of § 72.17 shall constitute a general misdemeanor
punishable by the payment of a fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days pursuant to G.S. § 14-4.



   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of § 72.18 shall upon
conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance
with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
§§ 72.40 through 72.44 shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished in accordance with the provision of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 7-15-1982; Ord. eff. 4-1-1989; Ord. eff. - -; Ord. eff. 10-6-2003;
Ord. eff. 8-8-2011)



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I   Traffic-control signal lights



   II   Stop intersections



   III   Left turns made right of center



   IV   Turning restrictions



   V   No cruising areas



   VI   Truck routes



   VII   Speed limits



SCHEDULE I.  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LIGHTS.



   (A)   All traffic-control signal lights of any kind or description
heretofore installed and erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified herein are hereby confirmed and authorized to be installed and to
continue in operation at the following intersections:



 


Street

 

Intersection of Street

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective





Church Street
 
North Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

7-16-1956



Church Street
 
Spring Street
 

–

 

- -

 

7-16-1956



Hawthorne Road
 
North Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

7-16-1956



Main Street
 
Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

7-16-1956



Market Street
 
Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

7-16-1956



Spring Street
 
North Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

7-16-1956



Standard Street
 
South Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

7-16-1956



Standard Street
 
West Main Street
 

–

 

- -

 

7-16-1956





 



   (B)   All persons and drivers of motor vehicles shall obey the
directions of any traffic-control signal light in accordance with state law
or municipal ordinances applicable thereto.



(Ord. eff. 7-16-1956)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SCHEDULE II.  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



 


Street

 

Intersection of Street

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective





Church Street
 

Bridge Street

 

–

 

- -

 

- -



Elk Spur Street
 

West Main Street

 

–

 

- -

 

- -



Gwyn Avenue
 

Bridge Street

 

–

 

- -

 

- -



Gwyn Avenue
 

Spring Street

 

–

 

11-6-1989

 

1-1-1990



Spring Street
 

Bridge Street

 

–

 

- -

 

- -



Spring Street
 

Gwyn Avenue

 

–

 

- -

 

- -



West Main Street
 

Elk Spur Street

 

–

 

- -

 

- -





 



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Schedule X)  Penalty, see § 71.99



SCHEDULE III.  LEFT TURNS MADE RIGHT OF CENTER.



 


Intersection of Streets

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective



Bridge and Church Streets
 

–

 

- -

 

- -



Gwyn Avenue and Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

- -




 



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Schedule XI)  Penalty, see § 71.99



SCHEDULE IV.  TURNING RESTRICTIONS.



 


Street Intersection

 

Restriction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective



Bridge Street and Main Street
 
No left turn
 

–

 

- -

 

7-4-1968



Main Street and Bridge Street
 
Right turn onto Bridge Street permitted when:

approaching from East or West Main Street, faced by a green light and after
yielding ROW to pedestrians lawfully crossing, and after determining that the
turn can be made safely
 

–

 

- -

 

6-23-1971



Right turn onto Main Street permitted when:

approaching from the operator’s right-hand lane of Bridge Street, faced by
a green light and after yielding ROW to pedestrians lawfully crossing, and
after determining that the turn can be made safely


All other right-hand turns are misdemeanors subject to G.S. § 14-4


Main Street and Bridge Street when traveling in any of four directions
 
No right turn on red signal
 

–

 

- -

 

6-30-1974



West Main Street and Front Street when traveling west on West Main Street
 
No right turn on red signal
 

–

 

- -

 

6-30-1974




 



Penalty, see § 71.99



SCHEDULE V.  NO CRUISING AREAS.



   Pursuant to the provisions of § 71.57, the following are designated as
“No Cruising” streets during the times specified there:



 


No Cruising Areas

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective





All alleys located within the following boundaries:

Market Street on the north, the western boundary of CMI property on the east,
the Yadkin river on the south and Big Elkin Creek on the west
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999



Commerce Street (all)
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999



East Main Street from intersection of East Main Street and Standard Street to
west side of Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999



Front Street from Standard Street to Market Street
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999



Market Street from Big Elkin Creek to East Main Street
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999



North Bridge Street from Market Street to Main Street
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999



South Bridge Street from Standard Street to Main Street
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999



Standard Street (all)
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999



West Main Street from Big Elkin Creek Bridge to Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

3-12-1999





 



Penalty, see § 71.99



SCHEDULE VI.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   Traffic concerns.  All trucks and trailers are prohibited
from traveling upon the following streets:



 


Street

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective



Church Street extending from Market Street to Spring Street, between 8:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on all days in which school is in session at the grammar
school; except that trucks and trailers may travel on the part of the street
to reach or return from a destination on that part of the street
 

–

 

- -

 

10-6-1955



Front Street, from NC 268 to Market Street, unless the truck has a business
stop on this part of Front Street or one of the streets that intersect Front
Street between NC 268 and Market Street
 

–

 

- -

 

8-1-1974



Gwyn Avenue in its entirety, except that trucks and trailers may travel on
these parts of streets to reach or return from a destination upon the streets
 

–

 

- -

 

1-1-1962



Spring Street, from Gwyn Avenue to North Bridge Street, except that trucks
and trailers may travel on these parts of streets to reach or return from a
destination upon the streets
 

–

 

- -

 

1-1-1962




 



   (B)   Weight limits. Vehicles having a gross weight plus load in
excess of the following limits are prohibited from traveling on the following
streets:



 


Street

 

Maximum Weight

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective



Oakland Drive
 

8 tons

 

–

 

- -

 

8-4-1959



Oakland Drive
 

13,000 pounds

 

–

 

- -

 

5-1-1973




 



Penalty, see § 71.99



SCHEDULE VII.  SPEED LIMITS.



 


Street

 

Max. Speed (mph)

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective





Aaron Road, from Johnson Ridge to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Argonne Road
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

8-22-1974



Arnold Drive, from North Bridge Street to Brenhaven
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Auburn Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Austin - Benham Road
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Bon Air Road, from Brookwood Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Brenhaven Drive, from North Bridge Street to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Bridge Street (US 21 Business and NC 268), from Market Street (NC 268) to a
point 0.10 mile north of Market Street
 

20

 

8

 

- -

 

- -



Bridge Street (US 21 Business), from the southern corporate limit at the
Yadkin County Line, to Market Street (NC 268)
 

20

 

9

 

- -

 

- -



Bridge Street (US 21 and NC 268), from a point 0.1 mile north of Market
Street (US 21 and NC 268) to Spring Street (NC 268)
 

35

 

–

 

- -

 

10-9-1964



Brookwood Drive, from NC 268 East to Dutchman Creek
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Catawba Road, from Brookwood Drive to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Cedar Street, from Surry Avenue to West Main Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Chatham Drive, from North Bridge Street to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Church Street, any part
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

7-1-1991



Claremont Drive (SR 1195), from US 21 Business eastward to a point 350 feet
east of US 21 Business
 

35

 

–

 

- -

 

10-4-1993



Claremont Drive (SR 1195), from a point 350 feet east of US 21 Business
eastward to Johnson Ridge Road (SR 1144)
 

45

 

–

 

- -

 

10-4-1993



Claremont Drive, from North Bridge Street to Johnson Ridge Road
 

45

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Collins Road
 

25

 

2017- 08-0484

 

8-14-2017

 

8-14-2017



Colony Lane, from Johnson Ridge to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Commerce Street, from Monroe Street to Front Street
 

20

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Cox Avenue, from North Bridge Street to East Robin Road
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Day Street, between Pegram Street and Veneer Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Dogwood Lane, to Wisconsin Avenue
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Dutchman Creek, from Hawthorne Road to Brookwood
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Dutchman Creek
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



East Highland Avenue, from North Bridge Street to Maple Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



East Main Street (NC 268), from Market Street to a point 0.15 mile east of
Market Street
 

20

 

–

 

- -

 

1-30-1969



East Main Street (NC 268), from a point 0.15 mile east of Market Street to
the eastern corporate limits, approx. 0.65 mile east of Market Street
 

35

 

–

 

- -

 

1-30-1969



East Main Street, from Market Street along NC 268 in an eastward direction to
Elkin Furniture Company Main Plant at a point where the eastern town limits
existed on NC 268 as of January 1, 1964
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

10-9-1964



East Robin Road, from North Bridge Street to Cox Avenue
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



East Spring Street, between North Bridge and dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Edgedale Drive to Hillcrest Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Edgewood Drive to West Main Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Elk Spur Street (SR 1149), from a point 0.40 mile west of Memorial Park Drive
eastward for 0.33 mile, from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 and from 2:30 p.m. to 3:30
p.m. on school days only (high school speed zone)
 

20

 

–

 

- -

 

8-2-1994



Elk Spur Street (SR 1149), from West Main Street (SR 1149) at Masonic Drive
to the western corporate limit
 

35

 

–

 

- -

 

10-9-1964



Elk Spur Street, from Memorial Park Drive to West End NC 268 West
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Eller Street, from North Bridge Street to Hill Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Forest Hill Drive, from North Bridge Street to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Foxhall Drive, from Johnson Ridge to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Franklin Street, from Surry Avenue to West Main Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Front Street, between West Market and Commerce Street
 

20

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Graham Street to West Main Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Greenwood Street to Elk Spur Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Grove Avenue from Eller Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Gwyn Avenue, any part
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

9-1-1961



Gwyn Avenue, between East Market and North Bridge Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Harris Avenue
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



Harris Avenue
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Hawthorne Drive, from North Bridge Street to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Hawthorne Road
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

8-22-1974



Hendrix Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



NC 268 West, from Church Street to intersection at West End
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Hill Street, from Eller Street to Claremont Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Hillcrest Drive, between NC 268 East and dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Hollyhill Road to Meadowbrook
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Ivy Circle
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



Ivy Circle, from Dutchman Creek Road
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



James Street
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



James Street, between Masonic Drive and Memorial Park Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Johnson Street, between Pegram Street and Veneer Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Knollwood Drive, from Brookwood Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Lauren Drive
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



Lauren Drive, from South Street to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Lyles Street to Woodland Drive
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Main Street
 

20

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Main Street (SR 1149), from Bridge Street (SR 1148) to South Front Street
 

20

 

–

 

- -

 

10-9-1964



Manor Ridge Road, from Brookwood Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Maple Street, from Woodruff Street to Highland Avenue
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Marion Road, from Johnson Ridge to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Market Street (NC 268), from Bridge Street (US 21 Business and NC 268) to
East Main Street
 

20

 

7

 

- -

 

- -



Market Street, from Church Street east to Chatham Main Gate
 

20

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Masonic Drive, between Elk Spur and James Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Memorial Park Drive, from Elk Spur Street to NC 268 West
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Millview Drive, between NC 268 and dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Mountain View Road, from the intersection of Mountain View Road and Oak Grove
Road north to the intersection of Mountain View Road and Old Quarry Road
 

25

 

–

 
6-10-2013
 


NC 268 Business, from 0.78 mile east of SR 1190 to 0.21 mile east of SR 1144
 

45

 

4-213

 

11-21-2011

 

- -[2011]



NC 268 East, from the intersection of Brookwood Drive and NC 268 eastward to
I-77
 

35

 

–

 

- -

 

12-6-1993



Newman Road
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



Newman Road, from Reeves Lane to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



North Bridge Street (US 21 Business), from a point 0.1 miles north of C C
Camp Road (SR 1138) northward to Brookfall Dairy Road (SR 1157)
 

45

 

–

 

6-3-1996

 

- -[1996]



North Bridge Street, from Centel Office to McDonald’s
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



North Bridge Street, from McDonald’s to corporate limits
 

45

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



North Front Street, between West Market Street and West Main Street
 

15

 

–

 

- -

 

12-13-2010



North Front Street, between West Main Street and Market Street
 

20

 

–

 

- -

 

10-3-1994



North Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Northwood Drive
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



Northwood Drive to Oakland Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Oakland Drive, from NC 268 West to North Bridge Street
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Oakwood Drive to Hillcrest Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Old Virginia Road, beginning at a point near the Big Elkin Creek Bridge on
West Main Street and north by the playground and east by the water works and
continues east by the elementary school property
 

15

 

–

 

- -

 

7-19-1954



Old Virginia Road, between Front Street and Church Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Park Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Parkwood Drive, from north entrance on Johnson Ridge Road to south entrance
of Johnson Ridge Road
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Partridge Lane to Oakland Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Pegram Street, between NC 268 East and loop
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Pinewood Drive, from dead end to Hawthorne Road
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Pinewood Road
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

8-22-1974



Pleasant Hill Drive, from NC 268 West to town limits
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Pleasant Hill Road (SR 1150), from Spring Street (NC 268) to the northwestern
corporate limit
 

35

 

–

 

- -

 

10-9-1964



Powers Lane, between Elk Spur Street and NC 268 West
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Reeves Lane
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



Reeves Lane to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Ridge Street, from North Bridge Street to East Spring Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Salmon Street, from North Bridge to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



South Street
 

25

 

–

 

- -

 

4-3-1984



South Street, from Reeves Lane to dead end
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Spring Street (NC 268), from Bridge Street (US 21 and NC 268) to North Front
Street
 

35

 

–

 

- -

 

10-9-1964



Spring Street (NC 268), from the western corporate limit, at the Wilkes
County Line, to North Bridge Street
 

35

 

–

 

3-4-1985

 

- -[1985]



Spruce Street, from North Bridge Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



SR 1001, from 0.50 mile northeast of US 21 to US 21
 

45

 

4-214

 

11-21-2011

 

- -[2011]



Standard Street, from NC 268 East to Front Street
 

20

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Surry Avenue, between Veneer Street and Cedar Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Texas Street to West Main Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Turner Street, from Sloop Street to West Robin Road
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Valleybrook, from Brookwood Drive to Meadowbrook Road
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Victoria Street to Elk Spur Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Vine Street, from Surry Avenue to West Main Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



West Highland Avenue, from North Bridge Street then changes to Sloop Street
at same speed
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



West Main Street (SR 1149), from South Front Street to Elk Spur Street (SR
1149) at Masonic Drive
 

35

 

–

 

- -

 

10-9-1964



West Main Street, between the Big Elkin Creek Bridge on West Main Street and
the intersection of West Main Street and Elk Spur Street
 

25

 

–

 

6-4-1990

 

6-4-1990



West Main Street, from Elk Spur Street to Front Street
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



West Robin Road, from North Bridge Street to Turner Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Westover Drive to Hillcrest Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Westwood Lane to Oakland Drive
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Wilkes Street, portion located within the town
 

25

 

–

 

11-6-1989

 

11-6-1989



Wisconsin Avenue to Elk Spur Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Woodland Drive, from Claremont to Lyles Street
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Woodland Drive to Lyles Street
 

35

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Woodruff Street, from North Bridge Street to North Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986



Young Street to Elk Spur Street
 

25

 

–

 

10-6-1986

 

10-6-1986





 



Penalty, see § 71.99



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I   Parking prohibited



SCHEDULE I.  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Streets.  Parking is prohibited at all times on the following
streets:



 


Street/Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective





Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

5-19-1971



Church Street, east side, between Market Street and Spring Street
 

–

 

- -

 

10-7-1957



Church Street, east side, between Market Street and Spring Street
 

–

 

- -

 

10-2-1978



Church Street, east side, between Spring Street and a point 100 feet north of
the intersection of Hendrix Street and Spring Street
 

–

 

- -

 

4-7-1966



Church Street, west side, between the intersection of Church Street and Old
Virginia Road and the intersection of Church Street and the paved drive that
leads west from Church Street to the lunchroom at the elementary school
 

–

 

- -

 

1-4-1971



Court Street, one side only
 

–

 

- -

 

- -



Elk Spur Street
 

–

 

- -

 

11-1-1967



Front Street, east side, between Old Virginia Road and the municipal library
 

–

 

- -

 

8-21-1970



Fuller Street, south side
 

–

 

- -

 

5-26-1975



Gwyn Avenue, west side, from Market Street northward to North Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

3-1-1971



Harris Avenue, east side, between Sunset Avenue and the southernmost end of
Harris Avenue Extension or the dead end of the Harris Avenue Extension at
Maple Street
 

–

 

- -

 

3-2-1981



Harris Avenue, east side, between the north boundary of the property
designated as House No. 219 (now Earl Mastin property) and the north boundary
of the property designated as House No. 255 (now Leon Reece property)
 

–

 

- -

 

10-2-1978



Harris Avenue, west side, between the south side of William H. Harris
property at 208 Harris Avenue and the southern boundary of the property now
owned by Frank Barnes at 228 Harris Avenue
 

–

 

- -

 

5-7-1979





 



 


Street/Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective





NC 268, either side, between Front Street and Oakland Drive
 

–

 

- -

 

7-7-1980



Johnson Street, either side, from Pegram Street to Veneer Street
 

–

 

- -

 

10-11-1999



Main Street, intersection with Market Street on the west side of Church Street
 

–

 

- -

 

- -



Masonic Drive, west side, between Elk Spur Street and James Street
 

–

 

- -

 

12-9-1965



North Bridge Street, any part, from the intersection of North Bridge Street
and Church Street northward to the north corporate limits line
 

–

 

- -

 

9-1-1967



Pegram Street, either side, from Johnson Street to the northern end of the
pavement on Pegram Street
 

–

 

- -

 

5-7-1979



Ridge Street, north side, from North Bridge Street to a point 250 feet east
of North Bridge Street
 

–

 

- -

 

1-6-1966



South Street, west side, from House No. 122 to House No. 140
 

–

 

- -

 

5-3-1972



South Street, west side, between the property of House No. 118 and the
property of House No. 140
 

–

 

- -

 

3-5-1973



Spring Street, south side, from Gwyn Avenue to Church Street
 

–

 

- -

 

12-15-1971



Standard Street, east side, between Southern Railway Tracks and East Main
Street
 

–

 

- -

 

11-20-1958



Veneer Street, east side, in the area from NC 268, north to Day Street
 

–

 

5-6-1996

 

5-7-1996



Wilkes Street, either side, beginning at the crest of the hill which is
located approximately 600 feet west of Elk Spur Street and extending in a
westward direction 150 feet from the crest of the hill and extending 150 feet
east of the crest
 

–

 

- -

 

12-5-1983



Yadkin Street
 

–

 

- -

 

10-14-1974





 



(1940 Code, Ch. G, Schedule I) 



   (B)   Parking on privately owned business property.  It shall be
unlawful for anyone to park any vehicle or allow any vehicle to remain parked
at any time on any part of the below described property except while the
person so parking any vehicle or allowing the vehicle to remain parked on the
property is using the wash bays while actively washing the vehicles and
except while parking near the outside vacuum while actively vacuuming the
vehicles.



 


Property

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Date Effective



Elkin Laundrette, bounded on the west by the Ride With Pride Car Wash, on the
north by Standard Street, on the east by Elk Street, and on the south by
Commerce Street
 

–

 

- -

 

11-17-1984



Ride With Pride Car Wash, bounded on the north by Standard Street, on the
south and west by Commerce Street, and on the east by the Elkin Laundrette
 

–

 

- -

 

11-17-1984




 



Penalty, see § 72.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   RECREATION AND PARK FACILITIES



      91.   ABANDONED, JUNKED AND HAZARDOUS MOTOR VEHICLES



      92.   AIRPORT OPERATIONS; STANDARDS



      93.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



      94.   ANIMALS



      95.   NUISANCES, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT



      96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      97.   CEMETERIES



      98.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      99.   PUBLIC LIBRARY



CHAPTER 90:  RECREATION AND PARK FACILITIES



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Purpose and findings



   90.02   Recreation and Parks Department; authority



   90.03   Recreation and Parks Director




Recreation Facility Rules




   90.15   Definitions



   90.16   Trespass



   90.17   Vehicles in parks



   90.18   Advertising



   90.19   Firearms, air rifles, toy arms, concealed handgun permit and
other hazardous activities



   90.20   Climbing on buildings and structures



   90.21   Animals running at large; horseback riding



   90.22   Mistreatment of animals



   90.23   Throwing rocks, bottles, dirt



   90.24   Alcoholic beverages, controlled substances



   90.25   Littering



   90.26   Fires



   90.27   Excavations



   90.28   Digging up, cutting, injuring plants



   90.29   Water use other than drinking



   90.30   Camping in designated areas



   90.31   Park closing times



   90.32   Prohibition of convicted sex offenders in public parks



   90.33   Volunteers and volunteer coaching



   90.34   Swimming, jumping, diving and fishing




Municipal Park




   90.45   Peddling, selling or begging without written authorization



   90.46   Dogs prohibited without leash



 



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS; ADOPTION DATE.



   (A)   The Board of Commissioners of the town is enacting this
chapter to establish reasonable regulations for use of town recreation and
parks facilities.



   (B)   The Board finds that recreation and parks facilities are
provided for the general benefit of the citizens of the town and surrounding
area and that the recreation facilities are created and maintained for public
use under G.S. Ch. 160A, Article 18. However, when there are no regulations
to govern the use of recreation and parks facilities, activities can occur
which threaten the safe use of the facilities by the public, may pose traffic
hazards, and may have a negative impact on the aesthetic value of the
recreation facility.



   (C)   By enacting this chapter, the Board intends to:



      (1)   Balance the rights of individuals to utilize recreation
facilities in a constructive active or passive manner which does not infringe
on the rights of others to do the same;



      (2)   Protect the public health, safety, and welfare;



      (3)   Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; and



      (4)   Ensure fair and consistent enforcement of the
regulations specified below.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)



§ 90.02  RECREATION AND PARKS DEPARTMENT; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of G.S. Ch. l60A, Art. 18,
there is created a recreation Department within the town.



   (B)   In addition to any other powers the town may possess, the town
shall have the right to exercise all authority granted to it under G.S. §
160A-353.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)



§ 90.03  RECREATION AND PARKS DIRECTOR.



   The Recreation and Parks Director shall be appointed by and responsible
to the Town Manager for the administration of the Recreation and Parks
Department.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)



RECREATION FACILITY RULES



§ 90.15  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   DIRECTOR. Director of the Recreation and Parks Department or authorized
agents.



   TOWN RECREATION FACILITY. A park, playground, athletic facility or any
recreational area of any type whatsoever, including, but not limited to
walking/hiking trails, paths and greenways, which are owned, leased or
otherwise in the possession of the town.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)



Statutory reference:



   General authority relative to recreation and parks, see G.S. §§
160A-350 et seq.



§ 90.16  TRESPASS.



   (A)   All employees of the Recreation and Parks Department of the
town shall enforce the rules and regulations of the Department that define
those activities within or upon a town recreation facility that are
prohibited or mandated.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to leave a town
recreation facility after having been asked to leave by an employee on or
authorized agent on account of a violation of the rules and regulations.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful, during the hours that the town
recreation facilities are closed to the public, for any person to trespass
thereon.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015) Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.17  VEHICLES IN PARKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, propel or
otherwise operate or use any motor vehicle, bicycle, minibike, motorcycle or
other transportation device, whether motor powered, self-propelled or
animal-drawn, in, over or through any town recreation facility, except along
and upon roadways or pathways, so designated, in or on town recreation
facilities. Roller skates, roller blades, and skateboards shall be permitted
in designated areas only and shall not be used upon tennis courts,
shuffleboard courts and shelter areas, or elsewhere where their operation is
a hazard to life or property.



   (B)   Use of bicycles, roller skates, roller blades and skateboards
shall be subject to safety regulations of G.S. § 20-171.6 regarding
mandatory helmet laws for operators.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be
parked any transportation device upon any town recreation facility except
upon parking areas designated by the Director. If shall further be unlawful
for any person to park on any roadway or in any designated space of a town
recreation facility except for the purpose of using the park, its facilities
and programs. Parking shall be for recreation facility patrons only.



   (D) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle parked and
unattended upon the grounds of any town recreation facility for longer than
12 hours or overnight without a permit. Any vehicle so parked unattended on
the grounds of a recreation facility will be subject to be towed away at the
owner’s expense. Any such vehicle towed may be reclaimed by its owner upon
payment of towing fees.



   (E) Only pedestrian and bicycle traffic are allowed on trails, paths
and greenways operated and maintained as a town recreation facility. This
section shall not apply to emergency vehicles, or vehicles in the service of
the town.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.18  ADVERTISING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any structure,
sign, bulletin board, posthole, or advertising device of any kind whatsoever
in any town recreation facility, or to attach any notice, bill, poster, sign,
wire, rod or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or structure
within any town recreation facility. This section and its prohibition shall
not apply to any signs lawfully erected in specified areas at polling places
the day of the election and removed at the close of polling on Election Day.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)



§ 90.19  FIREARMS, AIR RIFLES, TOY ARMS, CONCEALED HANDGUN PERMIT AND OTHER
HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except law enforcement
officers and members of the armed services when acting in the discharge of
their official duties, to discharge, shoot, fire or explode or cause to be
discharged, shot, fired or exploded any deadly weapon, air rifle or toy
pistol, toy rifle or other toy arms so designed and capable of forcibly
hurling a projectile or missile within any town recreation facility.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any firearm
where there is posted a prohibition sign, including a handgun carried under
the authority of a lawful concealed handgun permit, at the following
recreation and park facilities (i.e. athletic facilities, athletic fields and
playground) in accordance with G.S. § 14-415.23:



      (1)   Elkin Recreation Center;



      (2)   Baseball, softball, soccer and multi-use athletic fields
located within Elkin Municipal Park, Crater Park and Chatham Park during a
scheduled, organized athletic event;



      (3)   Elkin Municipal Pool;



      (4)   Any playground within Elkin Municipal Park, Crater Park
and Chatham Park; and



      (5)   Tennis courts located within Elkin Municipal Park;



      (6)   It shall be unlawful to participate in any activity
considered by the Recreation and Parks Department to be hazardous to persons
within any town recreation facility, including but not limited to:



         (a)   Hitting of golf balls;



         (b)   Hitting of baseballs or softballs other than
within designated “ball fields;”



         (c)   Throwing or propelling javelins, arrows, spears or
other projectiles, including the use of bows and crossbows; and



         (d)   The use of “fireworks” or other incendiary
devices within any town recreation facility without a permit issued by the
Director.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.20  CLIMBING ON BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a person authorized by the
Director, to climb upon any recreational building, bridge, rail, dam, cliff,
boulder or tree; or, attach to any structure, tree or other natural object
any rope, cable, chain or vine for the purpose of a swing.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.21  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; HORSEBACK RIDING.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or the person in possession to
permit any horses, dogs, cats or other animals to run at large within any
town recreation facility or to ride horses within the same. Owners of dogs
and cats must comply fully with the requirements of the town’s “Leash
Law” (§ 94.03).



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, catch, injure, tease, kill
or treat cruelly any bird or animal, or cause the same to occur, or molest or
rob any nest of any bird, or any lair, den, burrow or similar structure of
any animal within any town recreation facility. Fishing is allowed only per
North Carolina wildlife regulations.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  THROWING ROCKS, BOTTLES, DIRT.



   It shall be unlawful to throw rocks, bottles, dirt, mud or any similar
materials within any town recreational facility or on any trail or greenway,
including the throwing of any of such materials into any water course, pond,
or reservoir.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.24  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume or display any
alcoholic beverages or any substance included within the schedules of the
North Carolina Controlled Substances Act without a proper prescription in the
name of the possessor, within any town recreation facility, unless authorized
by the Town of Elkin Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 113-35(a)



§ 90.25  LITTERING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any
trash, ashes, soil, paper or leaves and other plant debris in or upon any
town recreation facility except in containers provided for this purpose.
Further, it shall be unlawful for any individual to dispose of household or
business garbage in recreation facility garbage containers.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 113-35(a); G.S. § 14-399



§ 90.26  FIRES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or kindle a fire in or upon
any town recreation facility except within a fireplace or grill provided for
this purpose or to leave an authorized fire unattended by a competent person
without having completely extinguished the same and the embers thereof.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.27  EXCAVATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavation in any town
recreation facility for any purpose without written permission from the
Director.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.28  DIGGING UP, CUTTING, INJURING PLANTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, cut, bruise, debark,
mutilate or otherwise injure any plant of any type whatsoever within any town
recreation facility without written permission from the Director. This
section shall not apply to a person walking normally on grass or other
similar plants or if an injury to a plant was incidental to an authorized
recreational activity.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.29  WATER USE OTHER THAN DRINKING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in or on any town recreation
facility to use water belonging to the town for any purpose other than
drinking unless such person is authorized by the Director to use town water
for an otherwise impermissible purpose.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.30  CAMPING IN DESIGNATED AREAS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in or on any town recreation
facility to camp/lodge outside of a designated camping area. Camping is
restricted to primitive camping (tent camping only) and limited to a single
consecutive 24-hour period. Campers will be required to place any refuse in
appropriate containers and adhere to all other park rules and regulations.
Campers will be allowed to stay within a designated area between the times of
1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sunday through Saturday.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions, see Recreation Facility Rules § 2-37



§ 90.31  PARK CLOSING TIMES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within
Elkin Municipal Park during the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sunday
through Saturday. The town shall have the authority to initiate closing times
at other facilities, from time to time, upon notification to the public by
posting closing times one week prior to the effective date. All trails and
greenways shall operate sun-up to sun-down, unless lighting is provided
(Elkin Municipal Park Walking Track). The provisions of this section do not
abridge, limit, or affect the rights of members of the public entitled to use
recreation facilities of the town as participants, spectators, or otherwise,
when they are not violating this section or state laws.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions, see Recreation Facility Rules Section 2-23(c)-(d)



§ 90.32  PROHIBITION OF CONVICTED SEX OFFENDERS IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   (A)   For purposes of this section the following definitions shall
apply:



      PUBLIC PARK. Any publicly owned, leased, operated or maintained
land or buildings which are designated by the town as a recreational or park
facility.



      REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER. An individual who is registered by any
state or Federal agency as a sex offender and whose name is published on any
state or Federal registered sex offender listing, including but not limited
to the sex offender registry established in G.S. Chapter 14, Article 27A.



   (B)   No registered sex offender shall enter into or upon any public
park operated by the town. Each entry into a public park, regardless of the
time period between such entries, shall constitute a separate offense under
this section.



(Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed
9-14-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.33  VOLUNTEERS AND VOLUNTEER COACHING.



   (A)   To be considered, all volunteers must complete a volunteer
application. Individuals who seek to volunteer as a youth coach or who
volunteer for any recreation program involving children under the age of 18
must provide the following information to the Recreation and Parks Director
or his/her designee:



      (1)   A valid North Carolina driver’s license number and
his/her social security number. He/she must submit to a nationwide background
check by a third party contractor and a fingerprint may be required.



      (2)   Fingerprints will be collected at the Elkin Police
Department, and will be processed by the State of North Carolina (State
Bureau of Investigation).



      (3)   Prior to denial or termination of
volunteering/employment based on CHRI received from the criminal justice
agency, the non-criminal entity shall verify the existence of a record by
either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint
card of the individual to the SBI for verification that the CHRI record
belongs to the individual.



      (4)   The Town Recreation and Parks Department will be
responsible for determining volunteer eligibility based on the results of the
nationwide background check and/or fingerprinting results. Criteria for which
a person would be denied to volunteer are any convictions of any felonies,
misdemeanors involving drugs, fraud, violence or child abuse, etc.



   (B)   It is at the discretion of the Recreation and Parks Director
or his/her designee to utilize a volunteer depending on need, the
applicant’s previous experience and/or information revealed through
personal interview or background check information.



(Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed 9-14-2015)



§ 90.34  SWIMMING, JUMPING, DIVING AND FISHING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to swim within 200 feet of any structure
on any water course running through or adjacent to any Town Recreation
Facility unless otherwise posted.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to jump, dive, or fish off any bridges or
structures into any water course running through or adjacent to any Town
Recreation Facility.



(Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed 9-14-2015)



MUNICIPAL PARK



§ 90.45  PEDDLING, SELLING OR BEGGING WITHOUT WRITTEN AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The ELKIN MUNICIPAL PARK PROPERTY is defined as the recreation
area located south of Highway 268, north and east of Big Elkin Creek and west
of Standard Street and part of Duke Power Company property, identified as
recreational facilities such as trails, greenways and parks.



   (B)   It shall  be unlawful for any person to engage in soliciting,
peddling, begging or selling, or ply the vocation of a solicitor, agent,
peddler, beggar or salesperson of any description on or in any recreation
area or facility located on the property described in division (A) above, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hawk or vend any type of food or
beverage or any type of merchandise within any recreation areas or facilities
located on the property described in division (A) above unless written
authority be given by the Recreation and Parks Director.



(Ord. eff. 5-3-1982; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed 9-14-2015)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.46  DOGS PROHIBITED WITHOUT LEASH.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog not controlled by leash to be
on the Municipal Park at any time.



   (B)   Any owner of a dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished as hereinafter set out if the owner’s dog is on any part of the
Municipal Park when the dog is not controlled by a leash.



(Ord. eff. 3-15-1982; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed 9-14-2015)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be a Class 3
misdemeanor under the authority of the G.S. § 14-4, which provides for a
fine of $50. Unless otherwise stated by a specific General Statute. Each
violation of this section shall be treated as a separate offense.



(Ord. eff. 3-15-1982; Ord. eff. 5-3-1982; Ord. eff. 12-12-2011; Ord. eff.
8-11-2014; Ord. 2015-09-0416, passed 9-14-2015)



CHAPTER 91:  ABANDONED, JUNKED AND HAZARDOUS MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   91.01   Administration



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   91.04   Hazardous vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   91.05   Junked motor vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   91.06   Permitted concealment or enclosure



   91.07   Pre-towing notice required



   91.08   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice



   91.09   Probable cause hearing prior to disposition



   91.10   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property



   91.11   Immunity from criminal and civil action



   91.12   Exceptions



   91.13   Adoption date



§ 91.01  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The town police and Code Enforcement Division shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The
Police Department shall be responsible for administering the removal of
vehicles determined to be abandoned on public property, including streets and
parking lots within the town limits. The Code Enforcement Division shall be
responsible for administering the removal of abandoned, junked and hazardous
vehicles located on private property within the town.



   (B)   The town may contract with private towing operators to remove,
store and dispose of abandoned, junked and hazardous vehicles in compliance
with all state and local laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
limit the legal authority and powers of the town police and Fire Department
officer in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303,
one that:



      (1)   Is left upon a street or highway in violation of a law
or ordinance prohibiting parking;



      (2)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for
longer than 24 hours;



      (3)   Is left on private property for longer than two hours
without the written consent of the owner, occupant or lessee of the property;
or



      (4)   Is left for longer than seven days on a public street or
highway.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The person or persons designated by the Manager to
perform the duties and responsibilities assigned by this chapter.



   HAZARDOUS MOTOR VEHICLE.  A vehicle on public or private property that
is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other
insects, snakes, rats or other pests;



      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious
vegetation over 18 inches in height;



      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;



      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil
or other flammable or explosive materials;



      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be
opened from the inside, such as trunks, hoods and the like;



      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it
falling or turning over;



      (7)   A point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;



      (8)   One which has sharp parts which are jagged or contain
sharp edges of metal, glass or other rigid materials; or



      (9)   One which creates any circumstances which expose the
general public to a safety or health hazard.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE.  As authorized and defined in G.S. §
160A-303.2, one that does not display a current license plate lawfully and
that:



      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;



      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which
it originally was intended to move; or



      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less
than $100.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any machine designed or intended to travel over land
or water by self-propulsion or while attached to a self-propelled vehicle.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY. All of that property as described and set out in an
owner’s deed, including but not limited to yards, grounds, driveways,
entrances or passageways, parking areas, storage areas, vacant land, bodies
of water and including sidewalks, grass strips, curbs or rights-of-way up to
the edge of the pavement of any public street.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  All that property except private property as herein
defined, including but not limited to highways, streets, alleys, parks,
recreation areas, sidewalks, grass strips, medians, curbs or rights-of-way up
to the edge of the pavement of any public street or body of water.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land that is dedicated or otherwise legally
established for public use.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of public health nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193



§ 91.03  ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow the vehicle to be
abandoned as the term is defined herein.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the Administrator may determine that a
vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.04  HAZARDOUS VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located, to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a
hazardous vehicle.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the Administrator may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a hazardous vehicle and order the vehicle removed.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.05  JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner,
lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is
located, to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the
vehicle has been ordered removed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the
possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of
the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located, to fail to
comply with the locational requirements or the concealment requirements of
this chapter.



   (C)   Subject to the provisions of division (D) below, upon
investigation, the Administrator may order the removal of a junked motor
vehicle as defined in this chapter after finding in writing that the
aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on
the private property owner. The finding shall be based on a balancing of the
monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the
public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance.
The following among other relevant factors may be considered:



      (1)   Protection of property values;



      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development
opportunities;



      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;



      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the
community; and



      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional
stability of area residents.



   (D)   In determining whether a vehicle constitutes a junked motor
vehicle the Administrator, in applying the specific criteria in the
definition of a junked motor vehicle, shall take into consideration but not
be limited to whether the vehicle has a valid inspection decal as evidence of
the stationary character of the vehicle; whether the vehicle displays a
current state license plate as evidence of being maintained; whether the
tires, wheels and other essential parts of the vehicle are present for the
operation of the vehicle; flat tires; removed parts, the condition of the
exterior or any other specific evidence that would support a finding that the
vehicle violates this section. If such a determination is made, the
Administrator shall state that basis in writing.



   (E)   The town may require any person requesting removal of a junked
motor vehicle from private property to indemnify and hold harmless the town
against any loss, expenses or liability incurred because of the removal,
storage or sale thereof.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.06  PERMITTED CONCEALMENT OR ENCLOSURE.



   (A)   One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, can be located in
the rear yard (as defined by the town’s zoning ordinance) of any property
being lawfully used for one- or two-family residential purposes, if the
vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public street and from
abutting premises by an acceptable covering. The covering shall be kept in
good repair and shall not be allowed to deteriorate. The Administrator is
authorized to determine whether any junked motor vehicle is adequately
concealed by an acceptable covering as required by this provision.



   (B)   Any other junked motor vehicle(s) must be kept in a garage or
building structure that provides a complete enclosure so that the junked
motor vehicles(s) cannot be seen from a public street or abutting property. A
GARAGE OR BUILDING STRUCTURE means either a lawful, nonconforming use or
garage or building structure erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a
building permit and which has been constructed in accordance with all zoning
and building code regulations.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



§ 91.07  PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as set forth in division (C) below, a junked, abandoned
or hazardous vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice
has been given to the registered owner or to the person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a junked or hazardous vehicle, if
the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located, can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be sent by first class
mail. If the information cannot be so ascertained, or if the vehicle to be
removed is abandoned, notice shall be affixed to the vehicle in a conspicuous
place.



   (B)   The notice required by division (A) above shall state why the
vehicle is subject to removal and that the vehicle will be removed within
seven days after the postmarked date or date of affixation of the notice
unless removed prior to that time. Except in those instances where pre-towing
notice is not required to be given, if the owner or person entitled to
possession does not remove the vehicle but wished to appeal the
Administrator’s determination that the vehicle is abandoned, is a safety or
health hazard or, in the case of a junked vehicle, that the aesthetic
benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, he or she may submit a
written request to do so to the Administrator before the seven-day period has
expired. The appeal shall be heard by the Town Manager within 30 days of the
appeal and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until
the appeal is heard and decided.



   (C)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of
an abandoned, junked or hazardous vehicle may, as determined by the
Administrator, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special
need for a prompt action to eliminate traffic obstruction or to otherwise
maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. By way of illustration
and not of limitation, these circumstances include vehicles blocking or
obstructing ingress or egress to business and residences, vehicles parked in
a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage
to public or private property. The findings shall, in all cases, be entered
by the Administrator in the appropriate daily records.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



§ 91.08  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE.



   (A)   The town may have vehicles removed under this chapter by
private towing operators. Any abandoned, junked or hazardous vehicle which
has been ordered removed may be removed to a storage area by the tow truck
operator or towing business contracting to perform those services for the
town.



   (B)   Whenever a vehicle with a valid registration plate or
registration is removed, the Administrator shall immediately notify the last
known registered owner of the vehicle, and the notice shall include the
following:



      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;



      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;



      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;



      (4)   The procedure which the owner must follow to redeem the
vehicle; and



      (5)   The procedure to be followed to request a probable cause
hearing.



   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in this state, notice shall be
given within 24 hours from removal of the vehicle. Otherwise, notice shall be
given to the registered owner within 72 hours from removal of the vehicle.
This notice shall, if feasible, be given by telephone. Regardless of whether
the owner is reached by phone, notice shall be sent to the owner at his or
her last known address unless he or she, or his or her agent, waives this
notice in writing.



   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, junked or hazardous vehicle is removed
and the vehicle has no valid registration or registration plate, the
Administrator shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number, to determine the last known registered owner and to
notify the owner of the information listed in division (B) above.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



§ 91.09  PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING PRIOR TO DISPOSITION.



   Any abandoned, junked or hazardous motor vehicle which is not claimed
by the owner or other party entitled to possession may be disposed of by the
tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle.
Disposition of the vehicle shall be earned out in accordance with G.S.
Chapter 44A.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



§ 91.10  CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The town will not remove a vehicle from private property if
the owner, occupant or lessee could have the vehicle removed under applicable
state law procedures.



   (B)   Unless determined to be hazardous or junked motor vehicle by
the Administrator, no vehicle shall be ordered removed by the town without
prior written request from the owner, occupant or lessee.



   (C)   The town may require any person requesting the removal of a
junked, abandoned or hazardous vehicle from private property to indemnify the
town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal,
storage or sale of the vehicle.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



§ 91.11  IMMUNITY FROM CRIMINAL AND CIVIL ACTION.



   No person shall be held to answer in any criminal or civil action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to possession of any junked,
abandoned or hazardous motor vehicle for disposing of the vehicle as provided
in this chapter.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



§ 91.12  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:



      (1)   Which is located in a bona fide “automobile
graveyard” or “junkyard” as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance
with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. § 136-141;



      (2)   Which is in an enclosed building;



      (3)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the enterprise;



      (4)   Which is used regularly for personal use; or



      (5)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town or private towing
operator contracting with the town for removal of vehicles.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      A VEHICLE IS NECESSARY TO THE OPERATION OF THE ENTERPRISE. 
Shall mean, but not be limited to the clear, active use or involvement of the
vehicle in the operation of the business enterprise. Mere storage or idle
standing of a vehicle does not constitute A VEHICLE NECESSARY TO THE
OPERATION OF THE BUSINESS.



      LAWFUL PLACE AND MANNER.  Includes but is not limited to strict
compliance with the town’s zoning ordinance.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



§ 91.13  ADOPTION DATE.



   This chapter was adopted June 13, 2005.



(Ord. eff. 6-13-2005)



CHAPTER 92:  AIRPORT OPERATIONS; STANDARDS



Section




Rules and Regulations




   92.01   Rules adopted; date



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Enforcement by Airport Manager



   92.04   Authority to regulate



   92.05   Motor vehicle regulations



   92.06   Aircraft operation regulations



   92.07   Rules for aircraft fueling operations



   92.08   Fire regulations



   92.09   Special airport uses




Minimum Standards for Commercial Operations, Fixed Base Operators or Limited
Fixed Base Operators




   92.20   Definitions



   92.21   Minimum standards, generally



   92.22   Fuel and oil



   92.23   Aircraft maintenance and repair



   92.24   Flight training



   92.25   Charter service



   92.26   Aircraft rental and sales



   92.27   Miscellaneous operations



   92.28   Hangar space



   92.29   Minimum standards for hangars and buildings



   92.30   Equality of services



   92.31   Civil rights requirements



   92.32   Adoption date




Limitations on Height of Objects Around Airport




   92.45   Short title



   92.46   Definitions



   92.47   Airport zones



   92.48   Airport zone height limitations



   92.49   Use restriction



   92.50   Nonconforming uses



   92.51   Permits



   92.52   Enforcement



   92.53   Board of Adjustment



   92.54   Appeals



   92.55   Judicial review



   92.56   Conflicting regulations



 



   92.99   Penalty



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 92.01  RULES ADOPTED; DATE.



   The town hereby adopts the following rules and regulations for the
operation and use of the Municipal Airport located at 1598 C.C. Camp Road,
Elkin, N.C.  This subchapter was adopted on June 9, 2003.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIRPORT.  The Municipal Airport.



   AIRPORT MANAGER.  The officer or representative of the town having
immediate charge of the airport.



   FAA.  The Federal Aviation Administration.



   NTSB.  The National Transportation Safety Board.



   OWNER.  The Town of Elkin.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, firm, association or corporation.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.03  ENFORCEMENT BY AIRPORT MANAGER.



   The Airport Manager shall, at all times, have authority to take any
reasonable action as may be necessary to enforce these regulations and to
efficiently manage the airport and its operations. In any contingencies not
specifically covered by these rules and regulations, the Airport Manager
shall be authorized to make any reasonable rules and decisions as may be
necessary and proper to ensure continued normal operation of the airport.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.04  AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.



   (A)   The owner has the right to and does hereby regulate all
commercial enterprises using the airport as a base of operation, whether the
operation is aeronautical or otherwise. No commercial operation of any kind
shall be conducted on the airport unless specifically authorized by the owner.



   (B)   A flying club is recognized as a plan for the joint ownership
of aircraft and the fair distribution of the cost of maintaining and
operating the aircraft. This operation is not considered to be commercial in
nature so long as there is no profit or for-hire motive involved in the
operation. In all cases, the owner will determine if the operation of a
flying club is commercial. If determined to be commercial, the club shall
conform to the commercial operation standards enforced by the town.



   (C)   The use of the airport or any of its facilities shall create
an obligation on the part of the user thereof to obey all of the regulations
herein provided and adopted by the owner.



      (1)   The privilege of using the airport and its facilities
shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the
user thereof, and the user shall release and hold harmless the owner, its
officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from use of the
airport or facilities by the user.



      (2)   The privilege of using the airport or facilities thereof
shall be upon the further condition that any person, corporation or any
others desiring to use the airport or facilities shall furnish, upon request,
a policy of indemnity against personal injury and/or property damage incurred
by the user.



   (D)   Any person violating any of the airport rules and regulations
may be punished as provided by law or ordinance or, at the discretion of the
owner, may be deprived of the use of the airport facilities for a period of
time as deemed necessary to be effective.



   (E)   No person shall solicit funds for any purpose, and no signs or
advertisements shall be posted on airport property without the written
permission of the owner.



   (F)   Garbage, refuse and other waste material shall be placed in
receptacles provided for that purpose, and no person shall destroy, remove or
disturb in any way buildings, signs, equipment, markers or any other property
on the airport.



   (G)   No person shall store, keep, use dispense or transport at, in
or upon the airport any Class A or Class B explosives (as defined in the
Interstate Commerce Regulations for transportation of explosives and other
dangerous articles), dynamite, nitroglycerine, black powder, fireworks,
firearms and ammunition, blasting caps or other explosives, gasoline,
alcohol, ether, liquid shellac, kerosene, turpentine, formaldehyde or other
flammable or combustible liquids, ammonium nitrate, sodium chlorate, wet
hemp, powdered metallic magnesium, nitrocellulose film, peroxides or other
easily inflammable solids or other corrosive liquids, prussic acid, phosgene,
arsenic, carbonic acid, potassium cyanide, tear gas, lewisite, anthrax,
ricin, botulins or any Class A poison (as defined in the Interstate Commerce
Regulations for transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles),
or any other poisonous substances, liquids or gases, or any compressed gas,
or any radioactive article, substance or material, at a time or place or in a
manner or condition as to endanger unreasonably persons or property, and
which has not been approved by the town or its designated representative.



   (H)   These regulations are not intended to amend, modify or
supersede any provision of federal, state or local law, or any specific
contractual agreement of the town with which they may conflict; provided,
however, that these regulations shall, insofar as possible, be interpreted so
that no such conflict shall exist.



   (I)   If any portion of these regulations shall be invalid or
unenforceable, all other portions shall remain in effect and be construed to
achieve the purposes hereof.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.05  MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Unless authorized by the Airport Manager, no highway or
automotive vehicles shall be operated on the airport except on roadways,
parking areas and the like, that are specifically designed for those
vehicles. The vehicles shall not be parked on ramp or apron areas or in any
area where it would be possible to interfere with the ground movements of
aircraft except for the very temporary parking to facilitate loading or
unloading of aircraft baggage. No other parking of vehicles on apron or ramp
areas will be permitted except by express permission of the Airport Manager
to accomplish a necessary airport purpose, service or inspection.



   (B)   No person shall operate any vehicle in a careless or negligent
manner or in disregard for the safety of others, or in excess of posted speed
limits. Aircraft shall have the right-of-way over ground vehicles at all
times.



   (C)   Any accident or incident involving injury or property damage
shall be reported to the Airport Manager.



   (D)   No person shall clean or make any repairs to motor vehicles
anywhere on the airport other than in designated shop areas, or as approved
by the town, except those minor repairs necessary to remove the motor
vehicles from the airport; nor shall any person move, interfere or tamper
with any motor vehicle or put into motion the engine, or take or use any
motor vehicle part, instrument or tool thereof, without the written
permission of the town, or satisfactory evidence of right to do so duly
presented to the town or its designated representative.



   (E)   The town or its designated representative shall have the
authority to tow or otherwise move motor vehicles which are parked by their
owners or operators on the airport in violation of these regulations, at the
owner’s expense and without liability for damage which may result in the
course of towing or moving.



   (F)   Lessees and passengers may park their vehicles in their
respective hangars while the aircraft is in use. No vehicle may be left in
hangars for a period in excess of 24 hours unless the aircraft is in use.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.06  AIRCRAFT OPERATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   FAA air traffic rules and regulations governing the operation
of aircraft in effect as of this date, including additions, are made a part
of these airport rules and regulations as fully as if set forth herein.



   (B)   Aircraft engines shall be started and run up only in places
designated for that purpose. At no time shall engines be run up in such a
manner as to allow the prop or jet blast to significantly impact persons,
other aircraft, vehicles or any building or attachments thereof. At no time
shall aircraft engines be run up inside hangars or any other building on
airport property and at no time shall prop or jet blast be directed toward a
building or any occupied open area.



   (C)   No aircraft shall be parked or stored at the airport except in
the areas designated for that use.



   (D)   At the direction of the Airport Manager, the owner, pilot or
operator of any illegally parked aircraft on the airport shall move the 
aircraft to a legally designated parking area on the airport. If the operator
refuses to comply with the directions, the Airport Manager or other airport
personnel may tow the aircraft to that place, at the aircraft owner or
operator’s expense and without liability for damage which may result from
the moving.



   (E)   In the event of an accident involving an aircraft, the airport
owner may, in compliance with FAA and/or other governmental regulations, move
damaged aircraft from the landing areas, ramps, aprons or other areas at the
expense of the aircraft owner and without liability to the airport for any
damage resulting from moving the aircraft.



   (F)   The pilot of an aircraft which is involved in an accident or
incident on airport property which causes personal injury or damage to
property, shall report the accident or incident to the Airport Manager or
airport personnel. In the event that the pilot is unable to make the report,
the owner or his or her designated agent shall make the report. This report
in no way relieves the pilot from making a full report to the FAA and/or NTSB.



   (G)   Any airport property damaged or destroyed by an accident or
otherwise shall be replaced or repaired by parties responsible at the
discretion of the town. In any case, the town shall be compensated in full
for the damaged airport property by the party or parties responsible for the
damage or destruction.



   (H)   The airport owner shall have the authority to detain any
aircraft for nonpayment of any charges due.



   (I)   All takeoffs and landings shall be confined to the runways,
and all movements of aircraft shall be confined to the hard surfaced areas.



   (J)   No person or persons, except airmen, duly authorized
personnel, passengers going to or from aircraft or persons being personally
escorted by airport attendants shall be permitted to enter the landing area
proper, taxiways or apron areas. However, this does not give any person or
persons so excepted the privilege of unrestricted use of the airport. These
privileges are confined to the necessary use of these spaces in connection
with flights, inspections and routine duties.



   (K)   The following shall apply to landing or taxiing aircraft
carrying or suspected of carrying explosives:



      (1)   Persons having knowledge of an aircraft carrying or
suspected of carrying explosive materials will so advise the town or its
designated representative; and



      (2)   Aircraft having passengers aboard will unload passengers
on the outer extremities of the airport terminal ramp and then immediately be
moved to the taxiway hold line adjacent to the runway. (Only engines
affecting unloading of passengers should be shut off to enable subsequent
moving of aircraft with a minimum of delay.)



   (L)   Any aircraft carrying or suspected of carrying explosives
shall be inspected and shall have a subsequent declaration of safety or
contamination conducted by the owner of the aircraft or his or her authorized
agent, and shall be accomplished immediately after parking and evacuation.



   (M)   No person shall enter the terminal building of the airport
with a dog or animal (without the express permission of the town or its
designated representative) except seeing-eye dogs, or dogs or other animals
which are to be transported by air and are properly restrained by leash or
properly confined.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.07  RULES FOR AIRCRAFT FUELING OPERATIONS.



   (A)   No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while the aircraft
engine is running or while the aircraft is in a hangar or enclosed area.



   (B)   During all fueling operations, the aircraft shall be grounded
by an approved method.



   (C)   Smoking or lighting an open flame within 50 feet of any
fueling operation is prohibited.



   (D)   Fuel trucks shall be parked at least 50 feet from buildings.



   (E)   No fuel storage and/or dispensing equipment shall be installed
or used at the airport without prior written approval of the town.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  FIRE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall start an open fire on airport property without
written permission of the Airport Manager.



   (B)   No person shall store flammable material or equipment, use
flammable liquids or gases or allow his or her premises to become in such a
condition as to violate in any manner the Fire Code in force at the Municipal
Airport.



   (C)   Tenants of hangars and rented or leased buildings shall
provide suitable fire extinguishers and equipment, and the extinguishers or
fire equipment shall be kept in good working condition as recommended by the
Fire Marshal and have a current required inspection date.



   (D)   Tenants and persons renting or leasing buildings or other
airport property are required to keep the premises clean and clear of all
rubbish, junk, debris, old aircraft and vehicles or any other unsightly
objects. If, after warning by the Airport Manager, the area is not cleaned,
cleaning will be done by airport personnel, and the cost of the cleaning will
be billed to the tenant or person.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.09  SPECIAL AIRPORT USES.



   (A)   The Airport Manager reserves the right to prohibit or limit
any given type, kind or class of aeronautical use of the airport if the
action is necessary for the safe operation of the airport or necessary to
serve the civil needs of the public. Operations involving unusual powered and
non-powered aircraft, including gliders, balloons, parachuting and other
unusual or special classes of aeronautical vehicles are specifically
prohibited without prior written approval of the Airport Manager. An UNUSUAL
OPERATION is defined as an operation which interferes with normal takeoff,
landing, approach and maneuvering of other aircraft or any operation which
creates a safety hazard to the normal operations of aircraft arriving or
departing from the airport.



   (B)   Operations on the airport’s paved surfaces are limited to
powered aircraft whose weights are not in excess of the published strengths
of the paved surfaces concerned. Any operations by aircraft which exceed the
published weight limits must first obtain the written permission of the
airport owner before conducting operations on any of the airport’s paved
surfaces.



   (C)   Considering the owner’s obligation to keep the airport open
to the public for aeronautical purposes, the airport facilities will not be
used for non-aviation events which would conflict with the airport’s
aeronautical use. Other uses of airport property or facilities will be
considered on a per-case basis. Use of airport property for meetings,
seminars, parties, public gatherings, product demonstrations or any other
unusual or non-aeronautical use must be approved in writing by the airport
owner or the Airport Manager.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)




MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS, FIXED BASE OPERATORS OR LIMITED
FIXED BASE OPERATORS




§ 92.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
These definitions shall not supersede any definitions contained in
contractual agreements with the town.



   AERONAUTICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity that involves, makes possible or is
required for the operation of aircraft or that contributes to or is required
for the safety of those operations.



   AIR OPERATIONS AREA (AOA).  An area used or intended to be used for
landing, takeoff or surface maneuvering of aircraft.



   AIR TAXI (COMMUTER).  Aircraft operated by the holder of an air taxi
(or commuter) operating certificate which authorizes the carriage of
passengers, mail or cargo for revenue in accordance with FAR Parts 135 and/or
121, on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis.



   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designed for navigation of or flight in air.



   AIRPORT.   The Municipal AIRPORT and includes all property and
improvements within the boundary lines of any AIRPORT operated or controlled
by the town, except when otherwise specifically noted.



   AIRPORT DISTRICT OFFICE (ADO).  The AIRPORT DISTRICT OFFICE of the
Federal Aviation Administration located in Atlanta, Georgia, telephone
404-305-7150.



   AIRPORT EMPLOYEES.  Bona fide employees of the town and their
officers, members and employees and any fixed base operator and their
employees.



   AIRPORT MANAGER. The officer or representative designated by the town
to have immediate charge of the airport and that representative’s assistant
managers.



   APRON.  A defined area, on a land airport, intended to accommodate
aircraft for purposes of loading or unloading passengers or cargo, refueling,
parking or maintenance.



   CARGO (AIR).  Any property carried on an aircraft other than mail,
stores and baggage.



   COMMERCIAL OPERATOR.  An individual or firm operating at the airport
and providing aviation services such as maintenance, storage, ground and
flight instruction, rentals or sales, or a person who, for compensation or
hire, engages in the carriage by aircraft in air commerce of persons or
property. Where it is doubtful that an operation is for compensation or hire,
the test applied is whether the carriage by air is merely incidental to the
person’s other business or is, in itself, an enterprise for profit.



   FAA.  The Federal Aviation Administration.



   FIXED BASE OPERATOR.  Any person who shall have entered into a written
lease or agreement with the town for the use of any building, shop or hangar,
or for the site upon which such a building might be erected and who, by
further agreement, guarantees to provide on the airport and serve the public
with all of the following minimum facilities:



      (1)   Aircraft storage;



      (2)   FAA approved domestic repair station;



      (3)   Student training;



      (4)   Demonstration and sale of aircraft;



      (5)   Aircraft rental; and



      (6)   Charter-air taxi.



   INSTRUCTOR.  Any individual giving for compensation, or offering to
give for compensation, instruction in the operation, construction, repair or
maintenance of aircraft, aircraft power plants and accessories, including the
repair, packaging and maintenance of parachutes.



   LEASES. Fixed base operator (FBO), limited fixed base operator (LFBO)
or commercial operator as defined hereinabove.



   LIMITED FIXED BASE OPERATOR. Any person who shall have entered into a
written lease or agreement with the town to provide any one or more but not
all services of an aviation nature defined for fixed base operator. All
activities provided by a LIMITED FIXED BASE OPERATOR shall meet all
established standards for that activity or combination of activities.



   PATTERN.  The configuration or form of a flight path flown by an
aircraft, or prescribed to be flown, as in making an approach to a landing.
At the Municipal Airport the current published patterns are:



 


Arrivals:

 
Runway - 7 Left Hand


Runway - 25 Left Hand



Departures:

 
Runway - 7 Left Hand


Runway - 25 Left Hand



 



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, group, corporation or other
entity created or authorized by statutory authority or duly authorized
representative thereof.



   PUBLIC AIRPORT FACILITIES.  The following facilities as they are from
time to time provided and made available by the town for public use by
aircraft operators:



      (1)   Public runways for the purpose of the landing and the
taking-off of aircraft;



      (2)   Public taxiways for the purpose of the ground movement
of aircraft;



      (3)   Public aircraft parking space for the purpose of parking
and storing aircraft; for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers,
baggage, freight, mail and other cargo upon and from aircraft; for the
purpose of performing operations incidental to the immediate preparation of
aircraft for departure such as inspection, cleaning and fueling; for the
purpose of making minor and emergency repairs to aircraft; and for the
purpose of parking mobile equipment actively used in connection with the
foregoing;



      (4)   Any other space, facilities or services provided by the
town for public use by aircraft operations at the airport; and



      (5)   Public access to the ramp for the primary purpose of
loading and unloading passengers and their baggage, and the loading and
unloading of mail and freight.



   RAMP.  A defined area, on a land airport, intended to accommodate
aircraft for purposes of loading or unloading passengers or cargo, refueling,
parking or maintenance.



   REFUELING TRUCKS. Any motor vehicle used for the transporting, handling
or dispensing of aviation fuel, oils and lubricants.



   SPECIALIZED AVIATION SERVICE OPERATION (SASO).  An aeronautical
business that offers a single or limited service, including but not limited
to aircraft flying clubs, flight training, repair and maintenance of
aircraft/airframe/powerplant, aircraft charter, air taxi or air ambulance,
aircraft sales, aircraft rental, avionics, instrument or propeller services,
or other specialized commercial flight support business.



   TERMINAL AREA.  The area used or intended to be used for such
facilities as terminal and cargo buildings, gates, hangars, shops, other
service buildings, automobile parking, airport motels, restaurants, garages
and automobile service; and an area provided for parking and positioning of
aircraft in the vicinity of the terminal building for loading and unloading.



   VEHICLE.  Every device by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a roadway, including bicycles.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.21  MINIMUM STANDARDS, GENERALLY.



   The following minimum standards shall apply to all operations. However,
all the activities listed may not be provided depending on the lease
agreement executed between the town and the operator, and those excluded
activities therefore will not apply.



   (A)   All operations at the airport shall be full-time, progressive
business enterprises, with a manned office facility at the airport during
reasonable business hours. No commercial operator shall be allowed to operate
on the airport without a fully executed lease agreement with the town. Any
operation defined under “commercial operator” in § 92.20, or any
operator whose principal place of business is located other than the
Municipal Airport and who further has a valid contract with another airport
sponsor may not be required to maintain office facilities at the airport as
determined on a case-by-case basis by the town. For all operations deemed by
the town to be a “specialized aviation service operation,” the town
reserves the right to require adherence with any applicable portions of these
minimum standards, or other standards of business determined by the town to
be reasonable, that are commensurate with the type of operation proposed to
be undertaken. In any event, a specialized aviation service operation shall
only be allowed upon application to and approval of the town. Reasonable
terms and conditions for the privilege of engaging in these various services
will be established by the town commensurate with the nature and scope of the
activities involved.



   (B)   Operators extended the privilege of providing self-fueling
services shall also be required to meet the minimum standards listed in §
92.22 and all applicable requirements of other governmental agencies.



   (C)   No persons or fixed base operators other than the operators
qualifying under division (B) above will be permitted to dispense aviation
petroleum products. All other operators may engage in any other aeronautical
services as they may qualify themselves for in accordance with these
regulations and their respective lease agreements.



   (D)   The town shall determine substantial conformance to the
standards for all operators.



   (E)   All operators must show financial solvency and business
ability to the satisfaction of the town.



   (F)   The minimum liability insurance which a fixed base operator
shall carry including general liability, product liability and premises
liability, as appropriate, is $1,000,000. Hangar keeper’s insurance carried
by the operator will be decided on between the town and the operator, but in
no case will be less than $500,000. All policies required by virtue of this
section will name as co-insured the town, its officers, members, employees
and contractors, and will contain a provision which will require the
insurance carrier to notify the town in writing at least 30 days prior to any
cancellation or major change in coverage.



   (G)   All operators will be required to furnish the town a
performance bond commensurate with any construction required or proposed by
the lessee under the minimum standards of service to be performed.



   (H)   All construction required or authorized herein shall be in
accordance with design and construction standards and building codes and/or
ordinances established by this state, the State Division of Aviation, the
Federal Aviation Administration, the County of Surry and approved by the town.



   (I)   Land available for commercial type operations is a valuable
and limited commodity. It is the policy of the town that no land areas or
building space in excess of present and foreseeable requirements will be
leased to any operator. Additional areas will be made available to operators
on the basis of need and availability.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.22  FUEL AND OIL.



   (A)   All aeronautical operators engaged in self-fueling of aircraft
at the airport shall be subject to a fuel flowage fee, which shall be
established by the town.



   (B)   Operators conducting those activities on the airport shall be
required to:



      (1)   Provide hard surface ramp space accessible by taxiway
with electric pumps and appropriate tank storage, or approved mobile fueler;



      (2)   For refueling operations, every operator shall install
and use adequate grounding/bonding facilities at all fueling locations to
eliminate the hazards of static electricity and shall provide approved types
of fire extinguishers or other equipment commensurate with the hazard
involved in refueling and servicing aircraft; and



      (3)   Meet all other requirements as set forth in the
Municipal Airport Rules and Regulations and applicable federal, state and
local law or regulation.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.23  AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   All operators conducting aircraft, engine and accessory maintenance
facilities shall provide:



   (A)   Sufficient hangar space to house any aircraft upon which the
service is being performed:



   (B)   Suitable storage space for aircraft awaiting maintenance or
delivery after repair and maintenance have been completed;



   (C)   Adequate shop space to house the equipment and adequate
equipment and machine tools, jacks, lifts and testing equipment to perform
maintenance as required for FAA certification and repair of parts not needing
replacement on single engine land and light multi-engine land general
aviation aircraft;



   (D)   At least one FAA-certified air frame and powerplant mechanic
available during reasonable business hours;



   (E)   Facilities which are approved by DNR and EPA for washing and
cleaning aircraft, aircraft engines and parts without allowing discharge of
harmful chemicals into the environment;



   (F)   Screening from public view for all non-airworthy aircraft;



   (G)   Separately partitionable space with adequate exhaust fans and
fire protection for touch-up spray painting, meeting all local, state and
federal regulations, if this type work is performed. Repainting of entire
aircraft shall require compliance with standards in Section XX entitled
AIRCRAFT PAINTING;



   (H)   Appropriate plans, permits, insurance (as may be required by
federal, state and local laws) regarding the handling and removal of
hazardous materials;



   (I)   Appropriate insurance as outlined in § 92.21(F);



   (J)   Equipment to remove disabled aircraft from the runway; and



   (K)   Proper licensing and certification to complete annual
inspections and other required inspections of single and light twin-engine
land aircraft.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.24  FLIGHT TRAINING.



   All operators conducting flight training activities for compensation
shall provide:



   (A)   At least one readily available and properly certificated
flight instructor for single-engine land airplanes;



   (B)   At least one dual-equipped single-engine land aircraft
properly equipped and maintained for flight instruction and any additional
types of aircraft as may be required to give flight instruction of the kind
advertised;



   (C)   Adequate classroom space with proper restroom and seating
facilities. A part of the required facilities, with the consent of the town,
may be located off airport property;



   (D)   Adequate training aids to provide proper ground school
instruction sufficient to enable students to pass FAA written examinations;



   (E)   Properly certificated instructor providing regularly scheduled
ground school instructions sufficient to enable students to pass the FAA
written examinations;



   (F)   Continuing ability to meet certification requirements of the
FAA for the flight training proposed;



   (G)   Permanently assigned tiedown or inside storage area for a
minimum of two aircraft;



   (H)   Suitable office space, personnel, telephone and other items
necessary for the scheduling of students and aircraft and the keeping of the
proper records in connection thereof; and



   (I)   Appropriate insurance as outlined in § 92.21(F).



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.25  CHARTER SERVICE.



   Persons operating charter service shall provide:



   (A)   Passenger lounge, restroom and telephone facilities as
appropriate;



   (B)   Adequate table, desk or counter for checking in passengers,
handling ticketing or fare collection, performing necessary security checks
of passengers and passenger luggage, and handling of luggage;



   (C)   Properly certificated suitable aircraft with properly
certificated and qualified operating crew available for service when not
otherwise engaged in that service. The  crew and aircraft shall be available
upon call within reasonable notice; and



   (D)   Appropriate insurance as outlined in § 92.21(F).



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.26  AIRCRAFT RENTAL AND SALES.



   Operators conducting full-time aircraft rental and/or sales activity at
the Municipal Airport shall provide:



   (A)   Suitable office space for consummating sales and/or rentals of
aircraft and the keeping of the proper records in connection therewith;



   (B)   Hangar or other storage space for at least one aircraft to be
used for sales or rental;



   (C)   For rental, at least one airworthy aircraft suitably
maintained and certificated;



   (D)   Adequate facilities for servicing and repairing the aircraft
or satisfactory arrangements with other operators for the service and repair;



   (E)   During reasonable business hours, a properly certificated
pilot capable of demonstrating aircraft for sale or for checking out rental
aircraft;



   (F)   If new aircraft are sold, the minimum stock of readily
expendable spare parts, or adequate arrangements for securing spare parts
required for the type of aircraft and models sold;



   (G)   Current up-to-date specifications and price lists for types
and models of new aircraft sold;



   (H)   Proper checklists and operating manuals on all aircraft rented
and adequate parts catalogues and service manuals on new aircraft sold; and



   (I)   Appropriate insurance as outlined in § 92.21(F).



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.27  MISCELLANEOUS OPERATIONS.



   Miscellaneous operations, including non-aviation related activities not
hereinbefore provided for, may be conducted by any person, firm or
corporation that is duly licensed, equipped and certified by the appropriate
agency, but only upon application to and approval of the town. Reasonable
terms and conditions for the privilege of engaging in these various services
will be established by the Airport Authority commensurate with the nature and
scope of the activities involved.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.28  HANGAR SPACE.



   Hangar space, office and lounge space, aircraft parking area and other
required facilities will be considered with the more restrictive requirements
where an operator offers multiple services, so that facility requirements
will be reasonable.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.29  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR HANGARS AND BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Hangars.



      (1)   Storage hangars (“T” Type) – 4 units, a minimum of
1,100 square feet each;



      (2)   Storage hangars (conventional) – minimum 2,400 square
feet; and



      (3)   Maintenance hangars – minimum 2,400 square feet.



   (B)   Office space.  Sufficient to meet all national, state and
local building codes for the numbers of persons using and occupying the
structure.



   (C)   Floors.  Concrete capable of supporting design load for
largest aircraft expected to use facility.



   (D)   Doors.  Self-contained and in accordance with national, state
and local building codes.



   (E)   Plans.  All construction plans must be approved by the town,
Surry County and the State Division of Aviation prior to construction.



   (F)   Buildings.  All buildings will be of metal, brick or masonry
construction and fire-proofed in accordance with national, state and local
codes, and generally match the architectural specifications of the town, if
any. See the Elkin Municipal Airport Hangar Construction Standards, current
edition, for specific building and site requirements related to hangar
(conventional and T-hangar) construction.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.30  EQUALITY OF SERVICES.



   All services shall be provided on a fair, equal and not unjustly
discriminatory basis to all users of the airport. The prices charged for each
unit of service shall be fair, reasonable and not unjustly discriminatory;
provided that the operator may be allowed to make reasonable and
nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other similar price reductions to
volume purchasers.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.31  CIVIL RIGHTS REQUIREMENTS.



   All operators shall provide services and manage their operations in
accordance with the provisions of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(Pub. L. No. 88-352), as amended, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000d - 2000d-7.
Accordingly, no person shall be denied equal services on the grounds of race,
age, sex, color, national origin or ability.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.32  ADOPTION DATE.



   This subchapter was adopted on June 9, 2003.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



LIMITATIONS ON HEIGHT OF OBJECTS AROUND AIRPORT



§ 92.45  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Municipal
Airport Zoning Ordinance.”



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.46  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIRPORT.  The Municipal Airport.



   AIRPORT ELEVATION.  The highest point of an airport’s usable landing
area measured in feet from sea level. The Municipal Airport is 1,068 feet
above sea level.



   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary
surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope
set forth in § 92.48. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface
coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.



   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES.  These zones are
set forth in § 92.47.



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.  A Board consisting of five members appointed by
the Surry County Board of Commissioners as provided in G.S. Chapter 63,
Article 4.



   CONICAL SURFACE.  A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.



   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION.  An obstruction determined to have a
substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the
navigable airspace.



   HEIGHT.  For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this subchapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.



   HORIZONTAL SURFACE.  A horizontal plane 100 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the
perimeter of the horizontal zone.



   LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY.  A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  Any pre-existing structure, object of natural
growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
subchapter or any amendment thereto.



   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Any structure, growth or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in § 92.48.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association or governmental entity; includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative of any of them.



   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY.  A runway having an existing or planned
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or
a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a
precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.



   PRIMARY SURFACE.  A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends
200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military or planned hard
surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of
the primary surface is set forth in § 92.47. The elevation of any point on
the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway centerline.



   RUNWAY.  A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.



   STRUCTURE.  An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by a person, including but without limitation buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.



   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES.  These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree
angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope
of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and
conical surfaces. TRANSITIONAL SURFACES for those portions of the precision
approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical
surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge
of the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway
centerline.



   TREE. Any object of natural growth.



   UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.47  AIRPORT ZONES.



   (A)   In order to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, there
are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the
land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal
surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply to the Municipal Airport. The
zones are shown on the Municipal Airport Zoning Map consisting of one sheet,
representing the current version on file in the Surry County Zoning
Department, which are attached to the ordinance comprising this subchapter
and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following
zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height
limitation.



   (B)   The various zones are hereby established and defined as
follows.



      (1)   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum
greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The
inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to
a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the
runway.



      (2)   Transitional zones.  The transitional zones are the
areas beneath the transitional surfaces.



      (3)   Horizontal zone.  The horizontal zone is established by
swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines
tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and
transitional zones.



      (4)   Conical zone.  The conical zone is established as the
area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does
not include the transitional zone.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.48  AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no structure
shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow
in any zone created by this subchapter to a height in excess of the
applicable height limit herein established for that zone.



   (B)   The applicable height limitations are hereby established for
each of the zones in question as follows:



      (1)   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum
greater than three-fourths mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. 
Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline;



      (2)   Transitional zones.  Slope seven feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 100
feet above the airport elevation, or at an elevation of 1,168 feet above mean
sea level;



      (3)   Horizontal zone.  Established at 100 feet above the
airport elevation, or at an elevation of 1,168 feet above mean sea level;



      (4)   Conical zone.  Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 100 feet
above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 300 feet above the
airport elevation; and



      (5)   Excepted height limitations.  Nothing in this
subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance
of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to 50 feet above the
surface of the land. Height shall be measured from the highest point on the
ground along the periphery of the structure or tree to the highest point on
the structure or tree.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.49  USE RESTRICTION.



   No use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
subchapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft,
make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and
others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.50  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Regulations not retroactive.  The regulations prescribed by
this subchapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or
other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the
regulations as of the effective date of this subchapter or any amendment
thereto, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use.
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration
of which was begun prior to the effective date of this subchapter, and is
diligently prosecuted.



   (B)   Marking and lighting.  Notwithstanding the preceding
provision (division (A) of this section, the owner of any existing
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the
installation, operation and maintenance thereon of markers and lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the town to indicate to the operators of
aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of these airport
obstructions. The markers and lights shall be installed, operated and
maintained at the expense of the town.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.51  PERMITS.



   (A)   Future uses. 



      (1)   Except as specifically provided in divisions (A)(1)(a),
(b) and (c) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land,
and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise
established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have
been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate
the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to
permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would
conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If the determination is in the
affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent
with the provisions of this subchapter shall be granted unless a variance has
been approved in accordance with division (D) below.



         (a)   In the area lying within the limits of the
horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 70 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when,
because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, the tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for those zones.



         (b)   In areas lying within the limits of the approach
zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end
of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less
than 70 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when the tree or
structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for the approach
zones.



         (c)   In the areas lying within the limits of the
transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than 70 feet of vertical height
above the ground, except when the tree or structure, because of terrain, land
contour or topographic features, would extend above the height limit
prescribed for the transition zones.



      (2)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions
shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or
alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the
height limits established by this subchapter except as set forth in §
92.48(B)(5). In the event a tree is allowed to grow in excess of the height
limits established by this subchapter, except as set forth in § 92.48(B)(5),
the tree shall be removed, topped, trimmed or otherwise modified to bring
into compliance with this subchapter. If the Mayor or his or her designee
determines that the tree adversely affects the safe use of the airport, the
town will pay for the direct cost to remove, top, trim or otherwise modify
the tree to bring into compliance with this subchapter.



   (B)   Existing uses.  No permit shall be granted that would allow
the establishment or creation of an airport obstruction that is a hazard to
air navigation or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to become a
greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this
subchapter or any amendments thereto or that it is when the application for a
permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for the permit shall be
granted.



   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed.  Whenever the
Mayor determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or
more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall
be granted that would allow the structure or tree to exceed the applicable
height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.



   (D)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height
of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree or use property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this subchapter, may apply to
the Board of Adjustment for a variance from the regulations. The application
for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal
Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of
air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace.
Variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application
or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and
relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create
a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice and will be in
accordance with the spirit of this subchapter. Additionally, no application
for variance to the requirements of this subchapter may be considered by the
Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to
the County Manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance.
If the County Manager does not respond to the application within 15 days
after receipt, the Board of Adjustment may act on its own to deny the
application.



   (E)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance
granted may, if the action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of
this subchapter and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as
to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the town
at its own expense to install, operate and maintain thereon any marking and
lights as may be necessary.



   (F)   Permits.  The Administrator shall review all applications for
development to ensure compliance with all regulations of this subchapter. All
applications shall be complete prior to review by the Administrator. The
Administrator in his or her discretion may request that additional
information be submitted as necessary to ensure a thorough and complete
review of the application. All applications shall be submitted with a
nonrefundable fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the Surry
County Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.52  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the County Manager to administer and enforce
the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances
shall be made to the Building Inspector upon a form published for that
purpose. Applications required by this subchapter to be submitted to the
County Manager shall be promptly considered and granted or denied.
Application for action by the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith
transmitted by the County Manager.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.53  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment to have and
exercise the following powers:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the County Manager in the enforcement of
this subchapter;



      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of
this subchapter upon which the Board of Adjustment under these regulations
may be required to pass; and



      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members
appointed by the Board of Commissioners and each shall serve for a term of
three years and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance
and in harmony with the provisions of this subchapter. Meetings of the Board
of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at other times
as the Board of the Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson or, in the
absence of the Chairperson, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Appeals
shall be public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its
proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be
filed in the office of the County Clerk and on due cause shown.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of facts
and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from the facts in reversing, affirming or modifying any order,
requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board
of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of the County Manager or decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this subchapter, or to
effect variation to this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.54  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision
of the County Manager, made in the administration of this chapter, may appeal
to the Board of Adjustment.



   (B)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time
as provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment, by filing with the
County Manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The County
Manager shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken.



   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless the County Manager certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the
County Manager cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case,
proceedings shall not be stayed except by the order of the Board of
Adjustment or notice to the County Manager and on due cause shown.



   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest
and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.



   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions
of this subchapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make any
order, requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the
circumstances.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.55  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment, may appeal to the Superior Court as provided in § 34 of
Chapter 63 of the Public Laws of this state.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.56  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or
limitations prescribed in this subchapter and any other regulations
applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the
height of structures or trees and the use of land, or any other matter, the
more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Each violation of §§ 92.45 through 92.56 or of any
regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both; and each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. eff. 6-9-2003)



CHAPTER 93:  FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section




General Regulations




   93.001   Title




Fire Code Enforcement




   93.020   Jurisdiction



   93.021   Purpose



   93.022   Relationship to other laws and standards



   93.023   Application



   93.024   Duties of Fire Chief



   93.025   Authority to enter premises



   93.026   Inspection of buildings and premises



   93.027   Permits



   93.028   Site plan approval



   93.029   Construction approval



   93.030   Notice of violation; order to correct



   93.031   Enforcement



   93.032   Appeals




Open Burning




   93.060   Jurisdiction



   93.061   Purpose



   93.062   Scope



   93.063   Burning prohibited



   93.064   Permissible open burning with permit



   93.065   Conditions of burning permit



   93.066   Liability for extinguishment



 



   93.999   Penalty



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 93.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Fire Protection and Prevention
Ordinance” of the town and may be cited as such and referred to herein as
the “Fire Chapter.”



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT



§ 93.020  JURISDICTION.



   This subchapter is effective in all areas of the municipality.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.021  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to prescribe regulations consistent
with the most current edition of the State Building Code, Fire Prevention
(also known as the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code) and the Appendices
(A) through (H) of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code and nationally
recognized good practices for the safeguarding of life and property from
hazards of fire and explosions arising from the storage, handling, and use of
flammable, combustible, and hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and
from conditions hazards to life and property in the use or occupancy of
buildings or premises.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.022  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS AND STANDARDS.



   The provisions of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, as amended
periodically, are incorporated by reference in this chapter. If any provision
of this chapter is in material conflict with a provision of the North
Carolina Fire Prevention Code, then the state code provision shall take
precedence over the conflicting provision of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.023  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to new and existing
conditions, and to the repair, use, occupancy, and maintenance of existing
buildings or structures specified in the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code,
and to other conditions hazardous to life or property in the opinion of the
Fire Chief or their designee.



   (B)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as
applying to the transportation of any substance shipped in compliance with
regulations prescribed by state and Federal law nor as applying to the
military forces of the United States.



   (C)   If any portion of this chapter shall be determined to be
invalid, unconstitutional, or so otherwise ineffective, the ruling shall not
affect the remainder and other parts and clauses of this chapter, and the
same shall remain in full force and effect.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.024  DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.



   The duties of the Fire Chief shall include but are not limited to:



   (A)   Keeping the Town Manager and governing body informed of the
progress and development of the Fire Department.



   (B)   Keeping the Town Manager and governing body informed of any
matters pertaining to the present condition and future expansion of the Fire
Department.



   (C)   Serving as the Town Manager’s and governing body’s advisor
concerning requirements of the state fire insurance rating program.



   (D)   Conducting fire prevention inspections of public schools
required by G.S. §§ 115C-1 et seq., and fire prevention inspections of
licensed day care facilities, licensed foster care homes, and licensed rest
home facilities as required by state law.



   (E)   Conducting periodic fire inspections of buildings, structures,
and premises within the town's corporate limits as set forth in § 93.026.



   (F)   Conducting investigations, often with the cooperation of other
fire and law enforcement officials, of fires of a suspicious nature so as to
determine their point of origin and cause.



   (G)   Maintaining an adequate staff of fire inspectors certified by
the North Carolina Code Officials Qualification Board to properly execute all
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.025  AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES.



   (A)   The Fire Chief or their designee may, at all reasonable hours,
enter any building or premises for the purpose of conducting any inspection
or investigation which, under provisions of this chapter, they deem necessary
to be made.



   (B)   The Fire Chief or their designee shall be permitted by the
owner, lessee, manager, or operator or any building or premises to enter and
inspect the building or premises at the time and for the purpose stated in
this section.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.026  INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS AND PREMISES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to inspect, or cause to
be inspected, according to the schedule provided in the North Carolina Fire
Prevention Code, all buildings and premises except the interiors of one- and
two-family dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be
corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or to endanger life from fire,
and enforcing the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, or any violations of
the provisions or intent of this chapter creating a hazard. The Fire Chief or
their designee shall charge inspection fees for inspections of buildings and
premises according to the fee schedule adopted by the town, except when those
premises are occupied or owned by state or local government.



   (B)   Installation or modification of building systems without
required plan review and approval by the fire chief or their designee shall
result in a violation fine as outlined by the fee schedule adopted by the
town. Required inspections for the building systems will not be conducted
until the fee is paid.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.027  PERMITS.



   (A)   Every business or user of a building or structure required to
obtain a mandatory permit under the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code must
obtain such permit no later than 30 days after notification by the Fire Chief
or their designee. The Fire Chief or their designee shall issue all
applicable permits to business which require such permits under the North
Carolina Fire Prevention Code upon determining the permit application meets
applicable requirements of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code.



   (B)   Construction permits will be valid for no more than six months
after issuance. No work authorized by an expired permit may be performed
until a new permit has been issued.



   (C)   Permit fees will be charged to the applicant in accordance
with the fee schedule adopted by the town.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.028  SITE PLAN APPROVAL.



   The Fire Chief or their designee shall review construction or
development site plans to ensure compliance with the North Carolina Fire
Prevention Code before final site approval is granted. Plan review fees will
be charged to the responsible party in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the town.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.029  CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL.



   (A)   The Fire Chief or their designee shall review and approve all
commercial and multifamily residential building plans to ensure compliance
with the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code before final approval is
granted. Plan review fees will be charged to the responsible party in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the town.



   (B)   The Fire Chief or their designee shall conduct inspections of
buildings under construction to ensure compliance with the provisions of the
North Carolina Fire Prevention Code before the building inspection issues a
certificate of occupancy for the building.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.030  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; ORDER TO CORRECT.



   When the Fire Chief or their designee determines that a violation of
this chapter exists or that a building or premises is in violation of the
North Carolina Fire Prevention Code, they shall issue a notice of violation
and order to correct the violation. Such notice and order shall:



   (A)   State the nature of the violation.



   (B)   Direct the responsible party to pay applicable fees and/or
civil penalties to the town.



   (C)   Direct the responsible parry to comply with applicable
requirements.



   (D)   Specify a date after which re-inspection will occur, if
immediate compliance is not possible.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.031  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor under G.S. § 160A-I75 and G.S. § 14-4.
Additionally, or in the alternative, the Fire Chief or their designee may
enforce the provision of this chapter in civil court and seek any and all
appropriate remedies authorized by G.S. § 160A-175, subject to the
restrictions of this section. Each day’s continuing violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.



   (B)   Compliance with the Fire Chief’s notice of violation and
order to correct.



      (1)   Immediate action orders. The Fire Chief or their
designee may issue immediate correction orders for violations of the North
Carolina Fire Prevention Code that constitute an imminent hazard to life and
property. Failure to correct such violation within 72 hours shall result in
imposition of a civil penalty in the amount specified by the fee schedule
approved by the town, per day, per violation, until the violation has been
completely corrected. Should the violation go uncorrected after 72 hours, a
civil complaint for collection of unpaid fees and penalties owed under this
chapter may be initiated and other legal proceedings including criminal
prosecution may be initiated. Repeated violations may subject a violator to
higher civil penalties as set forth in the fee schedule adopted by the town.



      (2)   Imminent hazards to life and property. Those violations
determined to be imminent hazards to life and property include but are not
limited to the following:



         (a)   Violations of the means of egress requirements
imposed by the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code;



         (b)   Overcrowding in violation of occupancy limits
established pursuant to the North Carolina Building Code and required under
the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code;



         (c)   Occupancy of a structure or premises without a
certificate of occupancy;



         (d)   Ongoing construction or operations without
applicable permits;



         (e)   Dangerous storage or unlawful amounts of
combustible, flammable, explosive, or otherwise hazardous materials;



         (f)   Hazardous conditions arising from defective or
improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible, flammable,
explosive, or otherwise hazardous materials;



         (g)   Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper,
boxes, shavings, or other highly combustible materials;



         (h)   Accumulations of dust or waste material in air
conditioning or ventilation systems, or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust
ducts, or inadequate clearances to unprotected combustible materials from
hoods, grease extractors, and ducts; and



         (i)   Obstructions that may interfere with Fire
Department operations.



      (3)   Other correction orders. All other correction orders
issued under this section for violations that do not constitute imminent
hazards shall be corrected within 30 days. Failure to correct such violation
within 30 days shall result in imposition of a civil penalty in the amount
specified by the fee schedule approved by the town, per day, per violation,
until the violation has been completely corrected. Should the violation go
uncorrected after 24 hours, a civil complaint for collection of unpaid fees
and penalties owed under this chapter may be initiated and other legal
proceedings including criminal prosecution may be initiated. Repeated
violations may subject a violator to higher civil penalties as set forth in
the fee schedule adopted by the town.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.032  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person who has been served with a notice of violation and
order for correction of violations of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code
may appeal the notice and order to the North Carolina Building Code Council
within ten days from the date of issuance.



   (B)   Any person who has been served with a notice of violation and
order for correction of violations of the provisions of this chapter which
are not violations of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code or which relate
to fees or penalties charged under this chapter may appeal to the Town
Manager, whose decisions shall be final. Appeals must be filed in writing
within ten days from the date of issuance.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



OPEN BURNING



§ 93.060  JURISDICTION.



   This subchapter is effective in all areas of the municipality.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.061  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate certain open burning in
order to protect the public from the hazards of fires and air pollution.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.062  SCOPE.



   This subchapter shall apply to all operations involving open burning
except those specifically exempted by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.063  BURNING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of
combustible material except as may be allowed in compliance with this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.064  PERMISSIBLE OPEN BURNING WITH PERMIT.



   (A)   While recognizing that open burning contributes to air
pollution, certain types of open burning may reasonably be allowed in the
public interest. The authority to conduct open burning under the provisions
of this section does not exempt or excuse a person from the consequences,
damages, or injuries which may result from such conduct nor does it excuse or
exempt any person from complying with all applicable laws, ordinances,
regulations, and orders of governmental entities having jurisdiction even
though open burning is conducted in compliance with this section.



   (B)   The following types of open burning are permissible with a
town burning permit.



      (1)   Fires purposely set to agricultural lands for disease
control, pest control, and other accepted agricultural or wildlife management
practices.



      (2)   Fires purposely set to forest lands for accepted forest
management practices.



      (3)   Fires purposely set in rural areas for rights-of-way
maintenance.



      (4)   Camp fires and fires used solely for outdoor cooking and
other recreational purposes or for human warmth and comfort, when confined to
containers approved by the Fire Chief or their designee.



      (5)   The burning of trees, brush, and other vegetable matter
in connection with construction projects or the clearing of land or
rights-of-way, with the following limitations:



         (a)   Prevailing winds at the time of burning must be
away from any city, town, roadway, or built-up area, the ambient air of which
may be significantly affected by smoke, fly-ash, or other air contaminants
from the burning;



         (b)   The location of the burning must be at least 1,000
feet away from any dwelling other than a dwelling or structure located on the
property on which the burning is conducted;



         (c)   The amount of dirt on the material being burned
must be minimized;



         (d)   Heavy oils, asphaitic materials, items containing
natural or synthetic rubber, or any materials other than plant growth may not
be burned; and



         (e)   Initial burning may generally be commenced only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and no combustible material may
be added to the fire between 3:00 p.m. of one day and 9:00 a.m. of the
following day.



      (6)   Open burning of leaves, tree branches, or yard trimmings
originating on the premises of private residences and burned on the premises
of origin in areas where no public pickup facilities are available, only when
such burning is done between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and does not create a
nuisance.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.065  CONDITIONS OF BURNING PERMIT.



   (A)   No open burning for which a permit has been lawfully issued
shall be allowed without a copy of the valid permit kept at the burning site.



   (B)   No open burning for which a permit has been lawfully issued
shall be allowed without a competent person being present at all times until
the fire is completely extinguished.



   (C)   No open burning for which a permit has been lawfully issued
shall be allowed when the burning conditions violate the provisions of this
subchapter, the conditions and requirements stated in the burning permit, or
the directives of the Fire Chief or their designee.



   (D)   No open burning for which a permit has been lawfully issued
shall be allowed without sufficient resources at the site to extinguish the
fire as needed or ordered.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.066  LIABILITY FOR EXTINGUISHMENT.



   If any person, firm, or entity shall ignite or maintain a fire in
violation of this subchapter and the Town Fire Department is called on to
control or extinguish the fire or any other fire resulting therefrom, the
responsible party shall be liable to the town for the applicable fire service
fees and costs as well as any other costs endured by the town in bringing the
fire under control and extinguishing it, and all other actual, reasonable
costs incurred incidental thereto.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



§ 93.999  PENALTY.



   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided in G.S. § 14-4. It is hereby
made the special duty of the Chief of Police or their designee who may be on
duty to coordinate with the Fire Chief or their designee to enforce such
penalties.



(Ord. 2015-12-0426, passed 12-14-2015)



CHAPTER 94:  ANIMALS



Section



Animal Nuisances



   94.01   Authority; adoption date



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Running at large, generally



   94.04   Vicious animal



   94.05   Vaccination, collar required



   94.06   Keeping stray animals



   94.07   Cats at large



   94.08   Responsibility of owners



   94.09   Notification of violation



   94.10   Enforcement



   94.11   Impoundment



   94.12   Tethering ban



Keeping of Horses



   94.25   Riding or walking horses on or along streets and sidewalks;
unlawful



   94.26   Allowing horses to run at large; unlawful



   94.27   Riding at night prohibited



   94.28   Adoption date



Keeping of Livestock



   94.40   Definitions



   94.41   Livestock prohibited



   94.42   Exception



   94.43   Unlawful to harbor certain animals



   94.44   Existing animals; time frame to comply



   94.45   Fowl



   94.46   Fowl at large prohibited



   94.47   Containment of gallinaceous birds



   94.48   Gallinaceous birds at large



Bird Sanctuary



   94.60   Establishment of town as bird sanctuary



 



   94.99   Penalty



ANIMAL NUISANCES



§ 94.01  AUTHORITY; ADOPTION DATE.



   (A)   This subchapter is adopted by the Board of Commissioners for
the town under authority of  G.S. § 14-4, Violation of local ordinances
misdemeanor; G.S. § 160A-186, Regulation of domestic animals; G.S. §
160A-187, Possession or harboring of dangerous animals; and rabies control,
G.S. § 130A-184.



   (B)   This subchapter was adopted on October 10, 2005.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMALS.  Any dog or cat, including both male and female.



   HARBOR.  To act as custodian of an animal, whether by feeding or
affording shelter.



   OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation owning, keeping or harboring an
animal. For the purpose of this subchapter, the head of a household shall be
deemed the OWNER in respect to any animal or animals owned, kept or harbored
by any person residing in the household and kept on the premises.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL.  Any animal or group of animals which:



      (1)   Is repeatedly found at large;



      (2)   Damages any property, either public or private, of
anyone other than its owner;



      (3)   Is vicious;



      (4)   Causes fouling of the air by odors;



      (5)   Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or
surroundings;



      (6)   By virtue of number or type is offensive or dangerous to
the public health, safety or welfare;



      (7)   Excessively makes disturbing noises such as barking,
howling and whining;



      (8)   Is diseased and dangerous to the public health; and



      (9)   Defecates on any property, either public or private,
other than the property of the owner or person harboring the animal.



   RUNNING AT LARGE.  Any animal off the premises of his or her owner and
not under sufficient physical restraint, such as a leash, cage or similar
effective device to allow the animal to be controlled.



   STRAY.  Any animal running at large which does not have a collar,
harness or halter upon which is attached a tag identifying the name and
address of the owner.



   VICIOUS ANIMALS.  Any animal which has bitten, scratched or otherwise
attacked one or more persons without provocation, or an animal in which a
propensity to attack humans exist, or which propensity is known or reasonably
should be known to the owner.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)



§ 94.03  RUNNING AT LARGE, GENERALLY.



   No person shall permit any animal owned or harbored by him or her to be
at large within the town unless accompanied by and under the control, through
the use of a leash, rope, chain, cage or likewise device, of the owner or a
responsible person at all times.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow the
animal to be at large in the town whether on private or public property.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping
or in charge of any dog to fail to remove feces deposited by the dog on any
street, park or other publicly owned area.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, keeping
or in charge of any dog to fail to remove feces deposited by the dog on any
private property unless the owner of the property has given permission
allowing that use of the property.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  VICIOUS ANIMAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business or corporation to
own, keep, have charge of, shelter, feed, harbor or take care of any animal
which is a vicious animal as defined in § 94.02 unless the animal is kept in
a secure enclosure. In addition to any other sanctions which may be
applicable, if any vicious animal be found running at large or is a stray, it
shall be seized as quickly as possible by Surry County Animal Control at the
request of the Town Police Department. If the vicious animal cannot be safely
caught and impounded, the animal may be slain by the Town Police Department
or other designated official such as an officer with Surry County Animal
Control.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  VACCINATION, COLLAR REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every person within the town who owns, controls or harbors a
dog or cat shall have the animal vaccinated annually against hydrophobia. For
a period longer than one year the dog or cat need not be vaccinated until the
termination of the period of immunity. In every case, the vaccination
certificate shall state the type and quantity of serum administered and the
period of immunity hydrophobia afforded thereby.



   (B)   Every person within the town who owns, controls or harbors a
dog or cat shall be responsible for the wearing by the dog or cat at all
times a collar on which is prominently displayed a vaccination tag indicating
a vaccination which currently affords the dog or cat immunity to hydrophobia.
There shall also be affixed to the collar an identification tag stating the
name and address of the owner of the animal.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)



§ 94.06  KEEPING STRAY ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willingly or intentionally
harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement, or otherwise, any animal
which does not belong to him or her, or has not been legally entrusted to him
or her, unless he or she shall, within 48 hours from the time the animal came
into his or her possession, comply with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.07  CATS AT LARGE.



   Owners and harborers of cats shall not permit their cat to run at large
to the annoyance or nuisance of other persons within the town.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.08  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.



   Owners of animals are responsible for the acts of their animals. The
owner of any animal who commits any nuisance, as defined and or stipulated in
this subchapter, upon the private property of another person or property
belonging to the town, is criminally and civilly responsible and accountable
for the acts of his or her animals.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.09  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   This subchapter requires that any complaining party contact the Police
Department by mail, electronic communication or phone, stating the nuisance
being created by the animal, with a description of the animal and the
owner’s name, if known. Reports to the police of vicious or dangerous
animals should be followed with a written complaint explaining the details to
the Police Department. Upon proper notification of any violation of this
subchapter by a complaining party, and before a citation is issued, all
persons allegedly violating any part of this subchapter shall be notified of
the alleged violation by the Town Police Department. The alleged violator
shall be given a copy of this subchapter. The contacting police officer shall
explain this subchapter to the alleged violator. Whenever it comes to the
attention of the Chief of Police that an animal is at large within the town,
the Chief of Police shall cause to be served upon the owner or the person who
harbors the animal a notice substantially as follows:



Office of the Chief of Police



Elkin, North Carolina



Date:                            



“To _______________________________:



“Take notice that a (dog, cat) described as_________________________ , and
reputedly owned or harbored by you, has been reported as (violation),
contrary to section __________ of the Town of Elkin Animal Nuisance
Ordinance. Therefore, you are hereby required to take up and confine that
animal on your own premises immediately and prevent it from (violation)
anytime in the future; otherwise, the animal may be impounded by Surry County
Animal Control.



“Further take notice that you are required to report to my office without
delay that you have complied with the terms of this notice.”



                                                



Chief of Police



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)



§ 94.10  ENFORCEMENT.



   The alleged violator will have 24 hours in which to abate or correct
the violation or nuisance once he or she has been given a copy of the
ordinance and an explanation of the violation by the Town Police Department.
If the alleged violator does not abate or correct the violation within 24
hours after he or she has been duly warned, the Police Department shall issue
the violator a citation for violating this subchapter. In the event there is
a second complaint made to the Chief of Police concerning the same animal and
nuisance violation, the violator will be issued a second citation for the
nuisance violation and the nuisance animal will be impounded by Surry County
Animal Control as soon as possible at the request of the Town Police
Department.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)



§ 94.11  IMPOUNDMENT.



   In the event the violator has not complied with this subchapter after
the first offence citation has been issued and the Chief of Police receives a
second complaint, the violator will be issued a second citation and the
animal will be impounded. The Town Police Department will contact Surry
County Animal Control and request the nuisance animal be picked up and
impounded as soon as possible. Violator(s) may retrieve their animal(s) from
Surry County Animal Control after compliance with all policies and regulation
stipulated by Surry County Animal Control.



(Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)



§ 94.12  TETHERING BAN.



   (A)   Tethering ban violation policy and procedure.



      (1)   Upon receiving a complaint regarding a dog that has been
tethered, the town will report the complaint to Surry County Animal Control.
The Animal Control Administrative Assistant will immediately check Animal
Control records for an exemption on file or Shelter Pro for an exemption as
documented by an Animal Control Officer (ACO).



      (2)   If no exemption is found, a Surry County ACO will report
to the premises of the reported offense.



      (3)   At the residence, the ACO will speak with the owner of
the tethered dog to see if the tethering falls into any of the acceptable
exemption categories.



      (4)   If the dog does fall under an acceptable exemption
category as listed in the ordinance and the tethering ban exemption policy,
the ACO will assure all guidelines for tethering are being followed.



      (5)   If all guidelines are being followed and the dog is
exempt under any reason, the ACO will document the complaint and outcome in
Shelter Pro, including the reason for the exemption and description of the
dog in question, and report this to the Elkin Police Department.



      (6)   If guidelines for tethering are not being followed
appropriately, or the animal is tethered with no possible reason for
exemption, the ACO will issue a verbal warning.



      (7)   An ACO will follow up on the situation within 48
business hours to assure all guidelines are being met or that the dog is no
longer being tethered inappropriately.



      (8)   Should said dog still be tethered or tethered
inappropriately, a fine of $100 payable to Surry County will be issued to the
owner.



      (9)   If the dog is found to be tethered inappropriately again
in the future, a criminal summons will be issued by an ACO.



   (B)   Tethering ban exemption policy and procedure.



      (1)   A person may tether or restrain a dog under one of the
following exemption. Please note that exemptions can be revoked at any time
should guidelines not be followed correctly.



         (a)   Usage of the dog in shepherding or herding
livestock.



         (b)   Use of the dog in the business of cultivating
agricultural products where the restraining is reasonably necessary for the
safety of the dog.



         (c)   Use of the dog in lawful hunting activities.



         (d)   Use of the dog at a dog training or performance
events.



         (e)   Camping or other recreation where tethering is
required by the camping or recreational area where the dog is located.



         (f)   Any activity where a tethering dog is in visual
range of its owner or keeper, and the owner or keeper is located outside with
the dog.



         (g)   After taking possession of a dog that appears to
be stray, having first advised Animal Control authorities of the capture of
the dog, the dog may be tethered or restrained, not to exceed seven days.



         (h)   Walking on a handheld leash.



         (i)   In accordance with tethering restrictions in
effect within any of the municipalities in Surry County. Tethering
restrictions in effect within any of the municipalities in Surry County will
take precedence over this section.



         (j)   Up to one year after this ordinance version goes
into effect.



         (k)   Acceptance of Tethering Ban Exemption application
by Surry County Animal Control, and strict adherence to Surry County Animal
Control Ordinance, Article VII, Section 3c, outlines as follows:



            1.   No tethering a dog to a cable trolley system
that allows movement of the restraining vehicle.



            2.   The length of the cable along which the
tethering device can move must be at least ten feet.



            3.   The tethering device must be of such length
that the dog is able to move 15 feet away from the cable perpendicularly.



            4.   The tethering device must be attached in such
manner as to prevent strangulation or other injury to the dog and
entanglement with objects.



            5.   Tethers must be made of rope, twine, cord, or
similar material with a swivel on one end or must be made of a chain that is
at least ten feet in length with swivels on both ends, and which does not
exceed 10% of the dog’s body weight.



            6.   All collars or harnesses used for the purpose
of tethering a dog must be made of nylon or leather; no choke type collars or
pronged collars.



            7.   Must be tethered in such a manner as to allow
the dog access to adequate food, water and shelter.



            8.   No tethering sick, diseased or injured dogs.



      (2)   Tethering ban exemption applications reviewed on a case
by case basis.



      (3)   ACO must verify that above requirements are being met.



      (4)    Animals tethered legally must be given time off the
restraint every day and receive daily socialization.



      (5)   In order to be eligible for the tethering ban exemption,
the dog must have rabies vaccination up to date and be spayed or neutered.
This will be verified by ACO.



      (6)   A separate application must be completed for each dog
needing a tethering exemption. Should one of the dogs become deceased and a
new dog is obtained, a new application must be submitted for a tethering ban
exemption.



      (7)   Animal Control reserves the right to make revoke
exemptions as deemed necessary.



   (C)   Employee non-compliance to these policies could result in a
non-compliance notification and/or be subject to the disciplinary process.



(Ord. 2018-05-0006, eff. 5-14-2018)



KEEPING OF HORSES



§ 94.25  RIDING OR WALKING HORSES ON OR ALONG STREETS AND SIDEWALKS;
UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful at all times for any person to ride or walk a
horse, or to permit a horse to walk or to be ridden on or along Main Street,
Standard Street, South Bridge Street, North Bridge Street, Commerce Street,
Front Street, Spring Street, Elk Spur Street, Highway 268 West, Highway 268
East, Gwyn Avenue, town parks, town cemeteries, Elkin Village Shopping
Center, Elkmont Shopping Center and Surry Square Shopping Center. These
streets and places are restricted without a permit from the Chief of Police
or Town Manager.



(Ord. eff. 8-4-1986)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.26  ALLOWING HORSES TO RUN AT LARGE; UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful at all times for any person having control or
ownership of a horse to permit the horse to run at large within the corporate
limits. For purposes of this provision, the phrase TO RUN AT LARGE shall mean
to walk or roam without restraint or confinement, either by a rider or
through some rope, chain, fence, pen or other enclosure.



(Ord. eff. 8-4-1986)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.27  RIDING AT NIGHT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or to permit a
horse to be ridden within the corporate limits between the hours of dusk and
dawn.



(Ord. eff. 8-4-1986)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.28  ADOPTION DATE.



    This subchapter was adopted on August 4, 1986.



(Ord. eff. 8-4-1986)



KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK



§ 94.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BIRDS OF PREY.  Including but not limited to eagles, hawks, owls and
falcons.



   CROCODILIANS.  Including but not limited to any of various reptiles of
the order Crocodylia (i.e., alligators, crocodiles and gavials).



   GALLINACEOUS BIRDS.  Species of birds, including but not limited to
chickens, ducks, geese, quail, pheasants, guineas, turkeys, grouse and all
domesticated and non-domesticated fowl.



   MAMMALS OF PREY.  Including but not limited to large cats and bears.



   NON-DOMESTICATED PRIMATES.  Including but not limited to monkeys,
gorillas and orangutans.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)



§ 94.41  LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation with less than
eight acres of land upon which to keep the livestock to keep, harbor or
maintain swine, mules, cattle, goats, horses, sheep, llamas, emus,
gallinaceous birds, birds of prey, large mammals of prey, crocodilians,
poisonous snakes, non-domesticated primates or other livestock within the
corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.42  EXCEPTION.



   Except for the keeping of swine, large mammals of prey, alligators,
crocodilians and non-domesticated primates in § 94.41, this subchapter does
not apply to the owners or occupants of any parcel of land consisting of at
least eight acres of land upon which to keep the livestock, provided the land
is contiguous and provided the owner maintains a 200-foot buffer between the
livestock and all adjoining property lines. Excluding the buffer area, not
more than one animal(s) classified as livestock may be maintained for each
acre of land inside the buffer area.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)



§ 94.43  UNLAWFUL TO HARBOR CERTAIN ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain any
swine, large mammals of prey, alligators, crocodilians and non-domesticated
primates within town limits of the town.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.44  EXISTING ANIMALS; TIME FRAME TO COMPLY.



   All persons, firms or corporations now keeping or maintaining any
livestock within areas which become subject to the provisions of this
subchapter through the extension of corporate limits, shall within three
years of the effective date of the expansion of the area comply with all
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)



§ 94.45  FOWL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep or house any fowl
within 200 feet of any residential or commercial building, school or church,
or other establishment.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.46  FOWL AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any fowl, including but not limited to
chickens, ducks, geese, pheasant, quail, grouse, turkeys, guineas or other
gallinaceous birds, to run at large.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.47  CONTAINMENT OF GALLINACEOUS BIRDS.



   Any gallinaceous birds kept within the corporate limits of the town
must be contained by a fence, building or other enclosure that will ensure
the birds will not run at large.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)



§ 94.48  GALLINACEOUS BIRDS AT LARGE.



   Any gallinaceous birds found running at large may be taken into
possession and/or destroyed by the Town Police Department or Surry County
Animal Control Department.



(Ord. eff. 4-12-2004)



BIRD SANCTUARY



§ 94.60  ESTABLISHMENT OF TOWN AS BIRD SANCTUARY.



   (A)   A city may by ordinance create and establish a bird sanctuary
within the city limits pursuant to G.S. § 160A-188. Although the Town of
Elkin has had signs posted for numerous years at town limits declaring the
Town of Elkin to be a bird sanctuary, there is no record of an ordinance
being filed with the North Carolina Department of Transportation. The Town of
Elkin Board of Commissioners finds that it is appropriate that a bird
sanctuary within the town limits be created. Therefore, a bird sanctuary is
hereby created and established within the town to conform to the corporate
boundaries thereof.



   (B)   This section may not protect any birds classed as a pest under
G.S. Chapter 113, Art. 22A, and the Structural Pest Control Act of North
Carolina of 1955 or the North Carolina Pesticide Law of 1971. When a bird
sanctuary has been established, it shall be unlawful for any person to hunt,
kill, trap, or otherwise take any protected birds within the town limits
except pursuant to a permit issued by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources
Commission under G.S. § 113-274(c)(la) or under any other license or permit
of the Wildlife Resources Commission specifically made valid for use in
taking birds within city limits.



   (C)   Protected birds shall be deemed to include all types and
classes of birds not designated as unprotected by the Wildlife Resources
Commission or by any law of the state.



(Ord. effective 5-13-2013)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   If any person(s) shall violate §§ 94.01 through 94.11, he or
she shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $50 or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days as
provided by G.S. § 14-4. Each day the violation continues to exist shall be
considered a separate offense.



   (C)   The violation of §§ 94.25 through 94.28 shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
§§ 94.40 through 94.48 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be fined not exceeding $50 and/or imprisoned for not exceeding 30
days. Each day a person, firm or corporation violates that subchapter shall
be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. eff. 8-4-1986; Ord. eff. 4-12-2004; Ord. eff. 10-10-2005)



CHAPTER 95:  NUISANCES, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT



Section



Weeds and Unlawful Conditions on Private Property



   95.01   Unlawful conditions enumerated



   95.02   Notice of violations



   95.03   Failure to comply



   95.04   Additional remedies



   95.05   Adoption date



Unnecessary Noises



   95.20   Unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise
prohibited



   95.21   Examples



   95.22   Noise measurement



Noises from Motor Vehicles



   95.35   Loud, disturbing noises emanating from a motor vehicle
prohibited



   95.36   Operation of motor vehicle



   95.37   Noise measurement



 



   95.99   Penalty



WEEDS AND UNLAWFUL CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 95.01  UNLAWFUL CONDITIONS ENUMERATED.



   (A)   The following enumerated and described conditions, or any
combination thereof, are hereby found, deemed and declared to constitute a
detriment, danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the corporate limits and are found, deemed and
declared to be public nuisances wherever the conditions may exist and the
creation, maintenance or failure to abate any nuisances is hereby declared
unlawful:



      (1)   Any weeds or other vegetation having an overall height
of more than 18 inches above the surrounding ground, provided that the
following shall not be considered to be a part of this condition: trees and
ornamental shrubs; cultured plants; natural vegetation on undeveloped
property that is not a threat to the character of surrounding properties; and
flowers and growing and producing vegetable plants;



      (2)   Any accumulation of trash and/or garbage which is the
result of the absence or of overflowing or improperly closed trash or garbage
containers;



      (3)   Accumulation in an open place of hazardous or toxic
materials and chemicals;



      (4)   An open place of concentration of combustible items such
as mattresses, boxes, paper, automobile tires and tubes, garbage, trash,
refuse, brush, old clothes, rags or any other combustible materials or
objects of a like nature;



      (5)   Any accumulation of garbage, rubbish, trash or junk
causing or threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to
cause the accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause
the inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes or vermin
prejudicial to the public health;



      (6)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is
offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of rats,
mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health;



      (7)   The open storage of any discarded ice box, furniture,
refrigerator, stove, glass, building materials, building rubbish or similar
items;



      (8)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which
violates the rules and regulations of the Surry or Wilkes County Health
Departments;



      (9)   Any building or other structure which has been burned,
partially burned or otherwise partially destroyed and which is unsightly or
hazardous to the safety of any person, is a continuing fire hazard or which
is structurally unsound to the extent that the Town Manager or his or her
designee can reasonably determine that there is a likelihood of personal or
property injury to any person or property entering the premises;



      (10)   Any condition which blocks, hinders or obstructs in any
way the natural flow of branches, streams, creeks, surface waters, ditches or
drains, to the extent that the premises is not free from standing water; and



      (11)   The outside or outdoors use of any furniture originally
designed or intended for interior use, such as but not limited to couches,
sofas, chairs, recliners or other like items.



   (B)   When any condition in violation of this section is found to
exist, the Code Administrator or such persons as may be designated by the
Town Manager, or the Town Manager himself or herself, shall give notice to
the owner of the premises to abate or remove such conditions within ten days.
Such notice shall be in writing, shall include a description of the premises
sufficient for identification and shall set forth the violation and state
that, if the violation is not corrected within ten days, the city may proceed
to correct the same as authorized by this section. Service of such notice
shall be by any one of the following methods.



      (1)   By delivery to any owner personally or by leaving the
notice at the usual place of abode of the owner with a person who is over the
age of 16 years and a member of the family of the owner.



      (2)   By depositing the notice in the United States Post
Office addressed to the owner at his last known address with postage prepaid
thereon.



      (3)   By posting and keeping posted, for ten days, a copy of
the notice, in placard form, in a conspicuous place on the premises on which
the violation exists, when notice cannot be served by method (1) and (2).



   (C)   If the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice
given pursuant to this section within ten days after the service of such
notice, he shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this section in
accordance with law and each day that such failure continues shall be a
separate offense. In addition, the Town Manager, or his or her designee, may
have the condition described in the notice abated, removed or otherwise
corrected and all expenses incurred thereby shall be chargeable to and paid
by the owner of the property and shall be collected as taxes and levies are
collected. All such expenses shall constitute a lien against the property on
which the work was done.



   (D)   The procedure set forth in this chapter shall be in addition
to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the
abatement of public nuisances, and this chapter shall not prevent the town
from proceeding in a criminal action against any person, firm or corporation
violating the provisions of this chapter as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



   (E)   Repeat offense. Any violation reoccurring on the same property
by the same property owner more than once within a 12-month period shall be
considered a repeat offense provided the reoccurrence is a violation of the
same provision. A notice of the repeat violation shall be issued by the Code
Administrator or his or her designee and shall have a three day grace period
before the penalty is assessed. (See Town of Elkin Schedule of Fees.) A three
day warning period shall be granted, in that this provision applies only to
violations that occur more than once in a 12-month period and proper notice
was given for the initial violation as prescribed under this section. After
this three day period, for each day the repeat violation remains, the
property owner shall be subject to a civil penalty of (see Town of Elkin
Schedule of Fees). Should this repeat violation remain unabated after the
seventh day from notification of the repeat violation, the town shall seek to
recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in the
General Court of Justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. The
collection of a penalty pursuant hereto shall not foreclose further
proceedings for penalties coming due subsequent to the date of the filing of
a prior proceeding. The provisions of this section may also be enforced
through any other appropriate remedies as prescribed in the Nuisance
Ordinance.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008; Ord. passed 4-14-2014)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.02  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   When any condition in violation of this section is found to
exist, the Code Administrator or any persons as may be designated by the Town
Manager, or the Town Manager himself or herself shall give notice to the
owner of the premises to abate or remove the conditions within ten days. The
notice shall be in writing, shall include a description of the premises
sufficient for identification and shall set forth the violation and state
that, if the violation is not corrected within ten days, the town may proceed
to correct the same as authorized by this section.



   (B)   Service of the notice shall be by any one of the following
methods:



      (1)   By delivery to any owner personally or by leaving the
notice at the usual place of abode of the owner with a person who is over the
age of 16 years and a member of the family of the owner;



      (2)   By depositing the notice in the United States Post
Office addressed to the owner at his or her last known address with postage
prepaid thereon; or



      (3)   By posting and keeping posted, for ten days, a copy of
the notice, in placard form, in a conspicuous place on the premises on which
the violation exists, when notice cannot be served by method (B)(1) and (2).



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   If the owner of any property fails to comply with a notice given
pursuant to this section, within ten days after the service of the notice, he
or she shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this subchapter in
accordance with law, and each day that the failure continues shall be a
separate offense. In addition, the Town Manager, or his or her designee, may
have the condition described in the notice abated, removed or otherwise
corrected and all expenses incurred thereby shall be chargeable to and paid
by the owner of the property and shall be collected as taxes and levies are
collected. All these expenses shall constitute a lien against the property on
which the work was done.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.04  ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.



   The procedure set forth in this chapter shall be in addition to any
other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of
public nuisances, and this chapter shall not prevent the town from proceeding
in a criminal action against any person, firm or corporation violating the
provisions of this chapter as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.05  ADOPTION DATE.



   This subchapter was adopted on September 8, 2008.



(Ord. eff. 9-8-2008)



UNNECESSARY NOISES



§ 95.20  UNREASONABLY LOUD, DISTURBING AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED.



   Under and by virtue of the authority granted in the General Statutes,
subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the creation of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town is
prohibited. Any noise which registers more than 60 dB(A) will be probable
cause for a violation of this subchapter. Noise of a character, intensity and
duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is
prohibited.



(Ord. eff. 3-1-1997)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.21  EXAMPLES.



   The following acts among others are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this provision, but this enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:



   (A)   Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn, whistle or signals
device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle or railroad train
except as a danger signal or as required by law, so as to create any
unreasonable, loud or harsh sound or the sounding of the device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;



   (B)   Radios, record players and the like.  The playing of any
radio, television set, record player, musical instrument or sound-producing
or sound-amplifying device in a manner or with such volume, particularly
during hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the
quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other type
of residence;



   (C)   Pets.  The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing
frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any
person in the vicinity; and



   (D)   Use of vehicles.  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or operated in a manner as to create loud
or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, screeching of tires or other
noise.



(Ord. eff. 3-1-1997)



§ 95.22  NOISE MEASUREMENT.



   For the purpose of determined dB(A)s as referred to in this subchapter,
the noise shall be measured on the A-weighting scale on a sound level meter
of standard design and quality having characteristics established by the
American National Standards Institute.



(Ord. eff. 3-1-1997)



NOISES FROM MOTOR VEHICLES



§ 95.35  LOUD, DISTURBING NOISES EMANATING FROM A MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or assist in
creating any unreasonably loud and disturbing noise emanating from a motor
vehicle.



   (B)   Any noise which registers more than 60 dB(A) will be probable
cause for a violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   The foregoing limitations on the operation of a motor vehicle
shall not apply to the operation of horns, sirens or other emergency warning
devices actually being used in emergency circumstances.



(Ord. eff. 3-1-1994)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.36  OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful to operate or allow the operation of any motor
vehicle in the town:



   (A)   Which has had its muffler-exhaust and/or other noise-control
equipment removed, altered or maintained in disrepair as to create
unreasonable loud and disturbing noises;



   (B)   By engaging in jackrabbit starts, spinning tires, racing
engines or other operations which create unreasonably loud and disturbing
noises; or



   (C)   Off the boundaries of a public street for racing or other
operations which create unreasonably loud and disturbing noises.



(Ord. eff. 3-1-1994)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.37  NOISE MEASUREMENT.



   For the purpose of determined dB(A)s as referred to in this subchapter,
the noise shall be measured on the A-weighting scale on a sound level meter
of standard design and quality having characteristics established by the
American National Standards Institute.



(Ord. eff. 3-1-1994)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
§§ 95.20 through 95.22, shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor
and shall be punished in accordance with the provision of G.S. § 14-4.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
§§ 95.35 through 95.37 shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 3-1-1994; Ord. eff. 3-1-1997)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   96.001   Display of street addresses on all houses and business
buildings; required



Driveway Cuts



   96.015   Purpose



   96.016   Definitions



   96.017   Procedures



   96.018   Appeal process



   96.019   Permit required



   96.020   Presumption



   96.021   Punishment



   96.022   Adoption date



Construction of Streets and Sidewalks



   96.035   Permit required for cutting of street or sidewalk



   96.036   Application for permit



   96.037   Adjustment of fee



   96.038   Disposition of fees



   96.039   Openings to be filled



Poles, Wires and Conduits



   96.055   Permits limited to single lines



   96.056   By agreement, separate lines or wires on same poles



   96.057   Care and inspection of poles



   96.058   Use of poles and underground conduits for town purposes



Use of Streets



   96.075   Storage or display of merchandise, goods, equipment or
tools prohibited



 



   96.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.001  DISPLAY OF STREET ADDRESSES ON ALL HOUSES AND BUSINESS BUILDINGS;
REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner of property with a
structure thereon to affix to the structure and otherwise display the
official street number of the property at a conspicuous place, visible from
the street on which the property fronts. All street numbers shall be
displayed numerically and no display of street numbers shall be spelled.



   (B)   The official street number affixed on any house, building or
other structure located on improved property shall not be less than three
inches in height. However, the building number of any apartment, townhouse,
condominium or other multi-family facility shall not be less than six inches
in height and shall be placed in either the approximate center of the
building or on the street end of the building; provided, the number is easily
visible from either a public or private street, or from the parking lot which
served the building or facility.



   (C)   All official street numbers affixed on any house, building or
structure located on improved property except apartments, townhouses,
condominium complexes or other multi-family facilities, shall be maintained
within three feet of the front entrance and shall be easily visible and
readable. Official unit numbers, letters or other designations on individual
apartments, townhouses, condominiums or multi-family facilities shall not be
less than three inches in height and shall be displayed within three feet of
the front entrance of each unit.



   (D)   Where a house, building or structure located on improved
property is located more than 100 feet from the street on which the property
fronts, or if the topography of the property prohibits the numbers from being
seen from the street or regardless of the distance from the street, the
assigned street address also shall be posted near the driveway of the
property and adjacent to the street right-of-way. If a property owner has
difficulty complying with this subchapter due to topography of the building
or structure or any unforseen circumstance that may inhibit compliance with
this subchapter, the property owner shall contact the Chief of Police or his
or her designate to render a solution to the problem of compliance. The
placement of the assigned street numbers on the street curb is permissible
but may not be used to meet the requirements of this section.



   (E)   All displays of official street numbers shall be of a
contrasting color to the color of the house, building or structure located on
the property, and the displays shall be clearly visible when illuminated.



   (F)   Following the posting of the street address numbers as
required, the owner or occupant shall maintain the numbers at all times in
accordance with the above standards.



   (G)   Owners of all houses, buildings or other structures located on
improved property within the corporate limits of the town on the effective
date of this subchapter shall comply with the provisions contained herein
within one year following the adoption of this subchapter. Any house,
building or structure erected, or any display of a street number which is
replaced or altered after the effective date of this subchapter, shall comply
with the provisions contained in this section.



   (H)   The failure of any house, building or structure located on
improved property in the corporate limits of the town to have affixed thereto
or otherwise displayed the official street number of the property in
accordance with the standards contained in division (A) above is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. In addition to all other remedies provided by law,
the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her authorized representative shall
have authority to summarily abate, remove or remedy those conditions declared
to be nuisance by this section. A notice shall be sent to the owner of the
property containing any deficiencies.



   (I)   A property owner, upon receiving this notice, shall have 15
days to correct the deficiencies listed therein. If any property owner shall
fail, neglect or refuse to correct the deficiencies, the Code Enforcement
Officer or his or her authorized representative shall have authority to
remove and correct them, including the removing of any unofficial number or
number in violation of division (A) above and the installation and proper
display upon the property of the official street number assigned thereto. The
expense of the action shall be paid by the person in default and, if not
paid, shall be a lien upon the land or premises where the deficiency arose,
and shall be collected as unpaid taxes.



   (J)   This section was adopted on June 3, 1991.



(Ord. eff. 6-3-1991)



DRIVEWAY CUTS



§ 96.015  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose and intent of this subchapter to prevent damage to
the streets, curbs and sidewalks in the town and to regulate construction of
new driveways, streets, alleyways, parking areas and other land uses which
require driveway cuts.



(Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



§ 96.016  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVEWAY CUT.  A designated driving area connected to a driveway,
street, parking area, alleyway or other vehicle path to allow access to these
areas by motor vehicles.



   SIDEWALKS.  A walking path provided and maintained for pedestrian
traffic. SIDEWALKS may be constructed from concrete, asphalt, brick, rock,
stone, rock dust or other building materials.



(Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



§ 96.017  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Prior to making a driveway cut, the owner of the property
shall make application to the Town Zoning Officer for a permit to construct a
driveway cut and/or to cross over a town sidewalk.



   (B)   The Zoning Officer shall review the application and may either
grant the permit or deny the permit based upon the following standards:



      (1)   Whether or not the property owner has at least one
driveway cut to his or her property;



      (2)   The nature and need for an additional driveway cut;



      (3)   The impact upon adjoining property owners;



      (4)   The number of driveway cuts existing along the street,
including the proximity of the driveway cuts to the proposed driveway cut; or



      (5)   Any impact upon traffic safety, including the proximity
of the proposed driveway cut to any street or alley intersections.



(Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



§ 96.018  APPEAL PROCESS.



   The applying property owner who has been denied a driveway cut permit
by the Zoning Officer shall have the right to appeal the denial to the Town
Board of Adjustment within ten days of the date of the written denial by the
Zoning Officer.



(Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



§ 96.019  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   From and after the effective date of this subchapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to construct or make a driveway cut in the town
without having first obtained a permit for the driveway cut.



(Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



§ 96.020  PRESUMPTION.



   Any driveway cut or damage to the street, curb or sidewalk caused by
the driveway cut shall raise a rebuttal presumption that the owner of the
property adjacent to the driveway cut was the person who made the driveway
cut in violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



§ 96.021  PUNISHMENT.



   A violation of this subchapter shall constitute a general misdemeanor
punishable by the payment of a fine as set forth in § 96.999.



(Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



§ 96.022  ADOPTION DATE.



   This subchapter was adopted on August 12, 2002.



(Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



§ 96.035  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CUTTING OF STREET OR SIDEWALK.



   It shall be unlawful to make any opening in any street or sidewalk
without a permit therefor issued by the Public Works Director.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. I, § 1)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.036  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Any person, firm or corporation, desiring to make any opening in any
street or sidewalk, shall make written application therefor which application
shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose thereof, and the
approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. The application
shall be accompanied by the fee required by the next following section.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. I, § 2)



§ 96.037  ADJUSTMENT OF FEE.



   If, when the opening is being made, it appears that the number of
square yards of surface to be cut is greater than is shown by the
application, the applicant shall immediately pay the remainder of the fee due
the town. If, when the opening is completed, the number of square yards of
surface actually cut varies from the number for which the fee was paid, the
proper adjustment shall immediately be made by the applicant or by the town.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. I, § 4)



§ 96.038  DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   All fees collected under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
paid into the General Fund.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. I, § 5)



§ 96.039  OPENINGS TO BE FILLED.



   All openings made in any public street, alley or sidewalk under the
provisions of this subchapter shall immediately upon the accomplishment of
the purpose for which the same was made, be completely filled up, and the
surface thereof shall be made flush with the adjacent surface of the street.
Any hard surface removed will be replaced by the person removing or causing
same to be removed. Every day during which the opening remains unfilled in
violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. I, § 6)  Penalty, see § 96.999



POLES, WIRES AND CONDUITS



§ 96.055  PERMITS LIMITED TO SINGLE LINES.



   No permit shall be issued for the erection of poles on a street where
there is already a line of poles on the street for the purpose of supporting
electric, telegraph or telephone wires.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. II, § 2) 



§ 96.056  BY AGREEMENT, SEPARATE LINES OR WIRES ON SAME POLES.



   Whenever any telephone or telegraph company shall desire to place wires
along any street upon which it does not have a line of poles, and there are
poles along the street owned by another company, then the companies may
maintain their wires upon the same poles. If an agreement cannot be reached
between the company owning the line of poles and the company desiring to use
the poles, then the companies may submit the question of compensation and
other pertinent matters in controversy to three disinterested persons for
arbitration, or they may submit the matter to the Board of Commissioners.
This section shall apply to poles owned by the town as well as to companies
operating under franchise from the town.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. II, § 3) 



§ 96.057  CARE AND INSPECTION OF POLES.



   It shall be the duty of the owners of all poles supporting telephone or
telegraph wires to keep the poles in safe condition and for that purpose to
inspect the same once every three months.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. II, § 4) 



§ 96.058  USE OF POLES AND UNDERGROUND CONDUITS FOR TOWN PURPOSES.



   One duct in all underground conduit systems shall be provided for the
use of the town free of charge, and the town shall have the use of any and
all poles on streets for police and fire alarm telegraph systems.



(1940 Code, Ch. R, Art. II, § 5) 



USE OF STREETS



§ 96.075  STORAGE OR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE OR OTHER GOODS, EQUIPMENT OR
TOOLS PROHIBITED.



   Under and by virtue of the authority granted in G.S. § 160A-296 of
granting municipalities the power to regulate vehicular traffic upon public
streets within the corporate limits, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to display or cause to be displayed; to store or cause to
be stored; to place or cause to be placed; to park or cause to be parked; to
locate or cause to be located; to relocate or cause to be relocated; to
exhibit or cause to be exhibited on any public street of the town, any
merchandise, goods, equipment, tools, produce or other items for sale or not
for sale.



(Ord. eff. 10-11-1972)  Penalty, see § 96.999



§ 96.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   A violation of §§ 96.015 through 96.022 shall constitute a
general misdemeanor punishable by the payment of a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days pursuant to G.S. § 14-4. In addition to
the criminal violation, the town may institute an appropriate action in the
District Court of Surry County asking the Court to enjoin the owners’ use
of the unlawful driveway cut and in addition thereto, the town may seek
damages for the full costs of repairing any damages to the street curb and/or
sidewalk caused by the unlawful driveway cut.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
96.075, shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 10-11-1972; Ord. eff. 8-12-2002)



CHAPTER 97:  CEMETERIES



Section



General



   97.001   Superintendent; appointment, duties generally



   97.002   Control of cemeteries



   97.003   Promulgation and enforcement of rules



   97.004   Superintendent a special policeman to eject violators



   97.005   When burials prohibited



   97.006   When open to public



   97.007   Entering cemetery after closing hours



   97.008   Advertisements, posters and the like



   97.009   Trucks and wagons forbidden



   97.010   Riding of bicycles, horses and motorcycles prohibited



   97.011   Driving on roads; speed limit



   97.012   Parking



   97.013   Firearms



   97.014   Disturbances



   97.015   Defacing or removing property generally; flowers and the
like



   97.016   Defacing or removing monuments and the like



   97.017   Dogs and fowl



   97.018   Grave mounds; permanent boxes, urns and the like on grave
plots



   97.019   Trees, shrubs, other plants, floral arrangements; planting
and removal



   97.020   Removal or pruning when plants detrimental



   97.021   Removal of non-conforming or unsightly flowers



   97.022   Number of floral arrangements allowed during certain
period; exception



   97.023   Interment; notice



   97.024   Interment records to be kept



Monuments, Mausoleums, Markers, Coping and the Like



   97.040   Monument specifications; foundations



   97.041   Mausoleum locations; specifications; foundations



   97.042   Markers; placement; specifications



   97.043   Markers to be at grade level



   97.044   Erection of objectionable monuments and the like,
prohibited; removal of damaged and the like



   97.045   Enclosures around lot or grave spaces



Sale of Lots or Plots



   97.060   Charges for cemetery lots



   97.061   Cash sales



   97.062   Further provisions as to sale to non-residents



   97.063   Sales to corporations and business concerns



   97.064   Speculation prohibited



   97.065   Limitation on number of lots a person may purchase



   97.066   Procedure for transfer



Definitions



   97.080   Definitions



 



   97.999   Penalties



GENERAL



§ 97.001  SUPERINTENDENT; APPOINTMENT, DUTIES GENERALLY.



   There shall be a Superintendent of the Town Cemetery who shall be
appointed by the Town Manager. The Superintendent shall perform all the
duties prescribed herein and such other duties as may be assigned him by the
Town Manager.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.002  CONTROL OF CEMETERIES.



   The Town Manager, through the Superintendent, shall have absolute
charge of the city cemetery with authority to enforce all ordinances, rules,
and regulations, relating to the cemetery; shall have the same kept in good
order, and shall superintend the digging of all graves, and all interments
and disinterment's.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.003  PROMULGATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF RULES.



   The Town Manager is authorized, subject to approval of the Town Board
of Commissioners, to make and carry out and enforce suitable rules and
regulations for the operation and maintenance of the city cemetery not
inconsistent with this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail,
neglect, or refuse to comply with such rules.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.004  SUPERINTENDENT A SPECIAL POLICEMEN TO EJECT VIOLATORS.



   The Superintendent may be sworn as a special policeman with full power
to arrest intruders and depredators, and any person willfully violating any
of the cemetery rules or regulations or ordinances may be ejected from the
grounds by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.005  WHEN BURIALS PROHIBITED.



   Burials are prohibited in the Town Cemetery on Easter Day and Christmas
Day.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.006  WHEN OPEN TO PUBLIC.



   The Town Cemetery shall remain open to the public from 7:30 a.m. to
Sunset; provided, that the Town Manager may order the same closed during an
emergency when in his opinion an emergency exists as to require such closing.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.007  ENTERING CEMETERY AFTER CLOSING HOURS.



   No person shall enter the Town Cemetery except during the hours in
which they are open to the public as set forth herein, except upon written
permission first granted by the Town Manager or the Superintendent.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.008  ADVERTISEMENTS, POSTERS, AND THE LIKE.



   No advertising of any description shall be permitted within any of the
Town Cemetery. No bills, posters, place-cards, pictures or any other like or
similar device shall be attached or posted on either the inside or outside of
any wall or fence enclosing the Town Cemetery.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.009  TRUCKS AND WAGONS FORBIDDEN.



   Commercial trucks and wagons, except those engaged in cemetery business
shall be permitted inside the gates of the Town Cemetery.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.010  RIDING OF BICYCLES, HORSES AND MOTORCYCLES PROHIBITED.



   Horseback riding and the riding of bicycles or motorcycles are hereby
prohibited in the Town Cemetery.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.011  DRIVING ON ROADS; SPEED LIMIT.



   No person shall drive a vehicle on any part of the grounds of the Town
Cemetery except upon the main roads and avenues provided therein for
vehicular traffic. The speed of vehicles in the cemetery shall not exceed ten
miles per hour.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.012  PARKING.



   No person shall park or cause to remain parked any vehicle within any
cemetery of the city unless engage in attendance at burial service or
otherwise engaged in activities which call for the presence of such vehicle
within the cemetery.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.013  FIREARMS.



   Except in the case of military funerals and veterans or military
commemorative exercises, it shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to
carry firearms into the Town Cemetery.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.014  DISTURBANCES.



   Any person disturbing the quite and good order of the Town Cemetery by
unnecessary noise of any kind or by any other improper conduct may be ejected
from the grounds. Any person refusing to leave the cemetery when notified to
do so for any disturbance, improper conduct or other violation of any of the
regulations or ordinances concerning such cemetery shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.015  DEFACING OR REMOVING PROPERTY GENERALLY; FLOWERS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in any way to disturb any grave;
deface, pull up or remove anything put or placed to mark a grave, or any wall
fence or enclosure around a grave, or any flowers, shrubs, or trees on any
cemetery lot or elsewhere in the cemetery; provided, that the same shall not
be a violation if done in compliance with the rules and ordinances pertaining
to the cemeteries under a permit duly granted by the Town Manager or the
Superintendent.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.016  DEFACING OR REMOVING MONUMENTS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully and without authority to
defile, deface, desecrate, place any mark upon or otherwise injure any
monument, headstone or marker contained in any cemetery duly and lawfully
maintained.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.017  DOGS AND FOWL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow his dog or other animal or
fowl to enter the Town Cemetery, and all dogs and fowl found within the
enclosures or grounds of any city cemetery shall be impounded.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.018  GRAVE MOUNDS; PERMANENT BOXES, URNS, AND THE LIKE ON GRAVE PLOTS.



   No grave mounds will be permitted in the cemetery, nor shall the
placing of any permanent boxes, urns, metal ornaments, seats or similar items
be permitted upon any grave or plot within the cemetery.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.019  TREES, SHRUBS, OTHER PLANTS, FLORAL ARRANGEMENTS; PLANTING AND
REMOVAL.



   No trees, shrubs or plants shall be planted in, pruned, or removed from
the Town Cemetery without the consent and written approval of the Town
Manager or the Superintendent. The Town Manager or the Superintendent shall
have authority to prune, remove or transplant any tree shrub, plant or other
growth necessary for the general beauty, welfare, and best interest of the
cemetery.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.020  REMOVAL OR PRUNING WHEN PLANTS DETRIMENTAL.



   If any trees, shrubs, or other plants situated in any lot shall, by
means of their encroaching roots or branches, become detrimental to the
adjacent lots, driveways or walks, the Superintendent is authorized and
empowered to enter onto lot and remove or trim any trees or shrubs that have
become objectionable.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.021  REMOVAL OF NON-CONFORMING OR UNSIGHTLY FLOWERS.



   The Superintendent shall have the authority to remove all floral
design, flowers, weeds, plants and herbage of any kind from the cemeteries as
soon as, in his judgment, they become unsightly or do not conform to the
standards.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.022  NUMBER OF FLORAL ARRANGEMENTS ALLOWED DURING CERTAIN PERIOD;
EXCEPTION.



   Between March 1 and November 1, more than one floral design or floral
arrangement per grave is prohibited in the Town Cemetery, except for a period
of seven days following interment.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.023  INTERMENT; NOTICE.



   Notice of an interment in town cemeteries must be given to the
Superintendent not less than 12 hours in advance, at which time the precise
location for the interment must be given. However, if the interment should
occur on a Sunday or on a holiday observed by the town, the notice of
internment should be given to the Superintendent not later than 5:00 p.m. the
preceding day. The company performing the interment shall notify the
Superintendent of the date, plot number and the location within the lot of
the interment. All owners, individuals or funeral services must complete, in
full, the Interment Authorization Form. This form shall be provided to the
town prior to the burial.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.024  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   Suitable books shall be provided and kept for entries by the
Superintendent of interments in the Town Cemetery. Such entries shall contain
the name, age, sex, date of death and date or burial of every person in the
Town Cemetery.



MONUMENTS, MAUSOLEUMS, MARKERS, COPING AND THE LIKE



§ 97.040  MONUMENT SPECIFICATIONS; FOUNDATIONS.



   The requirements as to monuments in the Town Cemetery shall be as
follows:



   (A)   No monument shall be placed or erected on any lot having fewer
than two grave lots, nor shall more than one monument be placed on any one
lot. The location of all monuments shall be subject to prior, written
approval of the cemetery Superintendent. Application for placement must be
filed five working days prior to approval and/or placement.



   (B)   No monument shall be placed or erected which shall have a face
area greater than 28 square feet, nor a width greater than five and one-half
feet.



   (C)   No monument shall be placed or erected on any lot unless such
monument shall be a minimum of two feet in height, not including base, two
feet in width and eight inches thick, provided, that the Superintendent may
authorize reasonable exception within old sections (A-K, 1934,1957 and 1967)
of Hollywood Cemetery.



   (D)   All monuments shall be constructed of first quality granite or
marble only.



   (E)   The foundations for all monuments shall be of solid masonry
concrete and columns of sufficient number to sustain the weight of the
monument. All foundations for monuments must be laid not less than two and
one-half feet below the grade of the lot. The area at the top of such
foundations must be at least equal to that of the base of the superstructure.
The mixture of concrete shall be a 1-2-4 mix. Foundations shall be
constructed by the monument company under the specifications set out above at
the expense of the owner/company.



   (F)   The owner of monument and other memorial structures shall keep
them in good repair, and any structure found to be unsightly and in
dilapidated condition may be removed by the town.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.041  MAUSOLEUM LOCATIONS; SPECIFICATIONS; FOUNDATIONS.



   The requirements as to mausoleums in the Town Cemetery shall be as
follows:



   (A)   No mausoleums shall be erected in the cemetery, except upon
lots specifically designated by the Superintendent for that purpose.



   (B)   No mausoleum shall be erected on any lot within the Town
Cemetery until complete specifications and plans have been submitted to the
cemetery Superintendent for approval and permit issued therefore.



   (C)   Mausoleums shall be constructed to specifications of the Town
Engineer by a private contractor under the direction of the Superintendent,
and at the expense of the owner. Foundations shall not ordinarily be less
than six feet deep unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.042  MARKERS; PLACEMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.



   The requirements as to markers in the town cemeteries shall be as
follows:



   (A)   No more than one marker may be placed on any grave, and in
turn, no more than one grave may be embraced by any one marker within the
Town Cemetery.



   (B)   All markers which shall be placed on any grave within the city
cemetery shall be 12 inches in width, 24 inches in length, and six inches in
thickness. Any standard markers furnished to the family of any deceased
veteran by the government of the United States, and which may not be within
the specifications specified herein, are excepted from said specifications
and may be placed on the grave of any deceased veteran.



   (C)   All grave markers shall be constructed of first quality
granite or marble, or of bronze.



   (D)   All granite or marble markers shall be installed so the face
is flush to the ground and the excavated area around the marble shall be
backfilled with sod from the excavated area.



   (E)   Bronze markers shall be of a size 12 inches wide and 24 inches
long. A vase of bronze may be attached as part of the marker, as long as the
dimensions of the vase shall not be included in the overall dimensions of the
marker. Bronze markers shall be installed in a concrete base so as to lie
flush with the ground.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.043  MARKERS TO BE AT GRADE LEVEL.



   There shall be a four-inch concrete "Skirt" around all stones installed
(Head stones, foot stones. Corner stones, monuments) with said "skirt"
installed and maintained flush and level with surrounding ground.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.044  ERECTION OF OBJECTIONABLE MONUMENTS AND THE LIKE, PROHIBITED;
REMOVAL OF DAMAGED AND THE LIKE.



   The town reserves the right to refuse or prohibit the erection or
placing of any monument, marker or mausoleum if in the judgment of the
Superintendent such memorial is objectionable in design, or is faulty
constructed, or is made of inferior materials, or is not in compliance with
cemetery rules and regulations governing same, and further reserves the right
to remove monuments which in the judgment of the Superintendent are damaged
or deteriorated beyond use.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.045  ENCLOSURES AROUND LOT OR GRAVE SPACES.



   No coping, curbing, fencing, planting, or enclosures of any kind shall
be permitted around any lot or grave space within the Town Cemetery.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



SALE OF LOTS OR PLOTS



§ 97.060  CHARGES FOR CEMETERY LOTS.



   The charges for a cemetery lot shall be available upon request from
Town Hall or the Superintendent. Applicable recording fees shall be paid by
purchaser, in addition to purchase price, at time of purchase.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.061  CASH SALES.



   Persons desiring to purchase plots in the city cemetery shall file an
application of purchase (available at Town Hall) so the Superintendent may
set an appointment with the purchaser to lay off the plot in question and
require an immediate cash payment according to the charges established by the
City Council. On payment of the required sum, the Superintendent shall issue
a certificate to the purchaser of such lot or plot specifying the same and
the price thereof. Upon presentation of such certificate to the Town Clerk a
deed shall be made out and executed. A copy of such deed shall be delivered
to the purchaser and a copy shall be kept by the Town Clerk in a book to be
kept in his office for that purpose.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.062  FURTHER PROVISIONS AS TO SALE TO NON-RESIDENTS.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the purchase price of
cemetery lots are hereby fixed by the Town Board of Commissioners at a price
at least 50% higher to persons residing outside the corporate limits of the
town than to persons residing within the corporate limits of the town,
irrespective of ownership of property within the town.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.063  SALES TO CORPORATIONS AND BUSINESS CONCERNS.



   Sales of cemetery lots to any corporation or to business concerns are
hereby expressly forbidden.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.064  SPECULATION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to buy or
otherwise acquire any city cemetery lot or burial space for the purpose of
speculation or sale.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.065  LIMITATION OF NUMBER OF LOTS A PERSON MAY PURCHASE.



   No natural person shall be entitled to purchase more than two Town
Cemetery lots except where there are unusual and extraordinary circumstances
surrounding the particular situation making it necessary that he have more
than two, and in such latter case only when he has applied for and received
the specific approval of the Superintendent. Lots shall be sold in groups of
two or four and when four are purchased they shall be in the surveyed area of
nine feet by 21 feet.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.066  PROCEDURE FOR TRANSFER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or transfer any lot in the
city cemetery without first obtaining the consent and approval of the
Superintendent. A copy of the new deed shall be returned to the Town Hall for
appropriate recording.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



DEFINITIONS



§ 97.080  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PLOT. A four-grave surveyed area of ground measuring nine feet wide by
21 feet long or a two-grave surveyed area of ground measuring nine feet wide
by ten and one-half feet long. Length is measured in an East/West direction.



   LOT. Each burial space within a designated plot measuring approximately
four and one-half feet long by ten and one-half feet long.



   MONUMENT. Shall be the only above ground structure located on a grave
lot typically identifying a family or families.



   MARKER. Shall be the single stone placed to identify a particular
individual buried in a plot within a lot.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



§ 97.999  PENALTIES.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter, shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. 2017-03-0462, eff. - -)



CHAPTER 98:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   98.01   Placement of visually monitored alarms



   98.02   Notification of police by private company



   98.03   Automatic dialing system



   98.04   Accurate operation; no liability



   98.05   Accidental or false burglar alarm; charge



   98.06   Accidental or false fire alarm; cost



   98.07   Failure to pay



§ 98.01  PLACEMENT OF VISUALLY MONITORED ALARMS.



   Beginning August 5, 1997, the Town Police Department will no longer
allow visually monitored burglar, hold-up or fire alarms to be placed within
the communications room of the Town Police Department.



(Ord. eff. 8-5-1997)



§ 98.02  NOTIFICATION OF POLICE BY PRIVATE COMPANY.



   Persons, firms and corporations located within the town limits who
employ a private security alarm company must instruct the security company to
contact the Town Police Department by telephone, in the event of an alarm
being activated.



(Ord. eff. 8-5-1997)



§ 98.03  AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEM.



   (A)   If a person, firm or corporation located within the town
limits installs an automatic dialing alarm system on his, her or their
property, which is designed to contact the Town Police or Fire Department by
telephone in the event the alarm is activated, he, she or they must notify
the Chief of Police prior to the activation of the alarm system.



   (B)   All automatic burglar, hold-up and fire dialing alarm systems
must be installed in such a manner that the recorded alarm signals will dial
911. The Town Police Department telecommunicator will use reasonable
diligence to dispatch all burglar, hold-up or fire alarms immediately after
they are received.



(Ord. eff. 8-5-1997)



§ 98.04  ACCURATE OPERATION; NO LIABILITY.



   (A)   The town or the Town Police Department assumes no liability in
connection with a default of any fire, hold-up or burglar alarm system
installed by any person, firm or corporation or any action or failure of
action on the part of town or any of town employees.



   (B)   The accurate operation of an alarm is totally the
responsibility of the person, firm or corporation which owns the alarm system.



(Ord. eff. 8-5-1997)



§ 98.05  ACCIDENTAL OR FALSE BURGLAR ALARM; CHARGE.



   If a burglar or hold-up alarm is set off accidentally or is false, a
$25 charge will be assessed against the person, firm or corporation that owns
or is responsible for the operation of the alarm and that amount shall be
paid to the town.



(Ord. eff. 8-5-1997)



§ 98.06  ACCIDENTAL OR FALSE FIRE ALARM; COST.



   If a false or accidental fire alarm is dispatched and the firefighting
personnel are dispatched, it will be the responsibility of the person, firm
or corporation that owns or is responsible for the operation of the alarm to
pay to the town the expense incurred by the town. The major expense in this
case will be to pay the volunteer firefighters at the town’s current rate
of pay and Fire Department vehicle operation.



(Ord. eff. 8-5-1997)



§ 98.07  FAILURE TO PAY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to pay to the town the
service charge for false alarm services within 30 days from written notice by
the town may have the service charge assessed against his, her or its real
property. No business license will be issued or renewed while the service
charge is considered delinquent. As an alternative to collecting the charges
as an assessment, the town may elect to collect the charges by civil action.



(Ord. eff. 8-5-1997)



CHAPTER 99:  PUBLIC LIBRARY



Section



   99.01   Library established



   99.02   Donations



   99.03   Title of property



   99.04   Use to be free



§ 99.01  LIBRARY ESTABLISHED.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. 153A-263, there is hereby
established a free public library in the town, to be known as the “Elkin
Public Library,” and which shall be supported only by gifts and
appropriation of nontax revenue available for that purpose, unless under
statutory authority, an election is requested or called, and held, at which
the voters authorize the levy of a special tax for library purposes.



(Ord. eff. 2-7-1966)



§ 99.02  DONATIONS.



   With the consent of the Board of Commissioners, expressed in each case
by an appropriate resolution or ordinance, the Library Board of Trustees may
accept any gift, grant, devise or bequest made or offered by any person for
library purposes and may carry out the conditions of the donations.



(Ord. eff. 2-7-1966)



§ 99.03  TITLE OF PROPERTY.



   Title to all property given, granted or conveyed, donated, devised or
bequeathed to, or otherwise acquired by the town for a library shall vest in
and be held in the name of the town, and any conveyance, grant, donation,
devise, bequest or gift to or in the name of the Library Board of Trustees
shall be deemed to have been made directly to the town.



(Ord. eff. 2-7-1966)



§ 99.04  USE TO BE FREE. 



   The use of the public library hereinbefore created and established
shall be forever free to the inhabitants of the town, subject to reasonable
rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Library Board of Trustees and
approved by the Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 2-7-1966)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   BUSINESS LICENSING



      111.   BEGGING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



      112.   RESIDENTIAL SALES



      113.   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES



      114.   FOOD SERVICE



      115.   COMMERCIAL, OPEN AIR, ACCESSORY SALES AND LIMITED
DURATION EVENTS



      116.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSING



Section



License Taxes



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   License tax upon certain trades and business operations



   110.03   Unlawful to conduct business without a license



   110.04   Duration of license tax



   110.05   License required for every separate business



   110.06   License required for every place of business



   110.07   Display of license required; exception



   110.08   No abatement of license tax



   110.09   When due; late penalty



   110.10   Conflicts



   110.11   Adoption date



Special Events



   110.25   Nondiscrimination



   110.26   Definitions



   110.27   Allowance of special event upon issuance of a permit



   110.28   Approval of applications



   110.29   Considerations for special event permit requests



   110.30   Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages



   110.31   Firearms



   110.32   Application fee



 



   110.99   Penalty



   Appendix A: Schedule of License Taxes



LICENSE TAXES



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENT.  The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or
distributor.



   BUSINESS.  Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or
calling of any kind, subject, by the provision of this subchapter, to a
license tax.



   ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS.  Engaged in the business as owner or operator.



   FISCAL YEAR.  The period beginning with July 1 and ending with June 30
next following.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation.



   QUARTER.  Any three consecutive months.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.02  LICENSE TAX UPON CERTAIN TRADES AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS.



   In addition to the tax on property and poles, as otherwise provided
for, and under the power and authority conferred in the laws of this state,
there shall be levied and collected annually, or more often, where provided
for, a privilege license tax on trades, professions, agencies, business
operations, exhibitions, circuses and all subjects authorized to be licensed,
as set out in the following sections and schedule in Appendix A. All licenses
shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent the Board of Commissioners from
imposing from time to time, as they may see fit, any license taxes as are not
specifically herein defined, or from increasing or decreasing the amount of
any special license tax, or from prohibiting or regulating the business or
acts licensed, and all licenses are granted subject to the provisions of
existing ordinances for those thereafter enacted.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.03  UNLAWFUL TO CONDUCT BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or his or her agent or servant to
engage in or carry on a business in the town for which there is required a
license, without first having paid the license tax and obtained the license.
For the purpose of this section, the opening of a place of business, or
offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing
in furtherance of the business shall be construed to be ENGAGING IN OR
CARRYING ON THE BUSINESS; and each day that the person, firm or corporation
shall engage in or carry on the business as aforesaid, shall be construed to
be a separate offense.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.04  DURATION OF LICENSE TAX.



   All taxes provided for and fixed in the following sections and schedule
shall be for 12 months, unless otherwise specified.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.05  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EVERY SEPARATE BUSINESS.



   The payment of any particular tax imposed by this subchapter shall not
relieve the person paying the same from any other tax imposed by this
subchapter for any other business he or she may carry on, unless so provided
by the section imposing the tax; it being the intent of this subchapter that
license taxes prescribed by various sections or subsections of this
subchapter applicable to any business shall be cumulative except where
otherwise specifically provided.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.06  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EVERY PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business is only
valid for the business conducted at the place and by the licensee named
therein. Every person doing business in more than one factory, mill,
warehouse, store, stand or other place of business shall secure a separate
license for each place of business, unless the places of business are
contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and open into each other,
and are operated as a unit. If the business is moved or if the licensee sells
to another, then a new license is necessary, unless a special permit to
continue business under the original license is obtained from the Board of
Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.07  DISPLAY OF LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   Every license must be kept prominently displayed at the place of
business of the licensee named in the license, or, if the licensee has no
fixed place of business, the licensee must keep the same whatever the
business is being operated and where it can be inspected at any time by the
proper municipal official.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.08  NO ABATEMENT OF LICENSE TAX.



   No license tax shall be abated, nor shall any refund of any part
thereof be made, in any case where the licensee discontinues his or her
business before the end of the period for which the license was issued.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.09  WHEN DUE; LATE PENALTY.



   All license taxes imposed by this subchapter shall be due and payable
to the Town Clerk on or before July 1 or at the date of engaging in the
business, trade, employment or profession, or doing the act, and after that
date shall be subject to a penalty of 5% for each 30 days that the tax
remains unpaid, in addition to other pains and penalties which may be imposed
for continuing or engaging in business without the required license.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.10  CONFLICTS.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this subchapter
are hereby repealed; provided that the repeal shall in no way affect any
rights heretofore acquired for the collection of any tax heretofore levied or
assessed or the validity of any sales for taxes heretofore made or any rights
heretofore acquired under any ordinance of the town.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



§ 110.11  ADOPTION DATE.



   This subchapter was read, approved and adopted on June 11, 2001.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001)



SPECIAL EVENTS



§ 110.25  NONDISCRIMINATION.



   The Chief of Police shall uniformly consider each application upon its
merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying a permit under this
subchapter based upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual
orientation or gender-related grounds.



(Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)



§ 110.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  The person that represents the sponsor and that will
complete, sign, take responsibility for and have notarized the event
application.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the town, or his or her
designee.



   CITY LIMITS.  Any area within the incorporated limits of the town.



   DEMONSTRATION.  Any demonstration, picketing, pamphleteering,
leafletting, march or other event organized or held primarily for purposes
associated with the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. This term shall
not include purely commercial speech or for-profit events.



   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment engaged in the business
of regularly selling food, customarily but not exclusively to be eaten on the
premises, including businesses that are commonly referred to as restaurants,
cafés, grills and other establishments that have a food counter where food
is sold.



   MALT BEVERAGE.  Any beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter, or any
other brewed or fermented beverage containing at least 0.5%.



   OPEN CONTAINER.  A container whose seal has been broken or a container
other than the manufacturer’s unopened original container.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way of public
streets, parking lots, alleys and any other town-owned property that is open
to the general public (i.e., any property that is a part of the Town
Recreation and Parks System).



   SIDEWALK.  Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of pedestrian traffic, regardless of its construction (i.e., paved
asphalt, concrete, rock dust, dirt or other construction types).



   SPECIAL EVENT.  Includes but is not limited to parades, festivals,
demonstrations, blocking streets or any other assemblies where two or more
people are gathered together and the event is open to the general public,
excluding family reunions and birthday parties of less than 100 people.



   SPONSOR.  Any group, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, school or organization of any kind that is sponsoring the event.



   STREET.  Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of vehicular traffic, including any right-of-way or median strip
thereof and is maintained by the town or the State Department of
Transportation; and all public vehicular areas and parking lots both private
and public.



   TOWN.  The Town of Elkin.



   TOWN PROPERTY.  Any property owned, leased or occupied by the town.



   UNFORTIFIED WINE.  Wine that has an alcoholic content produced only by
natural fermentation by the addition of pure cane, beet or dextrose sugar,
and that has an alcoholic content of not more than 17% alcohol by volume.



   WINERY. An establishment regularly engaged in the manufacture, sale or
marketing of wine.



(Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)



§ 110.27  ALLOWANCE OF SPECIAL EVENT UPON ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.



   Upon issuance of a permit by the Chief of Police, restaurants, food
service establishments, businesses, wineries and any other organizations may
hold a special event within public rights-of-way and on town-owned property
within the town corporate limits as designated in a special event permit.



(Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)



§ 110.28  APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS.



   Applications may be approved by the Chief of Police upon meeting the
following requirements.



   (A)   A written application for a special event permit, including
street closures, must be submitted to the Chief of Police at least 30 days
prior to the event. A detailed site map indicating, at a minimum, the stage
area, concessions, tables and seating area, designated beer or wine gardens,
parking areas and locations where the road may be blocked off shall also be
required. A copy of the application and permit shall be submitted and
retained by the office of the Town Clerk.



   (B)   A statement of the applicant’s intent whether to serve or to
allow the consumption of beer and wine. If serving alcoholic beverages, a
copy of the applicant’s ABC permit demonstrating that the applicant is
properly licensed to allow the consumption of beer and wine within the
plan-defined area, and a verified statement by the applicant that:



      (1)   Applicant’s/sponsor’s ABC permit is in good
standing; and



      (2)   The applicant/sponsor has not been cited for any
violation of its ABC permit for the premises within the previous three-year
period. If the applicant has been cited, the applicant must provide a
statement describing the circumstances for which it was cited and describing
what, if any, penalty was imposed for the incident.



   (C)   The applicant’s plan must also indicate that the festival or
event area must be maintained, and all debris or refuse removed from the
area, at regular intervals during the business day so as to maintain an
orderly appearance and to prevent the attraction of vermin, insects or other
pests to the area.



   (D)   The plan must also indicate that the applicant must maintain
an unobstructed path for pedestrian travel on all sidewalks within the event
area at least five feet wide at all times. If the permit does not provide for
street closure, the applicant must maintain an unobstructed path for
vehicular traffic on all streets within the event.



   (E)   The applicant agrees to remove all obstructions and additions
to the festival area immediately upon completion of the festival in order to
open the streets to public use as soon as possible.



   (F)   The applicant agrees that at no time will anyone be allowed to
block access to a fire hydrant in the street festival area.



   (G)   The applicant, or an authorized officer or member of the
sponsoring group, must sign an agreement to indemnify and hold the town
harmless from any and all claims of property damage, personal injury or death
arising from any services provided at the special event by the applicant or
his or her designee.



   (H)   The Town Recreation and Parks Director must also approve any
request for the use of any property that is under his or her direction that
is a part of the Town Recreation and Parks Department.



   (I)   The Chief of Police will notify the Town Manager and all
department heads before a permit is issued to make them aware of the
application and to determine if there are any issues that need to be
considered.



(Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)



§ 110.29  CONSIDERATIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT REQUESTS.



   In the review of the special event permit requests, the Chief of Police
shall be guided by the following considerations:



   (A)   The number of permits issued and the area or areas for which
these permits are issued in relation to crowd density, traffic control, the
ability to protect persons and property, fire prevention and control, general
safety and availability of town assets and resources to ensure the reasonable
protection of the general public; and the disruption of normal business for
merchants in the area;



   (B)   In those instances in which the Chief of Police, or designee,
considers town resources to be insufficient to meet the above considerations,
the Police Chief, or designee, may require the applicant for the permit to
provide, at the applicant’s expense, town police officer(s) for the
duration of the permit; and



   (C)   The Chief of Police, or designee, shall have the authority to
designate the boundaries of any public street festival or special event area.
To accommodate such an event, the Police Chief, or designee, is further
authorized to temporarily close any public streets, sidewalks or other
town-owned areas within the boundaries of any proposed special event.



(Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)



§ 110.30  SALE AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted
at special events.



   (B)   It shall be lawful for a special event sponsor to serve or
sell malt beverages and unfortified wine where the boundaries of the area in
which those beverages are sold and consumed is clearly delineated in the
permit, where access to that area is restricted to persons who shall be at
least 21 years of age and where the following requirements are met:



      (1)   All applicable health, ABC laws and town ordinance(s)
concerning alcohol are complied with unless waived by the Town Board prior to
the event;



      (2)   All malt beverages or unfortified wines must be sold and
consumed within the area delineated in the permit for the sale and
consumption of malt beverages or unfortified wine;



      (3)   All empty bottles and cans shall be recycled or handled
in such a way as to not be broken or left on town property;



      (4)   The sponsor shall be required to maintain proper decorum
and order and to leave the area in a clean condition;



      (5)   The applicant/sponsor shall have in full force general
liability and liquor liability insurance in the amount $1,000,000 each, with
the town being named as an additional insured; and



      (6)   In addition to approval by the Chief of Police, the
Board of Commissioners of the town shall approve each permit for the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages at special events.



(Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)



§ 110.31  FIREARMS.



   Except for sworn certified law enforcement personnel, the possession of
firearms at the special event area is prohibited.



(Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.32  APPLICATION FEE.



   The application processing fee will be based on the current schedule of
fees as established by the Town Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Every person who shall violate any provision of §§ 110.01 through
110.11 and Appendix A to this chapter, or carry on any business, trade,
vocation or profession, on which a license tax has been fixed, without having
first applied for and procured the required license, shall be liable to a
penalty of $50 or imprisonment for 30 days for each offense, and each day or
part of a day the business, trade, vocation or profession is carried on
without the required license shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



   (B)   Any violation of §§ 110.25 through 110.32 shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4. A fine of $100 will be
assessed for any violation of that subchapter to the applicant. A violation
of an event permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may result in an
immediate revocation of the permit and a possible ban on future permits.



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001; Ord. eff. 6-12-2010)



APPENDIX A: SCHEDULE OF LICENSE TAXES



   On the following trades, professions, agencies, business operations and
other subjects herein set out, the following taxes shall be levied and
collected.



 

License Schedule



Business

 

G.S. Cite/Fee





Advertising:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation who or which is engaged in the business of
outdoor advertising by placing, erecting or maintaining advertising signs or
structures (e.g., sign boards, poster boards or printed bulletins) or any
other outdoor advertising devices
 

$35.00 per city (tax is not applicable to theaters taxed by § 105 when
permission of owner is secured)



Amusements:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Moving pictures or vaudeville shows—admissions. Every person, firm or
corporation engaged in the business of operating a moving picture show or
place where vaudeville exhibitions, or theater or opera house where public
exhibitions, or performances are given for compensation
 

$25.00



Automobile, Motorcycle Dealers and Service Stations:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



   (1) Automotive service stations: Every person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of servicing, storing, painting, repairing, and the
like or in the business of retailing and/or delivering tires, tools,
batteries, auto radios, motor fuels and/or lubricants and other automotive
accessories
 

$12.50



   (2) Automotive equipment and supply dealers at wholesale: Every person,
firm or corporation engaged in the business of buying, selling, distributing,
exchanging and/or delivering automobile accessories, including auto radios,
parts, batteries, tools and/or other automotive equipment or supplies at
wholesale
 

$37.50



   (3) Motor vehicle dealers: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of buying, selling, distributing, servicing, storing and/or
exchanging motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, tires, tools and other
supplies or accessories and/or automotive equipment, excepting dealers in
semi-trailers weighing not more than 500 pounds and carrying not more than
1,000-pound load and to be towed by passenger cars
 

$25.00



   (4) Motorcycle dealers: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of selling, buying, distributing and/or exchanging motorcycles
or motorcycles supplies
 

$12.50





 



 

License Schedule



Business

 

G.S. Cite/Fee





Barber Shops and Beauty Salons:
 

G.S. § 160A-211(G)



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of conducting a
barber shop, manicurist, cosmetologist, beautician or operator
 

$2.50 per chair



Bicycle Dealers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of buying and/or
selling bicycles, supplies and accessories
 

$25.00



Billiards and Pool Tables:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation renting, maintaining or owning a building
wherein there is a table or tables at which billiards or pool is played,
whether operated by slot or otherwise, shall pay license tax for each
business location
 

$25.00



Bondsmen:
 

G.S. § 105-41



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of writing or
executing for a consideration, appearance, compliance or bail bonds, or any
type bond required in connection with criminal proceedings
 

$15.00



Bowling Alleys:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a
bowling alley
 

$10.00 per alley



Café, Restaurants, Cafeterias, Lunch Stands:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a
restaurant, café, cafeteria, hotel with dining service on the European plan,
drug store or lunch stand, or other place where prepared food is sold
 




   No seats to 4 seats
 

$25.00



   5 or more seats
 

$42.50



Carnival Companies:
 

G.S. § 105-38



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of a circus,
Carnival Company or a show of like kind
 

$25.00 per day





 



 

License Schedule



Business

 

G.S. Cite/Fee





Chain Stores:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating or
maintaining under the same general management, supervision or ownership two
or more stores, or mercantile establishments where merchandise is sold or
offered for sale, or from which the merchandise is sold and/or distributed at
wholesale or retail and the like is deemed a branch or chain store operator.
 




   Per each chain store located in city or town—except for the
particular store in which the principal office of the chain is located and so
designated by the chain
 

$50.00



Cigar, Cigarette and Tobacco Retailers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of retail and/or
cigars, cigarettes, tobacco and any other tobacco products
 

$10.00



Computer gaming establishment:
 




Any business enterprise utilizing one or more computers as game promotions or
for amusement. In a game promotion, a person may conduct a game of chance in
connection with the sale of consumer products or services and/or for which
the elements of chance and prize are present. This term includes but is not
limited to internet sweepstakes, internet cafés and cybercafés. This
definition only applies where a machine emits, issues, displays, prints out
or otherwise records any receipt, paper, coupon, token or other form of
record which is capable of being redeemed, exchanged or repurchased for cash,
cash equivalent, prizes, services or any other item of value, whether or not
the value of the distribution is determined by electronic games played or by
predetermined odds. This includes a system which invites patrons to purchase
prepaid internet access cards that also allows them to use computer terminals
with gaming software an ancillary benefit. This term does not include any
lottery approved by this state. This tax does not apply to any game or
process prohibited by G.S. §§ 14-304 through 14-309; provided, however,
once the tax is paid, determination that the game or process for which the
tax was paid was or is prohibited by G.S. §§ 14-304 through 14-309 shall
not entitle the establishment to a refund of the tax paid, and the tax paid
shall be forfeited. This category shall not include libraries, hotels, motels
or other businesses offering lodging, businesses operating only electronic
video games which require the insertion or entry of either money or tokens,
passwords or other items purchased from the business. 
 

$5,000.00 per establishment



plus $500.00 per machine, computer or terminal, whether or not the same may
be connected or connectable to the internet either by landline or wireless
connection, for each fiscal year or any part thereof





 



 

License Schedule



Business

 

G.S. Cite/Fee





Contractors and Construction Companies:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation who for a fixed price, commission, fee or
wage offers or bids to construct any building, street, sidewalk, bridge,
sewer or water system, grading or other improvement or structure
 

$10.00



Daycare Centers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of providing
service for daycare services shall pay a privilege license tax as follows:
 




   Fewer than 50 children
 

$75.00



   50-99 children
 

$125.00



   100-149 children
 

$225.00



   150-200 children
 

$325.00



   More than 200 children
 

$425.00



Dry Cleaners, Pressing Club and Hat Blockers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation operating a dry cleaning plant, pressing
club or hat blocking establishment
 

$50.00



   Solicitors for plants located outside the corporate limits
 

$100.00



Firearms:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in selling or offering for sale
firearms
 

$50.00



Fortune Tellers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Engaging in the business of telling or pretending to tell fortunes,
practicing the art of palmistry, clairvoyance and other crafts of a similar
kind for a reward
 

$750.00



Gasoline, Benzine, Lubricating Oil and Greases:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation selling illuminating or lubricating oil or
grease, or benzine, naphtha, gasoline or other similar products
 




   Less than 10,000 population
 

$25.00



   10,000 or more
 

$50.00





 



 

License Schedule



Business

 

G.S. Cite/Fee





Itinerant Merchants and Salespersons:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every itinerant salesperson or merchant who shall expose for sale goods,
wares or merchandise, either on the streets or in a building, not being a
regular merchant of the municipality (each itinerant salesperson or merchant
shall be required to provide to the Town Clerk written permission to use
property for sales from the property owner. No license shall be issued
without this written permission)
 

$100.00



Junk Dealers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of buying and/or
selling what is commonly known as junk, including scrap materials, waste
paper and the like, shall pay a license tax
 

$15.00



Laundries:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



   (1) Out of town laundries: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in
the business of laundry work and/or supplying or renting clean linens or
towels or wearing apparel when the work is performed outside the municipality
or when linen or towels or wearing apparel are supplied by businesses outside
the municipality
 

$100.00



   (2) Laundries located in town: Every person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of laundry work and/or supplying or renting clean
linen or towels or wearing apparel who is not subject to division (1) above
 

$50.00



Loan Agencies and Check Cashing Businesses:
 

G.S. § 105-88



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the regular business of making
loans or lending money, accepting liens on, or contracts of assignments of
salaries or wages or other security or evidences of debt for repayment in
installment payments or otherwise and maintaining in connection with same any
office or established place for conduct of business and/or advertising or
soliciting the business in any manner
 

$100.00



Pawnbrokers:
 

G.S. § 105-88



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the regular business of
pawnbroker (effective July 1, 2001)
 

$275.00



Merchandising Dispensers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Cigarette dispensing machines: An annual occupational license from operators
of cigarette dispensing machines
 

Exempt





 



 

License Schedule



Business

 

G.S. Cite/Fee





Music Machines:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating,
maintaining or placing on location any machine, which plays records or
produces music
 

$5.00 per machine



Musical Instruments:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or organization engaged in the business of selling or
offering for sale pianos, organs, victrolas or victrola records, radios
and/or radio accessories, and television sets and accessories, parts and
repair
 

$5.00 maximum



Peddlers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or
merchandise and sell or offer to sell or barter the same, shall be deemed
peddlers, except wholesale dealers with established warehouses and selling
only to merchants for resale, shall pay a license tax as follows:
 




   Peddlers on foot
 

$10.00



   Peddler with vehicles
 

$25.00



   Peddler of farm products (e.g., fruits, vegetables and the like)
 

$25.00



Pinball Machines:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of providing legal
pinball machines for sale or use
 

$25.00



Plumbing, Heating Contractors and Electricians:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in business as a plumber, steam or
gas fitter or installing heating systems or installing electrical equipment
 

$50.00



Undertakers and Coffin Retailers:
 

G.S. § 160A-211



Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of burying the dead
or in the retail sale of coffins
 

$50.00



And all other trades, professions or businesses conducted within the
corporate limits of the town, which are subject to special license or
privilege taxes and the maximum amount allowed by the laws of this state, for
cities and towns, with the population the size of the town, as provided in
the Revenue Act enacted by the General Assembly of North Carolina, Session of
1959 as amended




 



(Ord. eff. 7-1-2001; Ord. eff. 2-14-2005; Ord. eff. 4-12-2010; Ord. eff.
5-24-2010)



CHAPTER 111:  BEGGING, SOLICITING AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



Section



   111.01   Prohibition; where and how



   111.02   Definitions



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  PROHIBITION; WHERE AND HOW.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, association, organization or other
corporate entity to solicit alms, beg or ask for money or other things of
value, to exhibit one’s self for the purpose of soliciting, begging or
asking for money or other things of value, or to solicit or otherwise offer
the sale of goods for services:



   (A)   In or upon the vehicle-traveled portion of any public street,
alley or highway;



   (B)   In an intimidating or aggressive manner in a public area; or



   (C)   On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant
has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign
clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property.



(Ord. eff. 1-10-2011)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRESSIVE MANNER.  Includes, without limitation, the following
conduct:



      (1)   Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact
with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the
person’s consent;



      (2)   Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is
intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily
harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person’s
possession; or is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the
person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;



      (3)   Continuing to solicit within five feet of the person
being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing
the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to
fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property
in the person’s possession; or is intended to or is reasonably likely to
intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmative to the
solicitation;



      (4)   Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free
passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver
of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the
person asking the solicitation;



      (5)   Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive
language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to
fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property
in the person’s possession; or using words or gestures intended to or
reasonably likely to intimidate the person into responding to the
solicitation; or



      (6)   Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that
is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent
bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the
person’s possession; or is intended to or is reasonably likely to
intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation.



   CORPORATE LIMITS. Any area within the incorporated limits of the town.



   INTIMIDATE or INTIMIDATING MANNER.  Any conduct that would cause a
reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a
criminal act upon property in the person’s possession, and causes a person
to do something he or she would not otherwise have done.



   PUBLIC AREA. Any area to which the general public has access, which
includes but is not limited to rights-of-way, sidewalks, parking lots, parks,
playgrounds, plazas, any property owned or operated by the town, any
buildings, premises or other structures open to the general public including
the doorways and entrances to the buildings, premises or other structures and
the grounds enclosing them. This will include any property that is a part of
the Town Recreation and Parks System.



   PUBLIC STREET.  Any street, right-of-way, alley, road, highway, bridge
or other property owned, operated or maintained by the town or the State
Department of Transportation which is open to the general public upon which
motor vehicles traverse.



   SOLICIT ALMS, BEG OR ASK.  To request an immediate donation of money
or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor’s
purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The
solicitation, begging or asking may be without limitation by the spoken,
written or printed word or by other means of communication.



(Ord. eff. 1-10-2011)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, association or organization violating the provisions
of this chapter shall upon conviction be responsible for a Class 3
misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S.
§ 14-4, and shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than $500.



(Ord. eff. 1-10-2011)



CHAPTER 112:  RESIDENTIAL SALES



Section



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   Time limitations



   112.04   Space limitations



   112.05   Permits



   112.06   Enforcement



   112.07   Adoption date



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the town, the Board of Commissioners has determined that regulating the
number and length of occasional residential sales is necessary. Some sales
seem to be ongoing businesses producing unsightly premises and dangerous
traffic situations inappropriate for residential areas.



(Ord. eff. 3-18-2002)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CALENDAR YEAR. January 1 through December 31.



   DWELLING.  Any building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used
for living quarters, excluding motels, hotels or other structures designed
for transient residence.



   GOODS.  Merchandise for sale typically used in personal, household or
family settings.



   PERMIT.  A license issued by the town allowing a residential sale at a
particular dwelling.



   RESIDENTIAL SALE.  Sales of goods from a dwelling; and includes any
offer to sell goods either at retail or at auction. RESIDENTIAL SALE includes
the terms yard sale, garage sale, rummage sale or any other term to describe
these type sales.



(Ord. eff. 3-18-2002)



§ 112.03  TIME LIMITATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to conduct a residential sale for more than two
consecutive days with operating hours from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., or to
conduct more than two separate sales at the same dwelling within any calendar
year.



(Ord. eff. 3-18-2002)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  SPACE LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   A person may not place on display any goods under the
provisions of this section closer than ten feet from the front property line
of the dwelling.



   (B)   Displays may not extend beyond the property line of the
permitted dwelling.



   (C)   Articles for sale may be displayed inside the garage, inside
the backyard and on a driveway, but only so as not to hinder emergency
equipment access to any structures on the property.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as preempting
additional restrictions imposed by the town or the state.



(Ord. eff. 3-18-2002)



§ 112.05  PERMITS.



   Any person desiring to hold a residential sale shall first obtain from
the town a permit to hold the sale. The cost of each permit shall be $5. Each
permit shall be in the name of a person who resides in the dwelling and who
shall be responsible for conducting the sale and shall state the exact street
address of the dwelling at which the sale will be held. Each permit shall
also indicate the date upon which the sale shall be conducted. If the sale is
not conducted on the date indicated, the holder of the permit may have the
permit revised by the town to state a different date if the holder wishes to
reschedule the sale. Any permit issued and not revised shall be conclusive
evidence that the sale was held on the date indicated. Permits must be
displayed in plain view.



(Ord. eff. 3-18-2002)



§ 112.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Zoning
Officer, but the town police may enforce the ordinance by citation.



(Ord. eff. 3-18-2002)



§ 112.07  ADOPTION DATE.



   This chapter was adopted March 18, 2002.



(Ord. eff. 3-18-2002)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil penalties.  Civil penalties may be assessed for
violations of this chapter as follows: a warning citation for the first
violation, $25 for the second violation and $50 for each successive violation.



   (B)   Criminal penalties.  A violation of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $500 as authorized by
G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 3-18-2002)



CHAPTER 113:  CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES



Section



   113.01   Statement of intent and purpose



   113.02   Short title



   113.03   Definitions



   113.04   Franchise requirements



   113.05   Design provisions



   113.06   Institutional network, public educational and governmental
(PEG) access



   113.07   Technical standards and customer service practices



   113.08   Construction standards



   113.09   General financial and insurance provisions



   113.10   Revocation



   113.11   Foreclosure, receivership and abandonment



   113.12   Purchase by grantor upon termination of franchise term or
revocation of franchise



   113.13   Sale or transfer of franchise



   113.14   Rights of individuals protected



   113.15   Miscellaneous provisions



   Appendix A: Customer Service Standards



§ 113.01  STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The town, pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is
authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct,
operate, maintain and reconstruct cable systems within the incorporated areas
of the town.



   (B)   The Board of Commissioners of the town finds that cable
service has become an integral part of its citizens’ lives, and that
evolving cable systems have the potential to play an even more dramatic role
in the future, providing great benefits and advanced capabilities to the
town. At the same time, the Board further finds that the public convenience,
safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory
powers that are vested in the town or those persons the town designates.



   (C)   In order to ensure that the town and its residents receive
state-of-the-art cable services and capabilities as this technology further
evolves, all franchises granted pursuant to this chapter will be subject to
periodic review and modifications to keep current with changing law,
technology and services. It is the intent of this chapter to help ensure that
local cable operators provide the best possible cable service to residents of
the town, and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed
to include this finding as an integral part thereof.



   (D)   Further, it is recognized that cable systems have the capacity
to provide entertainment and information services to the town’s residents,
and may have the capacity to provide a variety of broadband, interactive
communications services to institutions and individuals. For these purposes,
the following goals underlie the regulations contained herein:



      (1)   Cable television services should be made available to
all of the town’s residents at the lowest reasonable cost;



      (2)   The system should be capable of accommodating both the
present and reasonably foreseeable future state-of-the-art cable television
needs of the town; and



      (3)   The systems authorized by this chapter shall be
responsive to the needs and interests of the local community, and shall
provide the widest possible diversity of information sources and services to
the public. Each of the above-enumerated goals shall be sought to the maximum
extent, taking into account the costs and benefits to the residents of the
town.



   (E)   The Board further finds that ongoing industry consolidation
could result in less local accountability, and that, therefore, stringent
customer service standards, including liquidated damages provisions, may be
the only practical means of ensuring compliance and approximating the costs
of franchise agreement noncompliance to the town and its residents.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.02  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Town Master
Cable Services Regulatory Ordinance,” and it shall become a part of the
ordinances of the town. This chapter shall take effect and be in force from
and after its adoption for the grant of any new franchise agreement or
renewal of any franchise existing at the time of adoption. All ordinances or
parts of the town code in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are
hereby repealed.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall”
and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.



   ADDITIONAL SERVICE.  Any cable service other than basic service
provided over the system.



   BASIC CABLE SERVICE.  Any cable service tier that includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational and governmental access programming required by this chapter or a
franchise agreement to be carried on the basic tier. BASIC CABLE SERVICE as
defined herein shall be consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7) (1997), and
shall include any signal of any television broadcast station that is provided
by a grantee to any subscriber, except a signal which is secondarily
transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of the
station. Additional signals may be added to the basic tier by the grantee.



   BOARD.  The Board of Commissioners of the Town of EIkin, North
Carolina or its delegates.



   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No.
98-549 (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982) and Supp. V. 1987), as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L.
No. 104-104 (1996) as may, from time to time, be amended.



   CABLE INTERNET SERVICE.  Any cable service offered by a grantee
whereby persons receive access to the internet or high-speed data information
services through the cable system.



   CABLE SERVICE or SERVICE.



      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of either video
programming or other programming service;



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection or use of the video programming or other programming service;
and



      (3)   For purposes of this chapter, CABLE INTERNET SERVICE
shall be considered CABLE SERVICE unless determined otherwise by state or
federal law.



   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM or CABLE SYSTEM.  A facility, consisting of a
set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service to multiple
subscribers within the franchise area; but the term does not include:



      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any
public right-of-way; or



      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201-226, except that
the facility shall be considered a CABLE SYSTEM to the extent the facility,
whether on a common carrier basis or otherwise, is used in the transmission
of video programming directly to subscribers.



   CAPITAL CONTRIBUTION.  A contribution provided by a grantee as
determined in a franchise agreement that may at the town’s discretion be
utilized for the capital costs of the municipal access channel facilities, or
to help defray the costs of an I-net.



   CHANNEL.  A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum that is
capable of carrying one standard video signal, in either analog or digital
form. Consistent with future changes in technology and/or applicable law, the
parties may mutually agree to a different definition in an individual
franchise agreement.



   COMPLAINT.  Any written or electronic inquiry, allegation or
assertion, made by a person regarding service.



   CONTROL.  The holding of legal or financial control of or over the
holder of the franchise, the service provider or system owner or operator,
regardless of whether the control is direct or indirect, or is exercised or
is permitted to be exercised directly or indirectly through other persons,
holdings or entities. CONTROL shall always be deemed to rest in the hands of
any person or entity that has the right or authority to establish or change
any policy or practice of the holder of the franchise or the service
provider, whether the CONTROL may be exercised directly, or indirectly
through other persons, holdings or entities.



   CONVERTER.  An electronic device that converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber and, through the use of an appropriate channel selector, permits a
subscriber to view all authorized subscriber signals delivered at designated
converter dial locations.



   DIRECT INCREMENTAL COSTS.  The costs actually incurred by a grantee in
meeting an obligation under its franchise which the grantee would not
otherwise have incurred, in order to either operate and conduct the business
of its cable system or meet another obligation of the franchise.



   DOWNSTREAM SIGNAL.  A signal originating from or provided by a system
to a subscriber terminal or other terminal, including video, audio or digital
signals or any other type of data or information for either programs or other
uses, such as security alert services and the like.



   DROP.  The cable or cables that connect users of the system to the
distribution system in order to receive service.



   EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS.  Channels specially designated for
locally produced noncommercial educational access programming use.



   EFFECTIVE DATE.  The date a franchise becomes effective in accordance
with the franchise and the rules and procedures of the town.



   FAIR MARKET VALUE.  The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission or a designated
representative.



   FRANCHISE.  The rights and obligations extended by the town pursuant
to an initial authorization or a renewal thereof, to a person to own, lease,
construct, maintain or operate a cable system in the right-of-way within the
franchise area for the purpose of providing cable services. Any
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include:



      (1)   Any other permit or authorization required for the
privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the town required
by the ordinances and laws of the town, including the provision of
telecommunications services; or



      (2)   Any generally applicable nondiscriminatory permit,
agreement or authorization required in connection with operations in the
right-of-way, including without limitation permits and agreements for placing
devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the
town or a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or
along the right-of-way.



   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.  The document which grants a franchise pursuant
to this chapter.



   FRANCHISE AREA.  The geographic area for which a franchise is granted
under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise specifically stated in
the franchise agreement, the FRANCHISE AREA shall be the entire geographic
unincorporated area within the town as it is now or may in the future be
constituted.



   FRANCHISE FEE.  Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the
town or other governmental entity on a grantee solely because of its status
and activities as such. The term FRANCHISE FEE does not include:



      (1)   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability
(including any tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable
operators or their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment that
is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);



      (2)   Capital costs that are required by a franchise agreement
to be incurred by a grantee for public access channels equipment and
facilities;



      (3)   Requirements or charges incidental to the award or
enforcement of a franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds,
letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, compliance audits, penalties
or liquidated damages; or



      (4)   Any fee imposed under U.S.C. Title 17.



   GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS.  Channels specially designated for locally
produced noncommercial governmental access programming use.



   GRANTEE.  A person who is granted a franchise or that person’s
lawful successors, transferees or assignees.



   GRANTOR. The town.



   GROSS REVENUES.  Any and all revenue, whether received in the form of
cash, credits, barter, trade, property or consideration of any kind or
nature, arising from, attributable to or in any way derived by the grantee
from the operation of a grantee’s system to provide cable service, whether
the revenue is received by the grantee, its affiliates or any person in which
the grantee has a financial interest, or by any other person who operates the
system, directly or indirectly. This definition is intended to reach as
broadly as possible to encompass all revenue. GROSS REVENUE includes, by way
of illustration and not limitation, amounts charged for basic service;
optional premium, per-channel, per-program services; cable programming
services; audio services; launch fees; channel guide subscriptions;
installation, disconnection, reconnection and changes-in-service; equipment
sales or rentals; leased channel fees; late fees and administrative charges
of any type; consideration received from programmers; advertising revenue;
and revenue from the sale of subscriber names and addresses. To the extent
that grantee receives revenue from cable services provided to a subscriber
for a fixed price that also includes non-cable services (i.e., those services
are “bundled”), grantee shall allocate an appropriate portion of those
revenues for inclusion in GROSS REVENUES. If the fixed price of the bundled
services is lower than the aggregate of the prices of those services if
purchased individually, then the appropriate amount of the revenue to be
allocated to each service shall be proportional to the individual price of
that service when compared to the aggregate of the individual prices of those
services when unbundled.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall not include:



         (a)   Bad debt except to the extent that bad debts are
recovered;



         (b)   The revenue of any person, including without
limitation a supplier of programming to the grantee to the extent that the
revenue is also included in GROSS REVENUE of the grantee;



         (c)   Pass-through payments received by the grantee from
third-party programmers to purchase services from entities other than the
grantee, which services benefit only the third-party programmers and for
which the grantee neither received nor provides any consideration; or



         (d)   Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee
which are imposed directly on any subscriber by the state, the town or other
governmental unit and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of the
governmental unit. A franchise fee is not such a tax.



      (2)   To the extent the scope of GROSS REVENUES is limited by
federal law or judicial action, the definitions herein shall be so amended.



   HEADEND.  The electronic control center of the system including
components that amplify, filter and convert incoming broadcast and other
television and electronic signals for distribution over the cable system.



   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK or I-NET.  Capacity, fibers or both, from both
within the primary cable network and/or separately constructed networks that
are dedicated to municipal users or other governmental and educational users
as determined by the town for two-way, broadband, noncommercial,
non-competitive, not-for-profit communications. The I-NET includes all
equipment and maintenance of equipment required to make the capacity
available, including but not limited to fiber, cable modems, coaxial cable
and all switching, routing, transmitting and receiving equipment necessary
for the use of the I-NET as determined in the individual franchise agreement.



   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK SERVICES. The provision of an I-net by a grantee
to municipal users and other governmental and educational users as determined
by the town, pursuant to the terms of a franchise agreement for
noncommercial, non-competitive, not-for-profit applications, including but
not limited to two-way dedicated voice, data, video, internet and telephony
channels connecting and interconnecting user facilities; computerized traffic
control systems; GIS systems; and the interconnection of facilities serving
police, fire and other public safety systems.



   LOCKOUT DEVICE.  A mechanical or electrical accessory to a
subscriber’s terminal that inhibits the video or audio portions of a
certain program or certain channel(s) provided by way of a cable system.



   NONCOMMERCIAL.  Channels or programming that are operated on a
not-for-profit basis.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS.  Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, NORMAL
BUSINESS HOURS must include some evening hours at least one night per week
and/or some weekend hours.



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.  Any and all situations or conditions
that are ordinarily within the control of a grantee, including but not
limited to management or corporate decisions; employee conduct; staffing
levels; special promotions; pay-per-view events; rate increases; regular peak
or seasonal demand periods; electronic and video equipment; and maintenance,
repair or upgrade of the cable system, and any associated computer or
software systems. Those conditions that are not within the control of a
grantee include but are not limited to natural disasters; civil disturbances;
power outages; telephone network outages; and severe or unusual weather
conditions. A condition shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee’s
control if committed by a corporation or other business entity which the
grantee controls.



   OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE.  Information that a grantee makes available
to all subscribers generally.



   PERSON.  Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, company, governmental entity or any natural person.



   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS.  Channels specially designated for locally
produced, noncommercial public access programming use.



   REASONABLE NOTICE.  Written notice addressed to the town or grantee at
a location as the parties have designated in the franchise agreement as the
address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be
sent by certified mail and postmarked not less than seven business days prior
to that day in which the party giving the notice shall commence any action
which requires the giving of notice. In computing the seven days, holidays
recognized by the town shall be excluded.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Each of the following which have been, or are hereafter,
dedicated to the public and maintained by any public authority or by others
and located within the town, including without limitation the surface and
space within, above and below any real property in which the town has an
interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest,
or as a trustee for the public, including but not limited to any public
street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, swale, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, park or any other place,
area, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas, or real
property owned by or under the control of the town.



   SCHOOL.  Any state-accredited public or nonprofit educational
institution including primary and secondary schools, both public and private.



   SERVICE INTERRUPTION.  The loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels.



   STANDARD INSTALLATION.  Any service drop not exceeding 150 feet from a
single point or pedestal attachment to the subscriber’s residence.



   STATE-OF-THE-ART.  The addition of new services and associated
equipment as they are developed, available and when economically feasible and
marketable to subscribers as specifically required under the terms of a
franchise agreement.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person who or which elects to subscribe for any
purpose to cable service provided by a grantee by means of, or in connection
with, the cable system, and whose premises or facilities are physically wired
and lawfully activated to receive cable service from grantee’s cable system.



   SYSTEM. A grantee’s cable system operated pursuant to a franchise
agreement within the franchise area.



   TOWN.  The Town of Elkin, North Carolina, as it is now or may in the
future be constituted.



   TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.  A person designated by the Town Manager to
represent the town in all business with the grantee.



   TRAINED REPRESENTATIVE.  Employees of the grantee who have the
authority and capability while speaking with a subscriber to, among other
things, answer billing questions, adjust bills and schedule service and
installation calls.



   UPSTREAM SIGNAL.  A signal originating from a subscriber’s terminal
to the headend of the system including video, audio or digital signals or any
other type of data or information for either programs or other uses such as
security alert services and the like.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.04  FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Unlawful to operate without a franchise.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a cable system or
to provide cable service in the town without a franchise. The person shall be
subject to a fine of $500 per day. The payment of the fine notwithstanding,
all violators shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to the payment of a franchise fee.  Cable
systems may elect for a statewide franchise granted under state law



   (B)   Franchises non-exclusive.  Any franchise granted pursuant to
this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the
right to grant, at any time, any additional franchises for a cable system or
any component thereof, to any other person including itself, as it deems
appropriate, subject to applicable federal and state law.



   (C)   Franchises nondiscriminatory.  In the event the town grants
more than one franchise or similar authorization for the construction,
operation or maintenance of any cable system to a qualified person in the
town, the town shall grant the franchises on terms that are nondiscriminatory
and competitively neutral, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as
requiring the use of identical terms or conditions, in accordance with
federal law.



   (D)   Term of the franchise.  A franchise agreement shall establish
the term of each individual franchise.



   (E)   Federal, state and town jurisdiction.



      (1)   The town shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority
under the provisions of this chapter, the Cable Act and all applicable laws.
This authority shall be vested in the Town Board of Commissioners and
administered through the Town Manager or his or her designee in order to
provide day-to-day administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter and any franchise granted hereunder, and to carry out the town’s
responsibilities with regard to cable service.



      (2)   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent
with all applicable federal and state laws.



      (3)   In the event that the federal or state government
discontinues preemption in any area of cable communications over which it
currently exercises jurisdiction in a manner as to expand rather than limit
municipal regulatory authority, the grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules
and regulations in these areas to the extent permitted by law, provided the
same do not materially alter the rights and obligations of a grantee under
any existing franchise.



      (4)   The grantee’s rights are subject to the police powers
of the town to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety
and welfare of the public. Grantee shall comply with all applicable general
laws and ordinances enacted by the town pursuant to that power.



      (5)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter. This
chapter shall also apply to all existing franchises, to the extent not
inconsistent with the terms of any franchise or applicable law. In the event
of any conflict between the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement and
the provisions of this chapter, and other generally applicable regulatory
ordinances of the town, the terms of this chapter shall control unless
otherwise expressly set forth in the franchise agreement. A franchise
agreement (including all of grantee’s particular rights, powers,
protections, privileges, immunities and obligations associated therewith as
the same exist on the date hereof) shall constitute a legally binding
contract between the town and grantee, and as such, cannot be amended,
modified or changed by the town or grantee without the consent of grantee and
grantor in any manner whatsoever, whether by ordinance, rule, regulation or
otherwise, to impose on grantee more stringent or burdensome requirements or
conditions; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall preclude
the town from the proper exercise of its police powers, or its powers of
eminent domain.



      (6)   In the event of a change in state or federal law which
by its terms would require the town to amend this chapter, the parties shall
modify the existing franchise in a mutually agreed-upon manner.



      (7)   The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement by
reason of any failure of the town to enforce prompt compliance.



   (F)   Rights reserved to grantor.  In addition to any rights
specifically reserved to grantor by this chapter or a franchise agreement,
grantor reserves to itself every right and power that is required to be
reserved by a provision of any other ordinance or under any other franchise.



   (G)   Franchise agreement.



      (1)   Every grantee shall agree to the terms and provisions of
a franchise agreement as negotiated between the grantee and the grantor.



      (2)   In addition to those matters required elsewhere in this
chapter to be included in the franchise agreement, each franchise agreement
must contain the following express representations by each grantee:



         (a)   Grantee has examined all of the provisions of this
chapter and accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this chapter, as
it exists as of the effective date of the grantee’s franchise agreement; and



         (b)   Grantee recognizes, unless otherwise agreed in the
applicable franchise agreement, the right of the town to adopt any additional
regulations of general applicability as it shall find necessary in the
exercise of its police power.



      (3)   Every franchise agreement shall contain further
conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the town and a grantee,
except that no conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict with any
provisions of state or federal law. In case of any conflict or of any
ambiguity between any terms or provisions of a franchise agreement and this
chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control, unless expressly set
forth in the franchise agreement.



   (H)   Initial franchise applications.  Any person desiring an
initial franchise for a cable system shall file an application with the town.
An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system shall
contain, where applicable:



      (1)   A statement as to the proposed franchise area;



      (2)   Resume or prior history of applicant, including the
legal, technical and financial expertise of applicant in the cable television
field;



      (3)   List of the partners, general and limited, of the
applicant, if a partnership; or a list of the principals of the applicant, if
a limited liability company; or the percentage of stock owned or controlled
by shareholders holding 10% or greater, if a corporation;



      (4)   List of officers, directors and managing employees of
applicant, together with a description of the background of each person;



      (5)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of
applicant or any other business entity owning or in control of applicant, in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant;



      (6)   A current financial statement of applicant verified by a
CPA audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct to the
reasonable satisfaction of the town;



      (7)   Proposed preliminary construction and cable service
schedule; and



      (8)   Any additional information that the town may require for
the administration of the franchise.



   (I)   Consideration of initial applications.  Upon receipt of any
application and application fee for an initial franchise, the Town
Administrator shall prepare a report and make his or her recommendations
respecting the application to the Board.



   (J)   Franchise renewal.  Franchise renewals shall be in accordance
with applicable law, including but not limited to the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984, as amended, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.. Grantor and
a grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time
during the term of the franchise.



   (K)   Grant of additional franchise and competing service. 
Competing or overlapping franchises may have an adverse impact on the public
rights-of-way and on the quality and availability of services to the public.
In considering whether to grant one or more additional franchises, the town
shall specifically consider, and address in a written report or in provisions
of the franchise agreement, the following issues:



      (1)   The positive and/or negative impact of an additional
franchise on the community;



      (2)   The ability and willingness of the specific applicant in
question to provide cable services to the franchise area;



      (3)   The amount of time it will take the applicant to
complete construction of the proposed system and activate service in the
franchise area; and whether the applicant can complete construction and
activation of its system pursuant to industry standards;



      (4)   The financial capabilities of the applicant and its
guaranteed commitment to make the necessary investment to erect, maintain and
operate the proposed cable system for the duration of the franchise term. In
order to ensure that any prospective grantee does have the requisite current
financial capabilities, the town may request equity and debt financing
commitment letters, current audited financial statements, bonds, letters of
credit or other documentation to demonstrate to the town’s satisfaction
that the requisite funds to construct and operate the proposed system are
available;



      (5)   The quality and technical reliability of the proposed
system, based upon the applicant’s plan of construction and the method of
distribution of signals and the applicant’s technical qualifications to
construct and operate the system;



      (6)   The experience of the applicant in the erection,
maintenance and operation of a cable system;



      (7)   The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate
one or more additional cable systems and the potential disruption of those
public rights-of-way and private property that may occur if one or more
additional franchises are granted;



      (8)   The likelihood and ability of the applicant to continue
to provide competing cable service to subscribers within the franchise area
for the duration of the franchise;



      (9)   Any other information as the town may deem appropriate
to be considered prior to granting any competing or overlapping franchise; and



      (10)   The purpose of this section is to ensure that any
competition which may occur among grantees will be on terms which, when taken
as a whole, are nondiscriminatory according to federal law.



   (L)   Permits for non-franchised entities. 



      (1)   The town may issue a license, easement or other permit
to a person other than the grantee to permit that person to traverse any
portion of the grantee’s franchise area within the town in order to provide
service outside, but not within the town. The license or easement, absent a
grant of a franchise in accordance with this chapter, shall not authorize nor
permit the person to provide cable service to any subscriber within the town
nor render any other service within the town.



      (2)   The granting of the license, easement or permit shall be
conditioned upon the payment of a fee for occupancy of the public
right-of-way to the extent permitted by applicable law.



   (M)   Review for competition.  The town recognizes that the cable
television and telecommunications industries are in a period of convergence,
that the technologies and services provided by these industries are rapidly
changing, and that the Telecommunications Act of 1996 promoted and encouraged
competition between and among these formally discrete industries. At this
time it is premature to know fully the extent to which there will be changes
in law, technology or services that may impact entities that have been or may
be granted franchises or licenses to use the town’s rights-of-way. It is
the desire of the town to be a communications-friendly town, that encourages
the development of competitive advanced communications capabilities for the
benefit of all its citizens. For this reason the regulatory ordinances and
franchises of the town should not impede or restrict the fair opportunity to
compete, but rather are intended to provide uniform and consistent
requirements for all similarly situated providers.



   (N)   Application and renewal fees.



      (1)   An application fee shall not be deemed to be franchise
fees within the meaning of § 622 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 542), and
the payments shall not be deemed to be “payments in kind” or any
involuntary payments chargeable against the compensation to be paid to the
town by grantee, or part of the compensation to be paid to the town by
grantee pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement.



      (2)   All applicants for an initial franchise grant shall
submit an application fee of $2,500 to compensate the town for its costs in
reviewing, preparing and awarding a franchise, including the costs of outside
consultants. Upon grant of a franchise the town may request the payment of an
additional fee to the extent that the reasonable costs of the franchise
review and negotiation process exceed the initial application fee amount.
Consistent with the Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., all these
fees shall not constitute or be credited towards a grantee’s franchise fee
obligations. Reasonable costs include staff time, professional fees and
administrative costs as determined necessary by the town.



      (3)   The town reserves the right, unless prohibited by
applicable law, to require a grantee to pay the incidental costs of the
franchise renewal and negotiation process. Incidental costs include staff
time, professional fees and administrative costs as stated in the franchise
agreement.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.05  DESIGN PROVISIONS.



   (A)   System design.



      (1)   Agreement.  Every grantee shall offer service that
meets the current and future needs of the town, taking into account the costs
of meeting those needs. The franchise agreement shall incorporate a
description of the grantee’s application in accordance with § 113.04(H),
including the general design and capabilities of the system to identify for
the town how the system will meet the current and future cable service needs
of the town.



      (2)   State-of-the-art review.  The franchise agreement shall
include provisions to ensure cable service and cable system compatibility
with changes in law, technology and programming and services to maintain a
state-of-the-art system throughout the franchise term.



   (B)   The system.  Every system shall pass by every single-family
dwelling unit and multiple-family dwelling unit within the franchise area in
accordance with line extension policies set forth in this chapter. Service
shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line
extension. Unless specified otherwise, service shall also be extended to
commercial buildings on a consistent basis with the residential line
extension policies.



   (C)   Drops to public buildings.



      (1)   Every grantee shall provide installation of at least one
cable drop, and provide monthly basic cable service, without charge, to
public buildings in accordance with the line extension policies of this
chapter, or as otherwise specified in the applicable franchise agreement.
Schools shall also receive one cable drop and basic cable service at no
charge. Following the town’s designation of additional buildings(s) to
receive cable service, and upon the town’s request, a grantee shall
complete construction of the drop and outlet within 30 days.



      (2)   All cable service outlets shall not be utilized for
commercial purposes.



      (3)   In instances where the drop to the public building
exceeds 150 feet, the grantee may charge for the actual and reasonable cost
of its labor and materials.



      (4)   Every grantee that offers two-way interactive broadband
services to subscribers within the town shall provide and install at no cost
for the term of the franchise agreement cable modems at every school and to
all public libraries, within the franchise area that are passed by the
portions of the grantee’s cable system that are capable of supporting the
two-way services.



   (D)   Use of grantee facilities.  The town shall have the right to
install and maintain town equipment, at the actual cost for the space, not
including cost for existing space. Cost will be limited to any incremental
cost for any wire or fixtures. This applies to the excess space upon the
poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of a grantee, any wires
and fixtures desired by the town to the extent that the installation and
maintenance does not interfere or compete with existing operations of a
grantee. The town will relinquish its use of the poles and conduits upon 90
days’ notice from a grantee that town’s use interferes with company’s
actual or anticipated use of the same.



   (E)   Upgrade of system.  Every grantee shall upgrade its system
(herein referred to as the “system upgrade”), if required, as set forth
in its respective franchise agreement.



   (F)   Nondiscriminatory access to cable system.  Grantee may be
required to allow nondiscriminatory access to its cable system if it shall be
required by federal law. Prior to the enactment of this requirement, a
grantee shall be provided with reasonable notice and an opportunity to be
heard, including the right to present evidence with respect to the need for
that requirement. Grantee reserves, and has not waived, any right it may
have, or may later be determined to have, to challenge the town’s
implementation of an open access requirement.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.06  INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK, PUBLIC EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL (PEG)
ACCESS.



   (A)   Every grantee shall, to the extent required by federal
statutes, provide institutional networks to the extent that a grantee is
obligated to provide the support pursuant to its franchise agreement. This
may be supported pursuant to a separate contract arrangement if so agreed
upon in the franchise agreement.



   (B)   Every grantee shall provide a channel or channels, bandwidth
capacity, service and funding for separate public, educational and government
(PEG) access channels, as specified in its franchise agreement. All these PEG
access channels shall be available to all subscribers as part of basic cable
service.



   (C)   Oversight and administration of the PEG access channels shall
be set forth in the franchise agreement. The town may designate a community
access corporation or similar entity to administer one or more of the access
channels.



   (D)   Cost associated with construction and operation of the I-net
shall not be a franchise fee unless specified in the franchise agreement



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.07  TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE PRACTICES.



   (A)   General technical standards and customer service practices.



      (1)   This section incorporates technical standards and
establishes customer service practices with which a grantee must comply. In
addition, a grantee shall comply with any additional or stricter requirements
established by FCC regulations, or other federal regulation that may be
adopted or amended from time to time.



      (2)   A grantee shall maintain equipment and keep records as
are required to enable the grantor to determine whether the grantee is in
compliance with all standards required by these regulations and other
applicable laws.



   (B)   Books and records available to the grantor.



      (1)   The grantee shall maintain an office within the town.
The town shall have the right, upon reasonable notice, to inspect and copy or
transcribe at any time, during normal business hours, all books, records,
maps, plans, financial records, service complaint logs, performance test
results and other like materials of the grantee kept or maintained by grantee
or under its control concerning the operations, finances, affairs,
transactions or property of grantee when necessary to ascertain the
grantee’s compliance with this chapter or the franchise agreement. Access
to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis
that the records contain proprietary information. Access to proprietary
information shall be allowed at a site of the grantee’s choosing and shall
be held in confidence by the town.



      (2)   If any of the maps or records are not kept in the town,
or upon reasonable notice made available in the town, and if the town shall
determine that an examination of the records is necessary or appropriate, all
reasonable expenses necessarily incurred in making the examination shall be
paid by grantee.



   (C)   Reports required.  The grantee shall file with the town, upon
reasonable request:



      (1)   Regulatory communications. All reports required by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including but not limited to annual
proof of performance tests and results, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO)
reports, and all petitions, applications and communications of all types
submitted by grantee to the FCC, the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC),
or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having
jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of grantee’s system;



      (2)   Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the
physical miles of plant construction and plant in operation at the end of the
fiscal year will be made available at the local office of the grantee for
review by the town;



      (3)   Rebuild/upgrade/construction reports.  These reports
shall be sent to the town 30 days after the initial franchise agreement is
awarded and monthly thereafter until construction is completed as specified
in this chapter or the franchise agreement;



      (4)   Proof of performance tests. Proof of performance test
results performed as required by the FCC shall be supplied to the town;



      (5)   Test required by town. Tests required by town as
specified in this chapter shall be submitted within 30 days of notification;



      (6)   Grantee rules. The grantee’s schedule of charges,
regular subscriber service policy regarding the processing of subscriber
complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any
other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee’s policy in connection
with its subscribers shall be in accordance with applicable state and federal
laws, rules or regulations;



      (7)   Proof of bonds and insurance. Grantee shall submit to
the town the required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and
insurance certificates as required under the terms and conditions described
in this chapter;



      (8)   Financial and ownership reports. The following financial
reports for the franchise area shall be submitted to the town, upon
reasonable notice and as required by the town:



         (a)   A statement verifying the amount of gross annual
revenues derived from the franchise, certified by the Vice President for
Finance or a duly authorized officer or manager of the grantee; and



         (b)   An annual list of officers and members of the
Board of Directors of grantee and of grantee’s parent corporation, if
applicable.



      (9)   Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and
furnish to the town at the times and in the form prescribed any additional
reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property, as
may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to ascertain grantee’s
compliance with this chapter or the franchise agreement.



   (D)   Technical standards.  The technical standards used in the
operation of a system shall comply, at a minimum, with the technical
standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable systems pursuant to the
FCC’s rules and regulations found in Title 47, §§ 76.601 to 76.617, as
may be amended or modified from time to time, which regulations are expressly
incorporated herein by reference. The results of any tests required by the
FCC, or a franchise agreement shall be made available to the town within 30
days of written request.



   (E)   Test and compliance procedure.



      (1)   Tests for a system shall be performed periodically in a
manner so as to conform to FCC specifications. The town shall notify the
grantee of its desire to witness the tests for a period of 90 days beyond the
date of request. Grantee shall notify the town at least five business days
prior to conducting the tests. Representatives of the town may witness the
tests and written test reports shall be made available to the town upon
request. If any test locations fail to meet these specifications, the grantee
shall be required to indicate what corrective measures have been or will be
taken. Grantee shall have the site re-tested on a timely basis as needed.



      (2)   Complaints. Whenever there have been similar complaints
made or when there exists other evidence, which, in the reasonable judgment
of the town, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee’s
system, the town shall have the right and authority to compel the grantee to
test, analyze and report on the performance of its system. The town may
require additional tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test
procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber’s terminal. Reports on
the tests shall be delivered to the town no later than 30 days after the town
formally requests the tests and shall include the following information: the
nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system
component was tested; the equipment used and procedures employed in the
testing; the results of the tests; and methods by which the complaints were
resolved. The tests and analyses shall be supervised by an engineer or other
trained technical specialist who shall sign all records of the special tests
and forward same to the town with a report interpreting the results of the
tests and recommending what actions should be taken by the town. All the
tests conducted by grantee shall be at the expense of the grantee.



      (3)   Consultants. The town shall have the right to employ or
contract with qualified consultants and attorneys, if necessary or desirable,
to assist in the administration of this or any other section of this chapter
or the franchise agreement. If test results differ by more than 10% from the
FCC technical standard, the grantee shall reimburse the town for its
reasonable costs associated with the testing.



   (F)   Emergency requirements.  Each grantee must provide emergency
alert override capabilities in a manner consistent with the FCC’s emergency
alert system (“EAS”) rules and consistent with any state and/or regional
emergency alert system plans adopted in response to the FCC’s EAS rules
that are applicable to the franchise area.



   (G)   Programming decisions.  Each grantee shall provide
programming from each of the broad programming categories identified in its
franchise agreement. All programming decisions remain within the sole
discretion of each grantee, provided that each grantee complies with federal
law regarding notice to grantor and subscribers prior to any channel
additions, deletions or realignments, and further subject to the grantee’s
signal carriage obligations pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §§ 531 through 536, as
may be amended and subject to the town’s rights pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §
545, as may be amended. The grantee shall use its good faith efforts to
ensure diversity of programming.



   (H)   Cable system office hours and telephone availability. 
Attached as Appendix A are the Federal Communication Commission (FCC)
Customer Service Standards with which grantee must comply.



   (I)   Parental control.  Every grantee shall make available to any
subscriber upon request a “lockout” device for blocking both video and
audio portions of any channel(s) of programming entering the subscriber’s
premises. The device shall be provided at a reasonable charge, except to the
extent that federal law specifically provides otherwise. The grantee may,
however, require a reasonable security deposit for the use of this device.
This section shall not apply to channels that are on the basic or expanded
basic tier of programming unless the subscriber receives service via a
programmable terminal device, such as a converter.



   (J)   Periodic subscriber survey.  The franchise agreement shall
provide terms for a periodic subscriber survey to assess the cable service
needs and interests of the community throughout the term of the franchise as
well as procedures for review and implementation of changes identified
through any survey.



   (K)   Installations exceeding standard installation.  Service drops
in excess of 150 feet and concealed wiring in the home shall be charged to
the subscriber based upon time and material. The desire of the subscriber as
to the point of entry into the residence shall be observed whenever possible.
Runs in building interiors shall be as unobtrusive as possible. The grantee
shall use due care in the process of installation and shall repair any damage
to the subscriber’s property caused by the installation. Restoration shall
be undertaken within no more than ten days after the damage is incurred and
shall be completed as soon as possible thereafter.



   (L)   Service area and line extension policy.



      (1)   Discrimination.  No grantee may discriminate in the
build-out of its system to a particular area of the town in providing service
to an individual or groups of residents on the basis of race, creed, religion
or economic condition. Unless the franchise agreement provides otherwise,
every grantee shall serve all areas of the town equally with populations of
at least 15 residential dwelling units per cable mile as measured from a
grantee’s existing distribution system, including areas annexed subsequent
to the grant of the franchise. The franchise agreement shall provide a
schedule of the areas to be served, and the specific build-out requirements
of the grantee, and shall also describe the process for extending service to
areas that will meet minimum density requirements at some future date. Unless
the franchise agreement provides otherwise, every grantee shall extend
service to commercial areas at no additional costs where the costs to do so
does not exceed the same costs of providing service in a residential area
with a density of 15 homes per mile.



      (2)   Stages.  During the initial construction phase of a new
system, a grantee may implement its system in stages pursuant to a schedule
and line extension policy established in its franchise agreement that serves
all areas of the town equally, provided that any deviation from the service
and line extension requirements of this chapter do not discriminate between
different areas of the town on the basis of race, creed, religion or economic
condition. A grantee of a new franchise shall comply with all customer
service obligations with respect to customers whose premises are passed by
portions of the grantee’s network which are fully activated, tested and
available for service.



      (3)   Cost-sharing. Pursuant to division (L)(1) of this
section, and in franchise agreements with a 15 homes-per-mile requirement in
areas with less than 15 homes per proposed cable mile, grantee shall offer a
cost-sharing arrangement to residents. Grantee shall bear its pro rata share
of the current construction costs based upon the actual number of homes per
mile. The cost-sharing arrangement shall consist of the following: on the
request of a subscriber desiring service, grantee shall prepare, at its cost,
an engineering survey and cost analysis to determine the cost of the plant
extension required to provide service to the subscriber from the closest
usable point on the cable system. The cost of construction shall be allocated
based on the following formula: if a request for extension into a residential
area requires the construction of cable plant which does not pass at least 15
homes per cable mile, a proportionate share of construction costs shall be
borne by grantee and by the subscribers. For example, if there are ten
dwelling units per mile, grantee’s share will equal 10/15th of the
construction cost. The remaining cost will be shared equally by each
subscriber in the area to be constructed. The line extension formula shall
also be applied to a portion of a cable mile meeting proportionate density
requirements. For example, if there are seven dwelling units per one-half
mile, the grantee shall construct the plant. The cost sharing described above
would be utilized if there were less than the proportionate share of dwelling
units per the portion of a mile needed to reach the dwelling units. Should
additional subscribers request cable service, subscribers utilizing the
cost-sharing plan for extension shall be reimbursed pro rata for their
contribution or a proportional share thereof. In that case, the pro rata
shares shall be recalculated and each new subscriber shall pay the new pro
rata share, and all prior subscribers shall receive refunds. In any event, at
the end of 24 months from completion of the project, the subscribers are no
longer eligible for refunds, and the amounts paid by subscribers will be
credited to the plant account of the grantee. The average cost of the line
extension shall be recalculated annually based upon the current costs of
labor and material. Each person contributing toward the direct cost of the
line extension shall waive all ownership interest in the line extension. All
equipment and components of the line extension, including but not limited to
cable wire, electronics and pedestals, shall at all times remain the
exclusive property of the grantee.



   (M)   Town monitoring.  In addition to free cable service required
by this chapter, grantee shall provide one service feed to Town
Administration Offices (unless otherwise specified by town) that shall
receive without charge all basic and expanded basic cable programming
provided by grantee. This service shall be provided in such a manner that the
town may monitor the programming and use of the cable system for compliance
with the franchise agreement and this chapter. The services provided pursuant
to this requirement shall be in a secure office location, and not in a
location open to public viewing.



   (N)   Access to inside wiring.  Access to, and ownership of, inside
wiring shall be in accordance with §§ 76.800 et seq. of the FCC rules and
regulations as the same may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.08  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Right-of-way construction.  Prior to commencing any
construction in the town, a grantee must obtain all necessary permits and
licenses required by federal, state and generally applicable town laws,
ordinances and rules and pay all associated nondiscriminatory fees. Further,
a grantee shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
standards relating to the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable
system.



   (B)   Compliance with laws.  The construction, installation and
maintenance of the cable system shall be effectuated by grantee in a manner
that is consistent with the laws, ordinances and construction standards of
the state, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the National
Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical Code and the FCC, to the extent
applicable, as well as all other laws, rules, regulations and ordinances that
are generally applicable and promulgated pursuant to the town’s lawful
police power. All open connections on splitters, couplers and other devices
shall be properly terminated.



   (C)   Minimum interference.  All of grantee’s construction,
installation, operation, repair and maintenance, and the arrangement of its
lines, cables and other appurtenances, on public or private property, shall
be conducted in such a manner as to not unreasonably interfere with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners that may be affected. In
the event the work is not in accordance with applicable rules and
regulations, the town may require the removal, within a period of time after
notice as is reasonable under the circumstances, of grantee’s lines, cables
and appurtenances from the public rights-of-way in question, at the sole
expense of the grantee.



   (D)   Repair of property.  Grantee shall promptly repair and
restore any town or private property which may be damaged as a result of the
construction, installation, operation, repair, maintenance or removal of the
cable system. Any property damaged or destroyed shall be promptly repaired
and restored by grantee, at grantee’s sole cost and expense to the
reasonable satisfaction of the town, to its condition prior to being damaged,
or shall be replaced by grantee with equivalent property. The town may
inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way and cables,
wires, attachments and poles after restoration. The liability, indemnity,
insurance and performance bond as provided herein shall continue in full
force and effect during the period of any removal and until the grantee has
fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the
franchise agreement. In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any
restoration work required by the town within the time as may be established
by the town and to the reasonable satisfaction of the town, the town may,
following reasonable notice to the grantee, cause the work to be done and the
grantee shall reimburse the town the cost thereof within 30 days after
receipt of an itemized list of the cost, or the town may at its option
recover the costs through the performance bond provided by grantee. The town
shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the
provisions of this section.



   (E)   Erection of poles.  Grantee shall not erect any pole on or
along any public rights-of-way in an existing aerial utility system without
the advance written approval of the town. If additional poles in an existing
aerial route are required, grantee shall negotiate, as needed, with the
owners thereof for the installation of the needed poles. Grantee shall
negotiate the lease of pole space and facilities from the existing pole
owners for all aerial construction, under mutually acceptable terms and
conditions.



   (F)   Reservations of street rights.  Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to prevent the town from constructing storm or sanitary sewers,
grading, paving, repairing or altering any public rights-of-way, or laying
down, repairing or removing water mains, traffic signal control systems, town
fiber plant, or constructing or establishing any public utility, service or
other public work that the town may operate or undertake now or in the
future. All the work shall be done, insofar as practicable, in a manner as
not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of poles,
wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances of grantee. If town in
its reasonable judgment shall determine that grantee’s facilities interfere
with the construction location or repair of any public right-of-way or public
improvement, then all the facilities of grantee shall be removed or replaced,
or temporarily disconnected, in a manner as shall be directed by the town so
that the same shall not interfere with the public works of the town. The
removal or replacement shall be at the expense of grantee; provided, however,
that nothing in this chapter shall preclude grantee from seeking
reimbursement for removal or replacement costs from any public funds
generally available to right-of-way users for the reimbursement of the costs.



   (G)   Underground installation.  In those areas within the town
where cable television, telephone or electrical facilities are currently
placed underground, all cable system facilities shall remain or be placed
underground. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities
are above ground at the time of installation, grantee may install its cable
system facilities above ground, provided that at the time that both electric
and telephone utility facilities are placed underground, grantee shall
likewise place its cable system facilities underground without cost to the
town. Nothing contained in this section shall require a grantee to construct,
operate and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances, except
that grantee shall take steps to minimize the number and visual impact of the
facilities. If the grantor reimburses any utility for the relocation, grantee
shall be similarly reimbursed. This section shall not prevent the town or any
of its agencies or joint agencies from requiring the installation or
relocation of cable services facilities underground pursuant to a separate
ordinance or regulation or requirement imposed in accordance with the
exercise of the general police power or regulatory function of the agency or
joint agency.



   (H)   Conduit.



      (1)   The town shall not be responsible for any cuts or damage
to buried or underground facilities of a grantee that are not clearly marked
or cannot be located through the state “one-call” service.



      (2)   Grantee shall provide the town detailed strand and
trench maps in both paper and a mutually agreed upon electronic format of all
new underground and buried cable facilities upon activation of the sections
of the system.



      (3)   Grantee shall provide a contact number for the town to
call in emergency situations requiring an immediate response on the part of
the town. If the grantee does not properly and effectively identify the
precise location of its facilities within 45 minutes of an emergency call
from the town, the town shall not be responsible for damage to the
grantee’s facilities.



   (I)   Clearing poles and cables.  Grantee shall have the right to
remove, trim, cut and to keep clear of its poles, cables, underground
conduits and related equipment the trees in and along the public
rights-of-way, but, in the exercise of that right, grantee shall not cut the
trees to any greater extent than is reasonably necessary for the
construction, erection, installation, maintenance and use of cable system
equipment. Except in emergency situations, grantee shall not remove, trim or
cut the trees from any public rights-of-way without first providing
reasonable notice to the town of its intention to do so, the notice to be
delivered not less than ten days in advance. The grantee shall compensate the
town or any private owners of the trees for any damage proximately caused by
grantee’s negligent conduct.



   (J)   Moving facilities.  Grantee, on the request of the town, or
any person holding a building permit issued by the town, or any permit issued
by an appropriate state agency, shall temporarily move its wires, cables,
poles or other cable system facilities to permit the moving of large objects,
vehicles, buildings or other structures. The expense of these temporary moves
shall be paid to grantee by the person requesting the same and grantee shall
have the authority to require payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not
less than 30 days’ advance notice to arrange for these temporary moves.



   (K)   Work performed by others.  To the extent applicable, all
provisions of this chapter shall apply to any subcontractors or others
performing any work or services pursuant to the provisions of a franchise
agreement on behalf of a grantee.



   (L)   Liability.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve
any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable
care to avoid injuring grantee’s facilities while performing any work
connected with grading, re-grading or changing the line of any public
rights-of-way or with the construction of any sewer or water system or
utility system.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.09  GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Franchise fee.



      (1)   The administration of this chapter or the franchise
agreement imposes upon the town additional regulatory responsibility and
expense and in consideration for permission to use the public rights-of-way
of the town for the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system
within the town, a grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the town a
franchise fee in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement, up to
the maximum amount allowed by applicable law. To the extent that applicable
law changes the maximum authorized franchise fee, the town reserves the right
to change the franchise fee as stated in the franchise agreement, by adopting
an ordinance establishing the new franchise fee rate and allowing reasonable
notice to the grantee for administration of the change. The town shall hold a
public hearing prior to adopting any change in the franchise fee.



      (2)   Payments due the grantor under this section shall be
computed quarterly, for the preceding quarter. Each quarterly payment shall
be due and payable no later than 45 days after the end of the preceding
quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report by a grantee
showing the basis for the computation and a “franchise fee worksheet”
listing all of the sources of revenues attributable to the operation of
grantee’s system in the town. All these payments shall be certified as
correct by an officer of the grantee.



      (3)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an
accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall the
acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim grantor may have
for further sums payable under the provisions of this chapter or a franchise
agreement. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by
grantor or its designee at any time during any calendar year (but not more
than once per calendar year) upon 20 calendar days’ notice, which shall
include a request for any documents sought to be reviewed. Audits shall be at
the expense of the grantee if the additional amount due is greater than 2% of
the amount paid. Any additional amount due to the town as a result of the
audit shall be paid within 60 days following written notice to the grantee by
the town which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. Grantor’s
right to audit and grantee’s obligation to retain records related to the
franchise fee audit, shall expire three years from the date on which the most
recent franchise fee payment by the grantee was due from the time of written
notice.



      (4)   In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed
amount is not made on or before the dates specified herein, the grantee shall
pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from the due
date, at the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the
town’s primary depository bank during the period that the unpaid amount is
owed.



   (B)   Performance bond.  Each grantee shall maintain a performance
bond with the town to ensure compliance with this chapter and the applicable
franchise agreement, in an amount and in a manner as set forth in the
grantee’s franchise agreement.



   (C)   Penalties procedure.



      (1)   Whenever the grantor has reason to believe that a
grantee has violated any material provision of a franchise agreement or this
chapter, the grantor shall first notify the grantee of the material violation
and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than
20 days in the case of the failure of a grantee to pay any sum or other
amount due the grantor under a franchise agreement, and 30 days in all other
cases. If a grantee fails to correct the violation within the time
prescribed, or if a grantee is unable to correct the violation and fails to
commence corrective action within the time prescribed and to diligently
remedy the violation thereafter, the grantee shall then be given written
notice of not less than 20 days for public comment. The notice shall indicate
with reasonable specificity the violation alleged to have occurred.



      (2)   At the public hearing, the Board shall hear and consider
all relevant evidence and thereafter render findings and a decision based
upon the evidence. Any hearing must, at a minimum, provide the grantee a full
and fair opportunity to be heard by the Board.



      (3)   In the event the Board finds that a grantee has
corrected the violation or promptly commenced correction of the violation
after notice thereof from the grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully
remedy the violation, or that no violation has occurred, the proceedings
shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.



      (4)   In the event the Board finds that a violation exists and
that a grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or did not
promptly commence and diligently proceed to correct the violation, the Board
may impose liquidated damages to be collected from the performance bond, as
set out in the franchise agreement.



      (5)   If the Board elects to assess liquidated damages, then
that election shall constitute the grantor’s exclusive remedy for a period
of 60 days. Thereafter, if a grantee remains in noncompliance, the grantor
may pursue any other available remedy.



      (6)   In the event that a franchise is cancelled or terminated
by reason of the default of a grantee, the performance bond deposited
pursuant to a franchise agreement shall remain in effect and available to the
grantor until all pending claims or penalties are resolved or settled, after
which point any remaining amounts in the performance bond shall revert to the
grantee.



      (7)   The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the grantor, whether
reserved by a franchise agreement, this chapter or authorized by law, and no
action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the performance
bond shall affect any other right grantor may have.



      (8)   In instances of repeated violations, whether remedied or
not, the grantor shall serve special notice outlining additional remediation
requirements. Failure to cure, as measured by repeated instances of the same
violation, is evidence of an evasive practice and may lead to revocation
under § 113.10(A).



      (9)   Grantee acknowledges that noncompliance with the
provisions of the franchise agreement and the master ordinance will harm
subscribers and the town and the amounts of actual damages will be difficult
or impossible to ascertain. The town may therefore assess the following
liquidated damages against grantee for unexcused noncompliance with the
requirements of the franchise agreement and master ordinance. Grantee
acknowledges that the liquidated damages set forth below are a reasonable
approximation of actual damages and that this provision is intended to
provide compensation and is not a penalty. All damages provided shall be
cumulative, unless expressly stated.



         (a)   For failure to materially complete construction or
extend service in accordance with the ordinance and the franchise agreement:
$250/calendar day for each day the violation continues;



         (b)   For failure to materially comply with requirements
for access channels: $250/calendar day for each day the violation continues;



         (c)   For failure to comply with the material
requirements of the I-net provisions of the ordinance/franchise agreement:
$250/calendar day for each day the violation continues;



         (d)   For repeated, wilful or continuing failure to
submit reports, maintain records, provide documents or information:
$250/calendar day for each day the violation continues;



         (e)   For failure to comply with the material
requirements of the customer service standards: $250/calendar day for each
day the violation continues;



         (f)   For failure to comply with the transfer
provisions: $250/calendar day for each day the violation continues; and



         (g)   For violation of other material provisions of the
ordinance and the franchise agreement: up to $250/day for each day the
violation continues.



      (10)   For the purposes of calculating the amount of
liquidated damages, time periods shall be tolled for such time as grantee is
found to be diligently working to remedy the violation.



   (D)   Bonds, indemnification and insurance.  Each grantee shall
maintain bonds and insurance with the town in amounts and in a manner as set
forth in the grantee’s franchise agreement. Each grantee also shall be
required to indemnify the town in a manner as set forth in the grantee’s
franchise agreement.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.10  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Grounds for revocation. The grantor reserves the right to
revoke the franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, in
the event that:



      (1)   A grantee substantially violates any material provision
of this chapter or a franchise agreement;



      (2)   A grantee attempts to evade any of the material
provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement;



      (3)   A grantee practices an act of fraud or deceit upon the
grantor;



      (4)   A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay
its debts, or is adjudged bankrupt;



      (5)   A grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as
required pursuant to its franchise; or



      (6)   A grantee violates any orders or rulings of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter
or the franchise and after notice thereof, shall continue the violation and
not remedy the same within 60 days.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   Whenever the grantor has reason to believe that there
may be grounds for revocation of a franchise, the grantor shall first notify
the grantee in writing of its basis for believing grounds for revocation
exist. This notice shall indicate with reasonable specificity the grounds for
revocation that are believed to exist so that the grantee may have a
reasonable opportunity to cure or otherwise address the same. If a grantee
fails to adequately cure or address the purported grounds for revocation
within 30 days of the notice, then the grantor may, upon 30 days’ written
notice to the grantee, commence a public administrative hearing to determine
whether there exists any ground for revocation.



      (2)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted so as to
protect the full due process rights of the parties and provide for, at a
minimum, the right to have counsel, the right to call and cross- examine
witnesses and the right to a full transcript of the proceedings.



      (3)   After the close of the hearing, grantor or the
designated hearing officer shall issue a written decision based on the record
of the proceedings, stating with specificity the findings and reasons
supporting the decision.



      (4)   Upon revocation, a grantee shall have a period of 120
days subsequent to the date of the formal adoption of a revocation of the
franchise by the town within which to file an appeal with a court of
competent jurisdiction.



      (5)   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in
full force and effect.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.11  FORECLOSURE, RECEIVERSHIP AND ABANDONMENT.



   (A)   Foreclosure.  Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of
all or a part of a system, a grantee shall notify the grantor of that fact,
and the notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in
control of the grantee has taken place, and the provisions of this chapter
governing the consent to transfer or change in ownership shall apply without
regard to how the transfer or change in ownership occurred.



   (B)   Receivership.  Apart from and supplemental to the right to
revoke a franchise, grantor shall have the right to cancel a franchise
agreement 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take
over and conduct the business of a grantee, whether in receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless the
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration
of the 120 days, or unless:



      (1)   Within 120 days after its election or appointment, the
receiver or trustee has fully complied with all the provisions of grantee’s
franchise agreement and this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and



      (2)   The receiver or trustee, within the 120 days, has
executed an agreement, duly approved by a court having jurisdiction, whereby
the receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every
provision of this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.12  PURCHASE BY GRANTOR UPON TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE TERM OR
REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.



   The grantor may, in accordance with and to the extent permitted by 47
U.S.C. § 547, upon the payment of a fair valuation, purchase, condemn,
acquire, take over and hold the property and plant of a grantee, in whole or
in part, on the following conditions:



   (A)   Upon revocation of a franchise, a fair valuation shall be an
equitable value that shall not include any sum attributable to the value of
the franchise itself, and plant and property shall be valued according to its
book value at the time of revocation, or the system’s initial cost less
depreciation and salvage;



   (B)   At the expiration of a franchise agreement and following a
denial of renewal of the franchise agreement, a fair valuation shall be the
fair market value of the plant and property, exclusive of the value
attributed to the franchise itself; and



   (C)   In the event the grantor shall acquire a franchise pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement, and commenced
operation of the system, the grantor shall reimburse the grantee for the fair
market value of the system.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.13  SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   No grantee shall sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or
dispose of, in whole or in part, an interest in or control of a franchise or
cable system or any of the rights or privileges granted by a franchise
agreement, without the prior consent of the grantor, which consent shall not
be unreasonably denied or delayed and may be denied only upon a good-faith
finding by the grantor that the proposed transferee lacks the legal,
technical or financial qualifications to consummate the transaction and
operate the system so as to perform its obligations under this chapter and
the applicable franchise agreement. This section shall not apply to sales of
property or equipment in the normal course of business. Consent from the
grantor shall not be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other
instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness
or for a transfer to a corporation, partnership or other entity controlling,
controlled by or under common control with a grantee.



   (B)   (1)   The following additional events shall be deemed to be
a sale, assignment or other transfer of an interest in or control of a
grantee or its franchise or cable system requiring compliance with this
section:



         (a)   The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a
majority of a grantee’s assets;



         (b)   The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital
stock or partnership, membership or other equity interests in a grantee by
one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity
owners so as to create a new controlling interest in a grantee;



         (c)   The issuance of additional capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interest by a grantee so as to create
a new controlling interest in a grantee; and



         (d)   A grantee’s agreement to transfer management or
operation of the grantee or the system.



      (2)   The term CONTROLLING INTEREST as used herein is not
limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever
manner exercised.



   (C)   In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of an
interest in or control of a grantee or its franchise or cable system, the
town shall have 120 days to act upon any request for approval of the sale or
transfer that contains or is accompanied by any information as is required in
accordance with FCC regulations and the requirements of this chapter and the
applicable franchise agreement, including information related to the legal,
technical and financial qualifications, and the proposed transferee’s
ability to operate the system in accord with this chapter and the franchise
agreement. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by the
town as part of its review may be grounds for a denial of the proposed
transfer. If the town fails to render a final decision on the request within
120 days after receipt by the town of all required information, the request
shall be deemed granted unless the grantee and the town agree to an extension
of the 120-day period.



   (D)   The consent or approval of the town to any transfer of the
grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the town in
and to the public rights-of-way, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be
expressly subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the
franchise agreement.



   (E)   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the town will
not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion
of construction of the proposed initial system.



   (F)   Any approval by the town of a transfer shall be contingent
upon the prospective new grantee becoming a signatory to the franchise
agreement.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.14  RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS PROTECTED.



   (A)   Discriminatory practices prohibited.  No grantee shall deny
service, deny access or otherwise discriminate against subscribers,
programmers or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, disability or age. Every grantee shall strictly adhere
to the equal employment opportunity requirements of state and federal law.
Each grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal,
state and local laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to
nondiscrimination.



   (B)   Subscriber privacy.  Grantees shall at all times comply with
the federal subscriber privacy requirements codified at 47 U.S.C. § 551.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



§ 113.15  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Rate regulation.  The town reserves the right to regulate
rates for all services offered over the cable system, to the extent permitted
by federal or state law. The grantee shall be subject to the rate regulation
provisions provided for herein, and those of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) at 47 C.F.R., pt. 76.900, subpt. N. The town shall follow
the rules relating to cable rate regulation promulgated by the FCC at 47
C.F.R., pt. 76.900, subpt. N. To the extent required by applicable federal or
state law, the grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory
within the same general class of subscribers and which must be applied fairly
and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering:



      (1)   Discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling
subscribers billed on a bulk basis;



      (2)   Promotional discounts;



      (3)   Reduced installation rates for subscribers who have
multiple services;



      (4)   Discounts for senior citizens and/or low-income
residents; or



      (5)   Reduced rates to subscribers who receive non-cable
services in addition to cable services.



   (B)   Rights reserved to grantor.



      (1)   Upon either the expiration or revocation of a franchise,
the grantor may permit and/or require a grantee to continue to operate the
cable system for an extended period of time not to exceed three months from
the date of the expiration or revocation. A grantee shall continue to operate
the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the applicable
franchise agreement and to provide cable service and any and all other
services which the grantee had been providing.



      (2)   The grantor shall have the right to compel continued
operation of the cable system whether by the grantee or a trustee or receiver
or by the grantor, and to ensure that the operation is consistent with public
interest as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. The grantee may
not remove equipment or documents necessary for continued operation of the
system.



      (3)   At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit
examination by the town of the system, together with any appurtenant property
of the grantee situated within or without the town when necessary to
ascertain the grantee’s compliance with this chapter, the franchise
agreement and all applicable laws.



      (4)   The town shall have the right of intervention in any
suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a party relative to grantee’s
operations in the town, and the grantee shall not oppose that intervention by
the town.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, the
grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the town or its officials,
boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, cost, expense or
damage arising out of any provision or requirements of this chapter or the
franchise agreement, or of their enforcement.



   (C)   Non-enforcement by the town.  Grantee shall not be relieved
of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or the
franchise agreement by reason of any failure of the town to enforce prompt
compliance.



   (D)   Governing law and choice of forum.  Any dispute arising with
respect to this chapter or a franchise agreement granted pursuant to it,
shall be subject to review by the state and federal courts having primary
jurisdiction in the town.



   (E)   Severability.  If any material portion of this chapter, or a
franchise agreement adopted pursuant to it, is held by an authority of
competent jurisdiction, to be invalid or unlawful as conflicting with
applicable laws now or hereafter in effect, or is held by a court or
competent governmental authority to be modified in any way in order to
conform to the requirements of any applicable laws, the provision shall be
considered a separate, distinct and independent part of this chapter or
franchise agreement, and, to the extent possible, the holding shall not
affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions thereof.



   (F)   Publication of notices.  All public notices required to be
published by the grantor under this chapter or any franchise agreement shall
be published in a manner consistent with the public notice laws of the state.



   (G)   System construction capabilities and schedule.



      (1)   The cable system shall generally conform to the system
design and channel capacity specifications set forth by the grantee in its
application for a franchise submitted to the town. At a minimum, the grantee
shall construct a system with equivalent technical capabilities to a hybrid
fiber coax (HFC) 750 MHZ cable system. The grantee is permitted to modify its
design and implementation plan, pursuant to the conditions provided herein,
to accommodate technological innovations and refinements that enhance system
reliability and capacity.



      (2)   The initial construction required under initial
franchise agreement shall be completed in compliance with a schedule
specified therein. If the grantee shows that, notwithstanding its due
diligence, that it has been unable to extend service to a specified area
because the acts or omissions of a third party (excluding the grantee’s
subcontractors or agents) or other factors have caused a delay in
construction beyond that reasonably expected during the course of
construction, and the grantee proposes a reasonable alternative deadline for
extension of service to that area, the town shall grant reasonable extensions
of time to complete construction.



(Ord. eff. 10-8-2001)



APPENDIX A: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS



   Customer Service Standards



   Grantee shall at all times comply with the more stringent of the
customer service and consumer protection provisions of the town’s Master
Cable Services Regulatory Ordinance, the franchise agreement or the FCC.



   (A)   Grantee will at all times comply with the town’s Customer
Service Standards in addition to compliance with the FCC standards (Title 47
C.F.R., pt. 76 (Cable Television Service), subpt. H (General Operating
Requirements) as amended.



   (B)   The town’s Customer Service Standards are:



      (1)   The Customer Service Standards as set forth below are
the standards set for all affected cable operators. This provision is the
town’s notice of its intent to enforce the standards.



      (2)   Effective with adoption of this chapter, a cable
operator shall be subject to the following Customer Service Standards.



         (a)   Cable system office hours and telephone
availability.



            1.   The cable operator will maintain a local,
toll-free or collect-call telephone access line which will be available to
its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week.



               a.   Trained company representatives will be
available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business
hours.



               b.   After normal operating conditions, the
access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system,
including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business
hours must be responded to by a trained company representative on the next
business day.



            2.   Under normal operating conditions, telephone
answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not
exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be
transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall
be met no less than 90% of the time under normal operating conditions,
measured on a quarterly basis.



            3.   The operator is required to have equipment or
perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards
above.



            4.   Under normal operating conditions, the
customer will receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time.



            5.   Customer service center and bill payment
locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be
conveniently located.



         (b)   Installations, outages and service calls. Under
normal operating conditions, each of the following six standards will be met
no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis.



            1.   Standard installations will be performed
within seven business days after an order has been placed.



            2.   Excluding conditions beyond the control of
the operator, the cable operator will begin working on “service
interruptions” promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the
interruption becomes known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct
other service problems the next business day after notification of the
service problem.



            3.   The “appointment window” alternatives for
installations, service calls and other installation activities will be either
a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business
hours. (The operator may schedule service calls and other installation
activities outside of normal operating hours.)



            4.   An operator may not cancel an appointment
with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the
scheduled appointment.



            5.   If a cable operator representative is running
late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the
appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment
will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the
customer.



            6.   Complaint log. The cable operator shall
establish a complaint log. The log will be provided to the town, upon
reasonable request for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the
ordinance or franchise agreement. The complaint log shall be available for
review for the current and past two years and be in a format convenient to
the grantee. The log shall have sufficient information to indicate the date
of the complaint, nature of the complaint and the grantee’s resolution of
the complaint.



         (c)   Communications between cable operators and cable
subscribers.



            1.   Notifications to subscribers.



               a.   The cable operator shall provide
written information on each of the following areas at the time of
installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any
time upon request:



                  (i)   Products and services offered;



                  (ii)   Prices and options for
programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other
services;



                  (iii)   Installation and service
maintenance policies;



                  (iv)   Instruction on how to use the
cable service;



                  (v)   Channel positions of programming
carried on the system; and



                  (vi)   Billing and complaint
procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise
authority’s cable office.



               b.   Customers will be notified of any
changes in rates, programming service or channel positions as soon as
possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice
must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of the changes
if the change is within the control of the cable operator, in addition, the
cable operator shall notify subscribes 30 days in advance of any significant
changes in the other information required by the preceding division.



            2.   Billing.



               a.   Bills will be clear, concise and
understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations, including
but not limited to basic and premium service charges and equipment charges.
Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period,
including optional charges, rebates and credits.



               b.   In case of a billing dispute, the cable
operator must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.



            3.   Refunds. Refund checks will be issued
promptly, but no later than either:



               a.   The customer’s next billing cycle
following resolution of the request of 30 days, whichever is earlier; or



               b.   The return of the equipment supplied by
the cable operator if service is terminated.



            4.   Credits. In the case of an outage, multiple
or single, in excess of 24 hours, the grantee shall make every effort to
credit the subscriber’s account based on the period of outage, reasons for
outage and general good business practices. Credits for service will be
issued no later than the customer’s next billing cycle following the
determination that a credit is warranted.



         (d)   Late payment for cable service.



            a.   If grantee assesses a processing fee for late
payments, each bill shall specify on its face in a fashion emphasizing same,
such as bold-face type, underlined type or a larger font: “For payments
received after   [date]  a $      processing fee for late payment may be
charged.”



            b.   No processing fees for late payment, however
denominated, shall be added to a subscriber’s bill less than 15 calendar
days after the date printed on mailing of the bill to the subscriber, and
shall not exceed the amount permitted under applicable law.



(Ord. eff. 10-18-2001)



CHAPTER 114:  FOOD SERVICE



Section



Sidewalk Cafes



   114.01   Sidewalk cafes permitted



   114.02   Regulations



   114.03   Alcohol service



   114.04   Permit revocation



SIDEWALK CAFES



§ 114.01  SIDEWALK CAFES PERMITTED.



   (A)   The Town of Elkin shall allow areas of town sidewalks to be
used by restaurants to serve patrons outside in areas immediately adjoining
the restaurant property ("sidewalk cafes") pursuant to the requirements of
this chapter. SIDEWALK CAFES are defined as an extension of a business beyond
the building's exterior walls, onto sidewalks in front of, or in alleyways or
property behind, their business. There are two types of sidewalk cafes
permitted:



      (1)   A cafe with tables and chairs for food service without
alcohol, or outside seating purposes only. No permits are required for a
business that will not be providing alcoholic beverages, however a one-time
application to approve a sidewalk cafe not selling alcohol must be submitted
and approved, and the regulations in § 114.02 below must be met at all times.



      (2)   A cafe with tables and chairs for food service allowing
for service of alcoholic beverages outside in approved, designated locations
that are partitioned off for alcoholic beverage service. Restaurants, cafes,
and businesses that wish to open a sidewalk cafe with alcohol must submit an
application, be approved, and pay to the town an annual permit fee.
Regulations in §§ 114.02 and 114.03 below must be met at all times as well
as special alcohol and late night food service hours.



   (B)   Alcohol served outside on the restaurant's private property is
not controlled by town ordinances and do not require a permit. However, all
Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC) rules and regulations shall apply, as well as
The Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.



   (C)   No business owner may operate a sidewalk cafe or serve alcohol
on public sidewalks, parking lots or alleyways, without first submitting an
application for a sidewalk cafe. Approval of the application and/or a permit
may take up to 60 business days. All fees for the alcohol permit must be paid
in full before the permit will be issued.



   (D)   Permits will be issued each year and will expire on June 30 of
the following year. If a permitted business operation/ sidewalk cafe is
discontinued, no refund of the permit fee shall be made. Permits issued
pursuant to this section shall not be transferable or assignable. Permits may
prohibit operation during special events and contain other conditions and
restrictions as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. In accordance with the town's Schedule of Fees, an annual fee will
cover the costs of processing and issuing the Sidewalk Cafe Permit each year.
An existing permit must be renewed prior to July 1 each year to continue
alcohol sales.



(Ord. eff. 5-12-2014)



§ 114.02  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The sidewalk cafe must be associated with an operating
business so that it is under the same management, and is adjacent to, and
shares the same preparation facilities, restroom facilities and other
customer convenience facilities as the business.



   (B)   The tables, chairs and other furnishings used in the sidewalk
cafe shall not be anchored and shall be of a type of street furniture that is
easily movable, but heavy enough to sustain strong winds.



   (C)   The placement of tables, chairs, umbrellas and other
furnishings must be depicted in a site plan submitted with the application
and shall be considered an extension of the business. The outside cafe area
shall leave a minimum of three feet of unobstructed space (as measured from
the sidewalk's curb towards the building) for the passage of pedestrians and
wheelchairs. [ADA minimum is a 36-inch allowable width with sidewalks being
at least five feet in width]. No fire exits or lanes may be blocked and must
remain clear at all times. Adjacent business frontage cannot be used for the
purposes of a sidewalk cafe.



   (D)   Each sidewalk cafe shall provide adequate waste receptacles
for its patrons, and if applicable, recycle bins. At the end of each business
day and during operating hours, the operator shall remove all trash and
debris of any sort from the receptacles and sidewalk area in and around the
sidewalk cafe. In addition, the operator shall remove from the sidewalk and
street alongside and from abutting properties, any other trash or debris
originating as a result of the operation of the sidewalk cafe. If multiple
complaints are received regarding trash violations at a location, the permit
to serve alcohol at that location may be suspended for 30 days, or revoked
until the next permit cycle begins, and a new application is submitted and
approved.



   (E)   If a waste receptacle is not currently located in front of the
proposed sidewalk cafe, one should be provided by the business owner to
accommodate the disposal of trash by their patrons. The waste receptacle must
be similar in style to current receptacles used along Main Street in Elkin.



   (F)   There shall be NO SMOKING in the sidewalk cafe area.



   (G)   Any damage to the sidewalks, light poles, town receptacles or
any other town property that occurs as a result of the sidewalk cafe, or due
to misuse or as a result of negligence, shall be the responsibility of the
business owner/ permit holder to repair or replace.



   (H)   The hours of operation of all sidewalk cafes can be scheduled
during regular business hours. However, sidewalk cafes that serve alcohol can
only serve alcoholic beverages and late night food menus outside from 10:00
a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and 12:00 noon through 12:00
midnight on Sundays. Noise ordinances go into effect at 10:00 p.m. every
evening.



(Ord. eff. 5-12-2014; Ord. eff. 10-6-2014)



§ 114.03  ALCOHOL SERVICE.



   (A)   The sidewalk cafe area serving alcohol must comply with all
requirements of the North Carolina ABC Commission, including but not limited
to the requirement that the area that contains tables, chairs, umbrellas and
such for serving patrons must be confined to an area designated with a
"boundary apparatus" or barrier that clearly defines the area within which
alcohol must be contained. Barriers that enclose the sidewalk cafe cannot be
relocated to accommodate extended areas of service not provided on the
original site plan. However, changes for the site plan can be submitted for
approval to the Town throughout the year.



   (B)   The style of barrier or boundary apparatus must be approved.
Plans and example photos should be attached with the permit application.



   (C)   Alcoholic beverages may be served in approved sidewalk cafes,
provided that the cafe shall be part of a restaurant business and shall
otherwise be authorized, permitted or licensed under North Carolina law to
serve and sell alcoholic beverages for "on-premises" consumption. If an
adjacent property is owned by the same building owner, service may be
extended in front of the adjacent property with the approval of the town.
Provided, however, the business address of the adjacent property must be
included in the restaurant's "on premises" ABC license and insurance
coverage. The business owner must show proof of this coverage.



   (D)   Copies of all permits and licenses issued by the county, state
or the town, including health department, ABC permits, and business licenses,
necessary for the operation of the business, must be on file with the town.



   (E)   Signs shall be posted, visible at all exit points from the
sidewalk cafe, that it is unlawful to remove alcoholic beverages from the
premises. Signs must be approved by the Town Planning Director (for more
information, call 336-794-6467) before purchasing and installing.



   (F)   No outdoor bar is allowed within the sidewalk cafe, nor shall
outdoor preparation of alcoholic beverages be permitted.



   (G)   The permit applicant shall provide to the town proof of
insurance policy, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in
the state, protecting the permittee and the town from all claims for damages
to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from
operation under or in connection with the permit. The insurance shall name
the town as additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not
terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date, without 30 days
advance written notice to the town. The insurance shall afford minimum limits
of $1,000,000 aggregate annually. In addition to the aforesaid general
liability coverage provided by the permittee on behalf of the town, the
permittee shall also offer proof of a liquor liability policy or endorsement
issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, which
protects the permittee and the town from all claims for damages to property
or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in
connection with the permittee (and specifically for the sale and consumption
of alcoholic beverages as authorized by this chapter). This liquor liability
policy or endorsement shall name the town as additional insured and shall
provide that the policy or endorsement shall not terminate or be canceled
prior to the expiration date, without 30 days written notice to the town. The
liquor liability insurance policy or endorsement shall afford minimum limits
of $1,000,000 aggregate annually.



(Ord. eff. 5-12-2014)



§ 114.04  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   The application and/or permit may be revoked by the town if it
is found that the business operator has:



      (1)   Deliberately misrepresented or provided false
information in the permit application;



      (2)   Violated any provision of the County Health Department
regulations or of this chapter;



      (3)   Violated any law, regulation or ordinance regarding the
possession, sale, transportation or consumption of intoxicating beverages or
controlled substances;



      (4)   Operated the sidewalk cafe in a manner as to create a
public nuisance or to constitute a hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare;



      (5)   Failed to consistently maintain the sidewalk cafe and
the area around it, in a neat and trash-free manner;



      (6)   In the event that the town determines that good grounds
exist for the revocation of an application or permit issued under this
chapter, it shall provide the business operator a notice to show cause,
stating with particularity the grounds therefor, why the sidewalk cafe
application or permit should not be revoked. The business owner may, within
15 days of receipt of this notice, submit to the town, in writing, their
contention as to why the permit should not be revoked. The Town Manager shall
review the decision, the owner’s contentions and make a decision which
shall be final. If an application or a permit is revoked, the business owner
cannot reapply for another sidewalk cafe application or permit until the next
permit cycle begins. If a permit is revoked for the sale of alcohol outside
of the establishment, this shall not affect the placement of the tables,
chairs, and other items placed outside the restaurant, as they may remain
outside for food service only.



   (B)   All applications shall be presented to the "Main Street and
Community Manager" of the Town of Elkin for approval. The "Main Street and
Community Manager" shall be the primary person responsible for insuring that
this chapter is complied with.



(Ord. eff. 5-12-2014)



CHAPTER 115:  COMMERCIAL, OPEN AIR, ACCESSORY SALES
AND LIMITED DURATION EVENTS



Section



   115.01   Purpose



   115.02   Definitions



   115.03   Open air sales, accessory, commercial yard sales and
limited duration events



   115.04   Open air sales, accessory



   115.05   Commercial yard sales



   115.06   Limited duration events



   115.07   Permit required; exceptions



   115.08   Town owned property



§ 115.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is designed to provide businesses the opportunity for
temporary uses to promote public health, safety and general welfare.



(Ord. passed 9-14-2015)



§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter as defined unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   INVENTORY OF GOODS. Anything of value offered for sale to the public by
any person.



   ITINERANT MERCHANTS. Engaging in the business of itinerant merchant,
defined as “merchant, other than a merchant with an established retail
store in the county (city), who transports an inventory of goods to a
building, vacant lot, or other location in a county (city) and who, at the
location, displays the goods for sale and sells the goods at retail or offers
the goods for sale at retail.”



   PEDDLERS. Engaging in the business of peddler, defined as “a person
who travels from place to place with an inventory of goods, who sells the
goods for sale at retail, and who delivers the identical goods he carries
with him.”



(Ord. passed 9-14-2015)



§ 115.03  OPEN AIR SALES, ACCESSORY, COMMERCIAL YARD SALES AND LIMITED
DURATION EVENTS.



   (A)   No structures, sales, displays, rides, or activities
pertaining to the event or sale are permitted in any required setback, public
or private right-of-way or landscaping areas.



   (B)   No use regulated by this section may occupy required parking
spaces, access, maneuvering areas, or loading spaces or areas (during normal
business hours).



(Ord. passed 9-14-2015)



§ 115.04  OPEN AIR SALES, ACCESSORY.



   Open air sales, accessory are permitted with a zoning compliance permit
subject to the following:



   (A)   Open air sales, accessory must be directly subordinate to the
operations of the permittee engaging in the principal use on the zoning lot
(i.e. outdoor sales of auto parts at an auto parts store, clothing brought
outside a clothing store, etc.) and meet the requirements of § 115.03 above,
are permitted.



   (B)   Food vendors are allowed solely as a promotional tool in
conjunction with open air sales, accessory.



   (C)   A fee is required for each event and for each individual
vendor on site for that event (See Schedule of Fees, Town of Elkin).



(Ord. passed 9-14-2015)



§ 115.05  COMMERCIAL YARD SALES.



   (A)   A zoning lot may be utilized for this use five times within
any calendar year. Each occurrence of this use shall be limited to two
consecutive days.



   (B)   Signs shall be regulated by § 71, of the Elkin Zoning
Ordinance.



   (C)   This use requires parking as specified by § 72, of the Elkin
Zoning Ordinance, in addition to the required parking provided for the
principal use of the property.



   (D)   Written permission of the property owner that commercial yard
sales use may occur on the property is required.



   (E)   An application for this use shall be submitted at least five
business days prior to the event.



   (F)   A fee is required for each event and for each individual
vendor on site for that event (See Schedule of Fees, Town of Elkin).



(Ord. passed 9-14-2015)



§ 115.06  LIMITED DURATION EVENTS.



   (A)   Limited duration events shall include circuses, carnivals,
fairs, concerts, and similar events.



   (B)   The event shall occur for five days or less.



   (C)   Signs shall be regulated by § 71, of the Elkin Zoning
Ordinance.



   (D)   Temporary uses require parking as specified by § 72, of the
Elkin Zoning Ordinance, in addition to the required parking provided for the
principal use of the property.



   (E)   Written permission of the property owner that the limited
duration event may occur on the property is required.



   (F)   Restroom facilities are required based on the North Carolina
Building Code.



   (G)   An application for this use shall be submitted at least 21
business days prior to the event.



   (H)   A site plan identifying event areas, and existing and proposed
structures, access, parking and



maneuvering areas is required. A statement shall be included on the site plan
that the use meets all applicable performance standards for the town and
comply with all other ordinances (i.e. noise and lighting requirements).



   (I)   A fee is required for each event and for each individual
vendor on site for that event (See Schedule of Fees, Town of Elkin).



(Ord. passed 9-14-2015)



§ 115.07  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   In order to promote community organizations, this ordinance shall not
apply to any bona fide organization meeting the guideline of the IRS Section
501(c) 3. (The fee will be waved but the frequency of events and property
owner’s signed permission will still be enforced/required). Also exempt
from this ordinance will be the merchants who are authorized for sale in the
Surry County Farmers Market, at the Elkin Location.



(Ord. passed 9-14-2015)



§ 115.08  TOWN OWNED PROPERTY.



   Town owned property cannot be used, for any of the events listed,
unless a formal request is presented to the Town Board and approved.



(Ord. passed 9-14-2015)



CHAPTER 116:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   116.01   Sunday sales



§ 116.01  SUNDAY SALES.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by S.L. 2017-87 any establishment
located in the corporate limits of the Town of Elkin and holding an ABC
permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages
allowed by its permit beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.



(Ord. 2017-08-0483, eff. 8-14-2017)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



Disorderly Conduct and Other Offenses



   130.01   Disturbing public meetings



   130.02   Drinking and possession of alcoholic beverages in public



Damaging Property



   130.20   Defacing signs



   130.21   Writing or drawing obscene words or pictures on buildings
or walls



Weapons



   130.35   Possession of weapons on town-owned property



   130.36   Prohibiting the use of bow are arrow or similar within the
city limits



   130.37   Discharge of firearms and air guns



   130.38   Hunting in town



Loitering



   130.50   Loitering upon the premises or parking lot of business
after hours



   130.51   Loitering in the streets



   130.52   Loitering around business houses



 



   130.99   Penalty



DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND OTHER OFFENSES



§ 130.01  DISTURBING PUBLIC MEETINGS.



   It shall be unlawful to disturb any public meeting or exhibition or
place of public amusement by words, acts or otherwise.



(1940 Code, Ch. H, § 6)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  DRINKING AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any beer, wine,
whiskey or other intoxicating beverage while on a public parking lot, public
street, public alleyway or public sidewalk or while in a vehicle which is on
a public parking lot, public street, public alleyway or public sidewalk in
the town.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except wholesale dealers
making lawful delivery of beer and wine to retailers, to have in his or her
possession any beer, wine, whiskey or other intoxicating beverage, the label
of which is visible, while on a public parking lot, public street, public
alleyway or public sidewalk in the town.



(Ord. eff. 9-10-1965)  Penalty, see § 130.99



DAMAGING PROPERTY



§ 130.20  DEFACING SIGNS.



   It shall be unlawful to injure or deface any sign, advertisements, post
or billboard which has been lawfully installed, placed or erected upon any
street, sidewalk or public place.



(1940 Code, Ch. H, § 8)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.21  WRITING OR DRAWING OBSCENE WORDS OR PICTURES ON BUILDINGS OR
WALLS.



   It shall be unlawful to write, draw or carve any obscene letter, word
or picture on any public or private building, fence or wall without the
owner’s permission.



(1940 Code, Ch. H, § 10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



WEAPONS



§ 130.35  POSSESSION OF WEAPONS ON TOWN-OWNED PROPERTY.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) below, all
persons are prohibited from possessing weapons as defined in G.S. § 14-269
in town-owned buildings, their appurtenant premises, playgrounds and parks.



      (2)   This prohibition shall not apply to the following
persons:



         (a)   Officers and enlisted personnel of the armed
forces of the United States when in discharge of their official duties as
such and acting under orders requiring them to carry arms and weapons;



         (b)   Civil officers of the United States while in the
discharge of their official duties;



         (c)   Officers and soldiers of the militia and the
national guard when called into actual service; or



         (d)   Officers of the state, or of any county, city or
town, charged with the execution of the laws of the state, when acting in the
discharge of their official duties.



   (B)   A conspicuous notice shall be posted at each entrance to any
property set forth in division (A)(1) above stating: “Possession of weapons
or carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited.”



   (C)   Weapons possessed in violation of this section are hereby
declared to be contraband. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall
hold the weapons for disposal pursuant to court order. In the absence of any
court order the weapons shall be destroyed.



(Ord. eff. 12-4-1995)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.36  PROHIBITING THE USE OF BOW AND ARROW OR SIMILAR WITHIN THE CITY
LIMITS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire within the town
limits a compound bow, crossbow, recurve bow, long bow or other archery
equipment and propel through the air a projectile, arrow, bolt or other
similar object.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the language of division (A) above, this
section shall not apply to the use of “legal archery equipment” (as
defined by the State Wildlife Resources Commission) for the taking of deer
during any period of time designated by the State Wildlife Resources
Commission for the legal taking of deer by use of archery equipment.



(Ord. eff. 10-1-1992; Ord. eff. 1-1-2008)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.37  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND AIR GUNS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FIREARM.  Any firearm capable of propelling a projectile,
including but not limited to any rifle, shotgun or any hand gun, air rifle or
hand gun, CO 2 rifle or hand gun within the Elkin Town Limits.



   (B)   Prohibitions. Except for the exceptions hereafter set forth,
it shall be unlawful for any person or members of a corporation, firm or
organization to discharge any firearm capable of propelling a projectile,
including but not limited to any rifle, shotgun or any hand gun, air rifle or
hand gun, CO 2 rifle or hand gun within the Elkin Town Limits.



   (C)   Permitted exceptions to this section. 



      (1)   When properly utilizing an indoor firing range which has
been approved by the town and fully complies with all federal, state and town
laws, rules and regulations.



      (2)   When firing a firearm which does not propel a projectile
at:



         (a)   A funeral or other ceremony where Military Honors
are presented; or



         (b)   At a Town of Elkin Special Event which has been
permitted by the town provided that the special event permit expressly
identifies the type of firearm that will be fired and further states that no
projectile will be propelled from said firearm.



      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
any citizen from discharging a firearm when “lawfully” defending his or
her person or property.



      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or
prevent any sworn law enforcement officer from discharging his firearm in the
performance of his/her sworn duties.



(Ord. eff. 2-18-1965; Ord. eff. - - ; Ord. 2018-01-0001, eff. 1-8-2018) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.38  HUNTING IN TOWN.



   No person shall shoot squirrels or birds within the corporate limits of
the town.



(1940 Code, Ch. H, § 13)  Penalty, see § 130.99



LOITERING



§ 130.50  LOITERING UPON THE PREMISES OR PARKING LOT OF BUSINESS AFTER
HOURS.



   It shall be unlawful to loiter, singularly or in large numbers, upon
the premises or parking lot of any store, restaurant, theater, shop,
warehouse or other business establishment after the store, restaurant,
theater, shop, warehouse or other business establishment has closed its doors
to the public and is no longer serving the public, when the store,
restaurant, theater, shop, warehouse or other business establishment has
posted one or more signs in plain and open view on its buildings or driveway
entrances forbidding the loitering or use of its premises by vehicular
traffic or by persons on foot after cessation of its business activity for
the day.



(Ord. eff. 10-12-1970; Ord. eff. 5-5-1978)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.51  LOITERING IN THE STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not having any legitimate business
at the time, to loiter or congregate or loaf on the streets in the town
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and sunrise.



(Ord. eff. 7-16-1968)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.52  LOITERING AROUND BUSINESS HOUSES.



   It shall be unlawful to loiter on any street, or about any public
place, so as to interfere with the free passage of pedestrians using the
sidewalks.



(1940 Code, Ch. H, § 5)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
130.02 shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



   (C)   Any person in violation of § 130.35 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not to exceed $500 or
imprisoned for not more than six months or both.



   (D)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
130.36 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more
than $500; provided, however, the minimum fine shall be greater than $50.



   (E)   Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating the
provisions of § 130.37 shall upon conviction be responsible for an
infraction and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of G.S. §
14-4. A violation of § 130.37 is a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be
punishable by a $50 fine.



   (F)   Violation of § 130.50 shall be a misdemeanor and punishable
on a conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 30
days, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



   (G)   Any person violating the provisions of § 130.51 shall upon
conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance
with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 2-18-1965; Ord. eff. 9-10-1965; Ord. eff. 7-16-1968; Ord. eff.
10-12-1970; Ord. eff. 5-5-1978; Ord. eff. 10-1-1992; Ord. eff. 12-4-1995;
Ord. eff 1-1-2008; Ord. 2018-01-0001, eff. 1-8-2018)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING CODES



      151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PROTECTION



      152.   SUBDIVISIONS



      153.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODES



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Permit required; fees



Minimum Housing Code



   150.15   Findings, purpose; authority; adoption date



   150.16   Scope



   150.17   Definitions



   150.18   Office of Housing Inspector created; powers and duties



   150.19   Inspections



   150.20   Preliminary investigations; notices; hearings



   150.21   Dwelling unfit for human habitation



   150.22   Standards of dwelling fitness



   150.23   Dwellings not in compliance but not unfit for human
habitation



   150.24   Failure to comply with order



   150.25   Service of complaints and orders



   150.26   Appeals



   150.27   Alternative remedies



   150.28   Conflict with other provisions



   150.29   Violations



   150.30   Repeal and reenactment of Existing Housing Code



Repair, Closing or Demolition of Abandoned Structures



   150.45   Finding intent



   150.46   Duties of the Code Enforcement Officer



   150.47   Powers of the Code Enforcement Officer



   150.48   Standards for enforcement



   150.49   Procedure for enforcement



   150.50   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   150.51   In rem action by Code Enforcement Officer; placarding



   150.52   Costs of lien on premises



   150.53   Alternative remedies



   150.54   Adoption date



 



   150.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEES.



   (A)   Permit required.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation of the town to start constructing or altering any building
within the town without first obtaining from the Planning Director of the
town an official zoning permit.



   (B)   Fees.  Based on the schedule of fees. 



(Ord. eff. 10-12-1970; Ord. eff. 6-18-1971)  Penalty, see § 150.99



MINIMUM HOUSING CODE



§ 150.15  FINDINGS, PURPOSE; AUTHORITY; ADOPTION DATE.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared
that there exist in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation
due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and
other calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, and due
to other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe and unsanitary, and
dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town.



   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the town, as authorized by G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part
6, it is the purpose of this subchapter to establish minimum standards of
fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for
human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-444.



   (C)   In addition, it is hereby found and declared, under the
authority of G.S. § 160A-174, that there exist in the town dwellings which,
although not meeting the classification as unfit for human habitation, fail
to fully comply with all the minimum standards for housing fitness as
established herein and therefore have present one or more conditions which
are inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare. These
conditions, if not corrected, can lead to deterioration and dilapidation of
dwellings which render them unfit for human habitation.



   (D)   This subchapter was adopted on June 14, 2010.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.16  SCOPE.



   (A)   This subchapter is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be
construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are
public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength,
stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and
property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings,
apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures or premises used or
intended for use as such.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all existing
housing and to all housing hereafter constructed within the town. Portable,
mobile or demountable buildings or structures, including trailers,
manufactured homes and mobile homes, when used or intended for use for
housing within the jurisdiction, shall be subject to the applicable
provisions of this subchapter. This subchapter establishes minimum
requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used
for human habitation and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise
established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings,
equipment or facilities except as provided in this subchapter.



   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter shall also apply to
abandoned structures which are found by the Town Board of Commissioners to be
a health or safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or
rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting
a threat to children or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary conditions.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.17  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Whenever the words “dwelling,” “dwelling unit,” “rooming house,”
“rooming unit” or “premises” are used in this subchapter, they shall
be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part
thereof.”



   ABANDONED STRUCTURE.  Any structure, whether designed and intended for
residential or other uses, which has been vacant or not in active use,
regardless of purpose or reason, for the past two-year period and which is
determined by the Housing Inspector to be unfit for human habitation or
occupancy based upon the standards as set forth in this subchapter.



   BASEMENT.  A portion of a building which is located partly
underground, having access to light and air from windows located above the
level of the adjoining ground.



   CELLAR.  A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
having inadequate access to light and air from windows located partly or
wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.



   DETERIORATED DWELLING.  A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation
and can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum
standards established by this subchapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of
its value, as determined by finding of the Housing Inspector.



   DILAPIDATED DWELLING.  A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation
and cannot be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum
standards established by this subchapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of
its value, as determined by finding of the Housing Inspector.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home,
or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so
used, and includes any accessory buildings and structures and appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does not
include any manufactured home or mobile home, which is used solely for a
seasonal vacation purpose.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Housing Inspector.



   GARBAGE.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   HABITABLE ROOM.  A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.



   HOUSING INSPECTOR.  The person appointed by the Town Manager to carry
out the administration and enforcement of this subchapter. Also known as CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   INFESTATION.  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests in a number as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public.



   MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME). A structure as defined in G.S. §
143-145(7).



   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.



   OCCUPANT.  Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking
or eating in, or a resident, dweller or inhabitant, having actual possession
of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   OWNER.  The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of
record.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST.  All individuals, associations and corporation
who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession
thereof.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the town, county or
state relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities
concerning dwellings in the town.



   ROOMING HOUSE.  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing
one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
three or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter, mother
or father or sister or brother of the owner or operator.



   ROOMING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except
garbage and ashes, and the term shall include but not be limited to paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.



   SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the control
of, the owner or operator.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.18  OFFICE OF HOUSING INSPECTOR CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   For the purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions
of this subchapter, the Office of Housing Inspector is hereby created.



   (B)   The Housing Inspector shall be appointed by the Town Manager,
and shall have powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this subchapter, including, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, in addition to others herein
granted, the following powers:



      (1)   Investigations.  To investigate the dwelling and
building conditions in the town in order to determine which dwellings therein
are unfit for human habitation and dangerous, being guided in the examination
of dwellings and buildings by the requirements set forth in this subchapter;



      (2)   Oaths, witnesses and the like.  To administer oaths and
affirmations and to examine witnesses and receive evidence;



      (3)   Right of entry.  To enter upon and within premises and
dwellings at all reasonable times for the purpose of making examinations and
investigations; provided, that the entries shall be made in such a manner as
to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;



      (4)   Warrants; citations and the like.  To swear criminal
warrants, issue civil citations and to take any other actions as may be
necessary to carry out the enforcement procedures of this subchapter; and



      (5)   Delegation of functions and the like.  To delegate any
of his or her functions and powers under this subchapter to any officers and
agents as he or she may designate.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.19  INSPECTIONS.



   For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this subchapter, the
Housing Inspector, upon proper identification, is hereby authorized to enter,
examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming houses, rooming units and premises, including abandoned structures.
The owners or occupants of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
rooming house, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Housing
Inspector free access to the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purposes of
the inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee,
access to any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit, and its premises, at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making any repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this subchapter or with
any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.20  PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS; NOTICES; HEARINGS.



   (A)   In the event a petition is filed charging that any dwelling is
unfit for human habitation, by a public authority or at least three town
residents/property owners, it will be the responsibility of the Housing
Inspector to conduct a preliminary investigation of the dwelling. If his or
her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for the charges, he or she
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest in
the dwellings a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the Housing Inspector (or his or
her designated agent) at a place within the town therein fixed not less than
ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the
owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Housing Inspector.



   (B)   Upon the issuance of a complaint and notice of hearing
pursuant to this section, the Inspector may cause the filing of a notice of
lis pendens, with a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing attached
thereto, in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of the county, to be
indexed and cross-indexed in accordance with the indexing procedures of the
General Statutes. The Inspector shall cause a copy of the notice of lis
pendens to be served upon the owners and parties in interest in the dwelling
at the time of filing in accordance with G.S. § 160A-445, as applicable.
Upon compliance with the requirements of any order issued based upon the
complaint and hearing, the Inspector shall direct the Clerk of Superior Court
to cancel the notice of lis pendens.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.21  DWELLING UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.



   (A)   The Housing Inspector shall determine that a dwelling is unfit
for human habitation if he or she finds that any one of the following
conditions exist in the dwelling:



      (1)   Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list,
lean or buckle to the extent as to render the dwelling unsafe;



      (2)   Supporting member or members which show 33% or more
damage or deterioration, or non-supporting, enclosing or outside walls, or
covering which shows 50% or more of damage or deterioration (if required, the
assistance and professional opinion of the Surry or Wilkes County Building
Inspections Department, will be solicited);



      (3)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads,
which are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably
safe for the purpose used;



      (4)   Any damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render
the dwelling unsafe;



      (5)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair
which is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or other
people in the town;



      (6)   Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic;



      (7)   Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire,
accident or other calamities;



      (8)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary
facilities to the extent as to endanger the health, safety or general welfare
of the occupants or other residents of the town;



      (9)   Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing
facilities required by this subchapter which constitutes a definite health or
safety hazard; and



      (10)   Lack of connection to a potable water supply and/or to
the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system, the lack of either
one of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation. For the purposes
of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if
the water supply has been cut off because of nonpayment of the water bill or
otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable
water to the tap.



   (B)   In addition to the ten conditions stated above, any one of
which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation, the Housing Inspector
shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he or she
finds that a dwelling fails to fully comply with seven or more of the
enumerated standards of dwelling fitness set forth in § 150.22.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.22  STANDARDS OF DWELLING FITNESS.



   (A)   Structural standards.



      (1)   Structural integrity.  Walls, partitions, supporting
members, sills, joists, rafters or other structural members shall not list,
lean or buckle; shall not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged; and shall not
have holes or cracks which might admit rodents.



      (2)   Supports.  Floors or roofs shall have adequate
supporting members and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.



      (3)   Foundations.  Foundations, foundation walls, piers or
other foundation supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged.



      (4)   Steps.  Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts
or appurtenances shall be maintained in a condition that they will not fail
or collapse.



      (5)   Egress.  Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire
or panic shall be provided.



      (6)   Interior materials.  Interior walls and ceilings of all
rooms, closets and hallways shall be furnished of suitable materials which
will, by use of reasonable household methods, promote sanitation and
cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to enable the
occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between various spaces.



      (7)   Weatherization.  The roof, flashings, exterior walls,
basement walls, floors and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall
be constructed and maintained so as to be weather- and watertight.



      (8)   Chimneys.  There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof
which are defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in a condition
or location as to constitute a fire hazard.



      (9)   Floors.  There shall be no use of the ground for floors
or wood floors on the ground.



   (B)   Plumbing standards.



      (1)   Facilities.  Each dwelling unit shall contain not less
than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and an adequate
supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through
an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. For
the purposes of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water
supply if the water supply has been cut off because of non-payment of the
water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a
flow of potable water to the tap.



      (2)   Maintenance.  All plumbing fixtures shall meet the
standards of the State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of
good repair and in good working order.



      (3)   Accessible.  All required plumbing fixtures shall be
located within the dwelling and be accessible to the occupants of the same.
The water closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms
affording privacy to the use.



   (C)   Heating standards, generally.  Every dwelling shall have
facilities for providing heat in accordance with either division (C)(1) or
(2) below. The facilities shall be maintained in a state of good repair and
good working order.



      (1)   Central and electrical heating systems. Every central or
electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling to
which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70ºF measured at a point
three feet above the floor during average winter conditions.



      (2)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric
heating system is not provided, each dwelling shall be provided with
sufficient electrical receptacles, fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents
whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to heat all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments with a minimum temperature of
70ºF measured three feet above the floor during average winter conditions.



   (D)   Electrical standards.



      (1)   Wiring.  Every dwelling shall be wired for electric
lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at
least two floor or wall type electrical convenience receptacles, connected in
such manner as determined by the State Electrical Code. There shall be
installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room
at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. In the
event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room,
then each habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall type
electric convenience receptacles.



      (2)   Hall lights.  Every public hall and stairway in every
multiple dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times
when natural light is not sufficient.



      (3)   Maintenance.  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and
wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being
used, and installed in accordance with the State Electrical Code.



   (E)   Ventilation standards.



      (1)   Generally.  Every habitable room shall have at least
one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total
window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of
the floor area of the room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures
face a window of any room and the light obstructions are located less than
five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, the window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and
shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in the top
of a room, the total window area of the skylight shall equal at least 15% of
the total floor area of the room.



      (2)   Habitable rooms.  Every habitable room shall have at
least one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or other device as
will adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum, window area
size or minimum skylight type window size as required, or shall have other
approved equivalent ventilation.



      (3)   Bathroom and water closet room.  Every bathroom
equipped with more than one water closet compartment, flush urinal, lavatory
basin and bathtub or shower shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirements for habitable rooms only.



   (F)   Space, use and location standards.



      (1)   Room sizes.  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least
the minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the State
Building Code. (Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room
area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling may count for
not more than 10% of the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any
part of any room where the ceiling height is less than four and one-half feet
shall not be considered as a part of the floor area in computing the total
area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.) Every dwelling
unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the
first occupant, at least 100 square feet of additional habitable area for
each of the next three occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional
habitable floor area for each additional occupant. In every dwelling unit and
in every rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at
least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and
over, and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12
years of age.



      (2)   Ceiling height.  At least one-half of the floor area of
every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet
and six inches.



      (3)   Cellar.  No cellar shall be used for living purposes
unless:



         (a)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;



         (b)   The total window area, total openable window area
and ceiling height are equal to those required for a habitable room; and



         (c)   The required minimum window area of every
habitable room is entirely above the grade adjoining the window area, except
where the windows face a stairwell, window well or accessory.



   (G)   Safe and sanitary maintenance standards.



      (1)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs.  Every foundation
wall, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight and
rodent-proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be
capable of affording privacy; shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall
shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the
entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.



      (2)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings.  Every floor,
interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent-proof; shall be kept
in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.



      (3)   Windows and doors.  Every window, exterior door,
basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight,
watertight and rodent-proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and
good repair.



      (4)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances.  Every inside and
outside stair, porch and any appurtenances thereto shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed
thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.



      (5)   Bathroom and kitchen floors.  Every bathroom and
kitchen floor surface and water closet compartment floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so
as to permit the floor to be easily kept in sound condition and good repair.



      (6)   Supplied facilities.  Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this subchapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



      (7)   Drainage.  Every yard shall be properly graded so as to
obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water.



      (8)   Smoke detector systems.  Every dwelling unit shall be
provided with an approved, listed smoke detector installed in accordance with
the manufacturer’s recommendations and listing. When activated, the
detector shall provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in
accordance with and meet the requirements of UL 217, Single and Multiple
Station Smoke Detectors.



   (H)   Insect, rodent and infestation control standards.



      (1)   Screens.  For protection against mosquitoes, flies and
other insects every dwelling shall have:



         (a)   Supplied and installed screens on every door
opening leading directly from the dwelling to outdoor space; except that
sliding doors, doors with self-closing devices, doors on mobile homes with
self-closing devices and doors that open into rooms of living spaces that are
artificially ventilated or air conditioned are exempt from this provision; and



         (b)   Supplied and installed screens on every window or
other device with an opening to outdoor space, except that this requirement
shall not apply for any room or rooms of a dwelling that are ventilated year
round with an operable and installed heating and air conditioning system.



      (2)   Rodent control.  Every basement or cellar window used
or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens
installed or any other approved device as will effectively prevent their
entrance.



      (3)   Infestation.  Every dwelling shall be maintained in a
manner to be free of any infestation of insects, rodents or other pests.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any
dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or
more dwelling units, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.



      (4)   Rubbish storage and disposal.  Every dwelling shall be
supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as
required by town ordinances, and the owner, operator or agent in control of
the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.



      (5)   Garbage storage and disposal.  Every dwelling shall be
supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate
mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling
unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the Inspector, in the
structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved
outside garbage container as required by town ordinances.



   (I)   Rooming house standards.  All of the provisions of this
subchapter, and all of the minimum standards and requirements of this
subchapter, shall be applicable to rooming houses and to every person who
operates a rooming house or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy any
rooming unit in any rooming house, except as provided in the following
divisions (I)(1) through (4).



      (1)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities.  At
least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly
connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house
wherever the facilities are shared. All these facilities shall be located
within the residence building served, shall be directly accessible from a
common hall or passageway and shall not be more than one story removed from
any of the persons sharing the facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub
or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Required
facilities shall not be located in a cellar.



      (2)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes.  Every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of
floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



      (3)   Sanitary conditions.  The operator of every rooming
house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors
and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the
rooming house; and shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance
of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which
the rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.



      (4)   Sanitary facilities.  Every water closet, flush urinal
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by division (I)(1) of this
section shall be located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms
which afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are
accessible from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or
through any other room therein.



   (J)   Full compliance.  Full compliance with a standard means that
if any part of the stated standard is not complied with by a particular
dwelling, then that dwelling has failed to fully comply with the enumerated
standard. For example, in regard to standard (B)(1), if all standards are met
in a dwelling except that a supply of hot water is not provided, then the
dwelling fails to fully comply with standard (B)(1).



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.23  DWELLINGS NOT IN COMPLIANCE BUT NOT UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.



   (A)   Failure to comply with fewer than seven standards. In any case
where the Housing Inspector determines that a dwelling fails to fully comply
with one or more but less than seven of the above (§ 150.22) enumerated
standards of dwelling fitness, the dwelling shall not be found to be unfit
for human habitation and shall not be subject to the procedures and remedies
as provided for in this subchapter for dwellings unfit for human habitation.
Each failure of noncompliance, however, shall constitute a violation of the
terms of this subchapter and shall subject the violator to the penalties and
enforcement procedures, civil or criminal or both, as set forth in § 162 of
the Town Zoning Ordinance.



      (1)   In making the determination as described in this
section, the Housing Inspector shall not be required to make notice and hold
the hearing as called for in § 150.20, but the Housing Inspector may do so
if the determination of the severity and classification of dwelling fitness
is not clear to the Housing Inspector upon preliminary investigation.



      (2)   If required, the assistance and professional opinion of
the Surry or Wilkes County Building Inspections Department will be solicited.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing; order. 



      (1)   If, after notice and hearing, the Housing Inspector
determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human
habitation in accordance with the standards set forth above, he or she shall
state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of that determination
and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order:



         (a)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the
dwelling can be made at a cost of less than 50% of the value of the dwelling,
requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve
the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and
close the dwelling as a human habitation, based upon the Housing
Inspector’s standards for closing dwellings; or



         (b)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the
dwelling cannot be made at a cost of less than 50% of the value of the
dwelling, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to
repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human
habitation or to remove or demolish the dwelling.



      (2)   If, after notice and hearing, the Housing Inspector
determines that the dwelling under consideration is not unfit for human
habitation but is not in full compliance with one or more standards of
dwelling fitness as set forth above, he or she may proceed with the
enforcement procedures of this code, civil or criminal or both.



   (C)   Notification.  Whenever a determination is made pursuant to
this section that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or
demolished, under the provisions of the section, notice of the order shall be
given by first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or
restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request
for these notices. A minimum period of time not to exceed 90 days from the
mailing of the notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action
of the Inspector, to allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate
with the owner to make repairs, lease or purchase the property for the
purpose of providing affordable housing. The Inspector shall certify the
mailing of the notices, and the certifications shall be conclusive in the
absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for
the notices may raise the issue of failure to mail the notices, and the sole
remedy shall be an order requiring the Inspector to wait 90 days before
causing removal or demolition.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.24  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.



   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the Housing Inspector may:



      (1)   Cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved
or to be vacated and closed; or



      (2)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling
a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter,
improve or remove or demolish the dwelling, the Housing Inspector may:



      (1)   Cause the dwelling to be vacated and removed or
demolished; or



      (2)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling
a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   The duties of the Housing Inspector set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) above shall not be exercised until the Town Commissioners shall have
by ordinance ordered the Housing Inspector to proceed to effectuate the
purpose of this subchapter with respect to the particular property or
properties which the Housing Inspector shall have found to be unfit for human
habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the
ordinance. No ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling
until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it
into conformity with the Housing Code. For the purposes of this division (C),
a period of 90 days following the date of the Housing Inspector’s order
shall constitute a reasonable opportunity. The ordinance shall be recorded in
the office of the Register of Deeds in the county wherein the property or
properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner
in the grantor index.



   (D)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the
Housing Inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which the
cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be
collected as the lien for special assessment provided in G.S. Chapter 160A,
Article 10. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Housing
Inspector, he or she shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any
personal property, fixture or appurtenances found in or attached to the
dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the
removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
Superior Court by the Housing Inspector, shall be secured in a manner
directed by the Court, and shall be disbursed by the Court to the persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order of the decree of the Court.



   (E)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
dwelling, the Housing Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the
town to remove the occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in
the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint
naming as parties-defendant any persons occupying the dwelling. The Clerk of
Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before
a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from
the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and
complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be
returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been
duly served, and if at the hearing the Housing Inspector produces the
certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the Town Commissioners pursuant to
division (C) above authorizing the Housing Inspector to proceed to vacate the
occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the
premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering
that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the
judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. § 42-30. An appeal from
any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in
G.S. § 7A-228, and the execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided
in G.S. § 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a
tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment
proceeding pursuant to this division (E) unless the occupant was served with
notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding
that the Town Commission has ordered the Housing Inspector to proceed to
exercise his or her duties under divisions (A), (B) and (C) of this section
to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling.



   (F)   If the Town Commissioners shall have adopted an ordinance, or
the Housing Inspector shall have issued an order, ordering a dwelling to be
repaired or vacated and closed, as provided in § 150.23(A), and if the owner
has vacated and closed the dwelling and kept the dwelling vacated and closed
for a period of one year pursuant to the ordinance or order, then if the Town
Commissioners shall find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose
to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human
habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its vacated and
closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, morals and welfare of
the town, in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a
fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would
attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to
blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render
unavailable property and a dwelling which might otherwise have been made
available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in
the town; then in those circumstances, the Town Commissioners may, after the
expiration of the one-year period, enact an ordinance and serve the ordinance
on the owner, setting forth the following:



      (1)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to
render it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of
the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the
owner either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days; or



      (2)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to
render it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50%
of the then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the
owner to demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.



   (D)   The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and
shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If
the owner fails to comply with this subchapter, the Housing Inspector shall
effect the purpose of this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.25  SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Housing Inspector pursuant
to an ordinance adopted under this subchapter, except those being prosecuted
under § 162 of the Zoning Ordinance, shall be served upon persons either
personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by
registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be
sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or
certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned
by the post office within ten days after the mailing. If regular mail is
used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected.



   (B)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons
are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Housing Inspector in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Housing Inspector makes an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the
unknown owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper
having general circulation in the town at least once no later than the time
at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this
subchapter. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby
affected.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.26  APPEALS.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment is hereby appointed as the Housing
Appeals Board to which appeals from any decision or order of the Housing
Inspector may be taken. Except where this subchapter provides for different
rules or procedures, the Board of Adjustment acting as the Housing Appeals
Board shall follow its rules of procedure, which may be amended to provide
specifically for this function. (Only the in-town, Board of Adjustment
members are permitted to vote on minimum housing appeals.)



   (B)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Housing Inspector
may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or
commission of the town. Any appeal from the Housing Inspector shall be taken
within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order by
filing with the Housing Inspector and with the Board a notice of appeal which
shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of
any notice of appeal, the Housing Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed
from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Housing Inspector
refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her
decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is
from a decision of the Housing Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do
any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until
the hearing by the Board, unless the Housing Inspector certifies to the
Board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him or her, that because of
facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the
appellant), a suspension of his or her requirement would cause imminent peril
to life or property. In that case the requirement shall not be suspended
except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon
not less than one day’s written notice to the Housing Inspector, by the
Board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to division (E) of
this section.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing appeals, shall give due notice to the parties and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision and order that
in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have
all the powers of the Housing Inspector, but the concurring vote of
four-fifths of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or
modify any decision or order of the Housing Inspector. The Board shall have
power also in passing upon appeals, when practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of the
chapter, to adapt the application of the chapter to the necessities of the
case to the end that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public
safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.



   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



   (E)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Housing
Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board may petition the Superior Court
for an injunction, restraining the Housing Inspector from carrying out the
order or decision and the Court may, upon the petition, issue a temporary
injunction restraining the Housing Inspector pending a final disposition of
the cause. The petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the
order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the Court on a
petition within 20 days, and shall be given preference over other matters on
the Court’s calendar. The Court shall hear and determine the issues raised
and shall enter the final order or decree as law and justice may require. It
shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a
temporary injunction under this division.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.27  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary
proceedings or otherwise nor shall enforcement of one remedy provided herein
prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in
other ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for herein,
any violation of the terms of this subchapter shall subject the violator to
the penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both, as set forth in
§ 162, penalties, of the Town Zoning Ordinance.



   (B)   No dwelling shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or
changed in occupancy without a certificate of occupancy. In any case where
the Housing Inspector, after notice and hearing as required herein, finds
that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he or she
shall withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the dwelling or
dwelling unit until a time that he or she determines that it is fit for human
habitation. In addition, in any case where the Housing Inspector, after
preliminary investigation as provided for herein, concludes, based upon that
investigation, that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation
and believes that the occupancy of the dwelling or dwelling unit could cause
imminent peril to life or property from fire or other hazards, he or she
shall withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the dwelling or
dwelling unit until a time that he or she determines that it is fit for human
habitation.



   (C)   If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this subchapter or of any valid
order or decision of the Housing Inspector or Board made pursuant to any
ordinance or code adopted under authority of this subchapter, the Housing
Inspector may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or occupancy, to
restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the
dwellings, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the
premises of the dwelling.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.28  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   Notwithstanding any express provision of this subchapter, should the
requirements set forth herein conflict with the provisions of the State
Building Codes in effect at the time of the construction of the structure, or
as are currently in effect in this state, the “less” restrictive
provisions shall apply to the alleged violation; however, the current
provisions of the State Building Codes shall control and serve as the
standard for all repairs, additions and re-modeling work to the structure in
question. Additionally, in the event any provision, standard or requirement
of this subchapter is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other
ordinance or code of the town, the provision which establishes the higher
standard or more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the residents of the town’s jurisdiction shall
prevail.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



§ 150.29  VIOLATIONS.



   In addition to the conditions, acts or failures to act that constitute
violations specified in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner
of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter
or improve the same, or to vacate and close or vacate and remove or demolish
the same, upon order of the Inspector duly made and served as herein
provided, within the time specified in the order. It shall be unlawful for
the owner of any dwelling, with respect to which an order has been issued
pursuant to § 150.23, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after
the time prescribed in the order for its repair, alteration or improvement or
its vacation and closing, or vacation and removal or demolition.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.30  REPEAL AND REENACTMENT OF EXISTING HOUSING CODE.



   The rewriting of this subchapter in part carries forth by reenactment
some of the provisions of the existing Housing Code of the town and it is not
intended to repeal but rather to reenact and continue in force the existing
provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have been accrued are
preserved and may be enforced. All provisions of the Housing Code which are
not reenacted herein are hereby repealed. All suits at law or in equity
and/or all prosecutions resulting from the violation of the Housing Code in
effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of this state or of the
United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of
this subchapter, but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if
this subchapter had not been adopted; and any and all violations of the
existing chapter, prosecutions for which have not been instituted may be
filed and prosecuted; and nothing in this subchapter shall be so construed as
to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending and/or
which may have been instituted or prosecuted.



(Ord. eff. 6-14-2010)



REPAIR, CLOSING OR DEMOLITION OF ABANDONED STRUCTURES



§ 150.45  FINDING INTENT. 



   It is hereby found that there exists within the town one or more
abandoned structures which the Board of Commissioners of the town finds to be
hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the town due
to the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard,
dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children, or frequent use by
vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities. Therefore,
pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. § 160A-441, it is the intent of
this subchapter to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of the
abandoned structures in accordance with the same provisions and procedures as
are set forth by law for the repair, closing or demolition of dwellings unfit
for human habitation.



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984)



§ 150.46  DUTIES OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby designated as the town
officer to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer:



      (1)   To locate abandoned structures within the town and
determine which structures are in violation of this subchapter;



      (2)   To take any action pursuant to this subchapter as may be
necessary to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of the structure;



      (3)   To keep an accurate record of all enforcement
proceedings begun pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter; and



      (4)   To perform any other duties as may be prescribed herein
or assigned to him or her by the Board of Commissioners of the town.



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984; Ord. eff. 5-1-1989)



§ 150.47  POWERS OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. 



   The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to exercise any powers as
may be necessary to carry out the intent and the provisions of this
subchapter, including the following powers, in addition to others herein
granted:



   (A)   To investigate the condition of buildings within the town in
order to determine which structures are abandoned and in violation of this
subchapter;



   (B)   To enter upon premises for purpose of making inspections;



   (C)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence; and



   (D)   To designate other officers, agents and employees of the town
as he or she deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984; Ord. eff. 5-1-1989)



§ 150.48  STANDARDS FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Every abandoned structure within the town shall be deemed in
violation of this subchapter whenever the structure constitutes a hazard to
the health, safety or welfare of the town citizens as a result of:



      (1)   The attraction of insects or rodents;



      (2)   Conditions creating a fire hazard;



      (3)   Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children;
or



      (4)   Frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities.



   (B)   In making the preliminary determination of whether or not an
abandoned structure is in violation of this subchapter, the Code Enforcement
Officer may, by way of illustration and not limitation, consider the presence
or absence of the following conditions:



      (1)   Holes or cracks in the structure’s floors, walls,
ceilings or roof which might attract or admit rodents and insects, or become
breeding places for rodents and insects;



      (2)   The collection of garbage or rubbish in or near the
structure which might attract rodents and insects, or become breeding places
for rodents and insects;



      (3)   Violations of the State Building Code, the State
Electrical Code or the Fire Prevention Code which constitute a fire hazard in
the structure;



      (4)   The collection of garbage, rubbish or combustible
material which constitutes a fire hazard in the structure;



      (5)   The use of the structure or nearby grounds or facilities
by children as a play area;



      (6)   Violations of the State Building Code which might result
in danger to children using the structure or nearby grounds or facilities as
a play area; and



      (7)   Repeated use of the structure by transients and
vagrants, in the absence of sanitary facilities, for living, sleeping,
cooking or eating.



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984; Ord. eff. 5-1-1989)



§ 150.49  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a
petition is filed with the Code Enforcement Officer by at least five
residents of the town charging that any structure exists in violation of this
subchapter or whenever it appears to the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
inspection, that any structure exists in violation hereof, he or she shall,
if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for those charges,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in the
structure a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Code Enforcement Officer at a place therein
fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint.  The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file
an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of the hearing
shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition
relating to the structure.  Any person desiring to do so may attend the
hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard.  The rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Code Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing.  After the notice and hearing, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall state in writing his or her determination
whether the structure violates this subchapter. If the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that the structure is in violation, he or she shall state
in writing his or her findings of fact to support that determination, and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing
and requiring the owner to either repair, alter and improve the structure or
else remove or demolish the same within a specified period of time not to
exceed 90 days.



   (C)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   In personam remedy.  If the owner of any structure
shall fail to comply with an order of the Code Enforcement Officer within the
time specified therein, the Code Enforcement Officer may submit to the Board
of Commissioners of the town at its next regular meeting a resolution
directing the Town Attorney to petition the superior court for an order
directing the owner to comply with the order of the Code Enforcement Officer,
as authorized by G.S. § 160A-446(g).



      (2)   In rem remedy.  After failure of an owner of a
structure to comply with an order of the Code Enforcement Officer within the
time specified therein, if injunctive relief has not been sought or has not
been granted as provided in the preceding division (C)(1), the Code
Enforcement Officer shall submit to the Board of Commissioners of the town an
ordinance ordering the Code Enforcement Officer to cause the structure to be
removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the Code
Enforcement Officer, and pending the removal or demolition, to placard the
structure as provided by G.S. § 160A-443.



   (D)   Petition to Superior Court by owner.  Any person aggrieved by
an order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right, within
30 days after issuance of the order, to petition the Superior Court for a
temporary injunction restraining the Code Enforcement Officer pending a final
disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984; Ord. eff. 5-1-1989)



§ 150.50  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS. 



   Complaints or orders issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail, but
if the whereabouts of the persons are unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, the Code Enforcement Officer shall make an affidavit to that
effect, and the serving of the complaint or order upon the person may be made
by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the town at least
once, no later than the time at which personal service is required under §
150.49. Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected
by the complaint or order.



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984; Ord. eff. 5-1-1989)



§ 150.51  IN REM ACTION BY CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PLACARDING. 



   (A)   After failure of the owner of a structure to comply with an
order of the Code Enforcement Officer issued pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter, and upon adoption by the Board of Commissioners of the town
of an ordinance authorizing and directing him or her to do so, as provided by
G.S. § 160A-443(5), the Code Enforcement Officer shall proceed to cause the
structure either to be repaired or else removed or demolished, as directed by
the ordinance of the Board of Commissioners of the town and shall cause to be
posted on the main entrance of the structure a placard prohibiting the use or
occupation of the structure. Use or occupation of a building so posted shall
constitute a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds of Surry County, and shall be indexed in the name of the property
owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160A-443(5).



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984; Ord. eff. 5-1-1989)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.52  COSTS OF LIEN ON PREMISES. 



   As provided by G.S. § 160A-446(6), the amount of the cost of any
removal or demolition caused to be made or done by the Code Enforcement
Officer pursuant to this subchapter shall be a lien against the real property
upon which the cost was incurred.  The lien shall be filed, have the same
priority, and be enforced and the costs collected as provided by G.S. Chapter
160A, Article 10.



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984; Ord. eff. 5-1-1989)



§ 150.53  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES. 



   Neither this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this subchapter by criminal process, and the enforcement of any
remedy provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of other remedy or
remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984)



§ 150.54  ADOPTION DATE.



   This subchapter was adopted on April 24, 1984.



(Ord. eff. 4-24-1984)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
150.01 shall upon conviction be guilty of misdemeanor and shall be punished
in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. eff. 10-12-1970; Ord. eff. 6-18-1971)



CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD DAMAGE PROTECTION



Section




Administrative Provisions




   151.001   Statutory authorization



   151.002   Findings of fact



   151.003   Statement of purpose



   151.004   Objectives



   151.005   Definitions




General Provisions




   151.020   Lands to which this chapter applies



   151.021   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas



   151.022   Establishment of floodplain development permit



   151.023   Compliance



   151.024   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151.025   Interpretation



   151.026   Warning and disclaimer of liability




Administration




   151.040   Designation of Floodplain Administrator



   151.041   Floodplain development application, permit and
certification requirements



   151.042   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator



   151.043   Corrective procedures



   151.044   Variance procedures




Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction




   151.060   General standards



   151.061   Specific standards



   151.062   Standards for floodplains without established base flood
elevations



   151.063   Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood
elevations, but without established floodways or non-encroachment areas



   151.064   Floodways and non-encroachment areas




Legal Status Provisions




   151.080   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood
damage prevention ordinance



   151.081   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits



 



   151.999   Penalty



ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The legislature of this state has in G.S. Chapter 143, Article
21, Part 6; G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Parts 3, 5 and 8; and G.S. Chapter
160A, Article 8, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the town does ordain
as follows in this chapter.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.002  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are
subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life, property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood-prone areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or other hazards.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.003  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood-prone areas, by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or that result in damaging
increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
that serve those uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels
and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and all other development
that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.004  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are to:



   (A)   Protect human life, safety and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e.,
water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets and
bridges) that are located in flood-prone areas;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas; and



   (G)   Ensure that potential home buyers are aware that property is
in a special flood hazard area.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.005  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage, and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE).  A structure located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure, and the use of which
is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and
storage sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay sheds
and the like qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING).  An extension or increase in the
floor area or height of a building or structure.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated Zone AO on a community’s
flood insurance rate map (FIRM), with base flood depths determined to be from
one to three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  See definition of SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
AREA (SFHA).



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  A determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When
the BFE has not been provided in a SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA,it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state or other
source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies.  This elevation, when
combined with the FREEBOARD, establishes the REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION
ELEVATION.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  See definition of STRUCTURE.



   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY.  A building, portion of a building, or
exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.



   DISPOSAL.  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge,
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste
into or on any land or water so that the solid waste, or any constituent part
of the solid waste, may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including groundwaters.



   ELEVATED BUILDING.  A non-basement building that has its lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings or columns.



   ENCROACHMENT.  The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION.  A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the
special flood hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official
map is a supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM).



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of
the special flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE.  The insurance coverage provided under the National
Flood Insurance Program.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are
delineated.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood insurance risk zones and other flood data in a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study
report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and
floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.



   FLOOD-PRONE AREA.  See definition of FLOODPLAIN.



   FLOOD ZONE.  A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map
or flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in
the area.



   FLOODPLAIN.  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.  The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances and other applications of police power. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
that provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.



   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS.  An engineering analysis of the impact
that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the
floodway boundaries and base flood elevations. The evaluation shall be
prepared by a qualified, North Carolina-licensed engineer, using standard
engineering methods and models.



   FREEBOARD.  The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to
account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood
elevation (BFE) plus the  FREEBOARD establishes the REGULATORY FLOOD
PROTECTION ELEVATION.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility that cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water,
limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading
of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding or ship repair. The term does not
include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Ch. 130A,
Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery or disposal of hazardous waste.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG).  The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls
of the structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
landmarks in communities with a CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG) PROGRAM; or



      (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance
of a historic district designated by a community with a CERTIFIED LOCAL
GOVERNMENT (CLG) PROGRAM.  CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG) PROGRAMS are
approved by the U.S. Department of the Interior, in cooperation with the
North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic
Preservation Officer, as having met the requirements of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966, as amended in 1980.



   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG).  The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or
patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after
completion of the building.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that
the enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MARKET VALUE.  The building value, not including the land value and
that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot.  MARKET
VALUE may be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost
depreciated by age of building and quality of construction (actual cash
value), or adjusted assessed values.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a
reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which
base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each
FIRM panel to determine datum used.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to the structures.



   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA.  The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing by more than one foot the water
surface elevation as designated in the flood insurance study report.



   POST-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the START OF
CONSTRUCTION occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.



   PRE-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the START OF
CONSTRUCTION occurred before the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.



   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND.  At least 51% of the actual cash value of
the structure is above ground.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AND/OR NUISANCE. Anything injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or which unlawfully obstructs the



free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or
river, bay, stream, canal or basin.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV).  A vehicle that is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less, when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling,
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   REFERENCE LEVEL.  The top of the lowest floor for structures within
the special flood hazard areas designated as Zone AE, A, A99 or AO.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  The BASE FLOOD ELEVATION plus
the FREEBOARD.  In SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS where base flood elevations
(BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE. In SPECIAL
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS where base no BFE has been established, this elevation
shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION.  To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing
federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.



   SALVAGE YARD.  Any non-residential property used for the storage,
collection and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.



   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.  Any facility involved in the disposal
of solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).



   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any
place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary
landfill or any other method.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  The land in the floodplain subject
to a 1% or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in
§ 151.021.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles,
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas, liquid or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
during any one-year period, whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by
a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the
cost of repairs at the time of each flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period, for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the START OF CONSTRUCTION of the
improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred SUBSTANTIAL
DAMAGE, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:



      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or
community health, sanitary or safety code specifications that have been
identified by the community code enforcement official, and that are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure, and the alteration is approved by a variance issued
pursuant to § 151.044.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required in §§ 151.040 et
seq. and §§ 151.060 et seq. is presumed to be in VIOLATION until the time
that that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE).  The height, in relation to mean sea
level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.020  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extraterritorial jurisdictions (ETJs) of the town.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.021  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the State of North
Carolina and FEMA in its FIS, dated August 18, 2009, for Surry County, and
associated FIRM panels (4941L, 4942K, 4943J, 4951K, 4952J, 4953J, 4961K and
4962K), including any digital data developed as part of the flood insurance
study, which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. Future revisions to the FIS and FIRM panels that do not change flood
hazard data within the jurisdictional authority of the town are also adopted
by reference and declared a part of this chapter. Subsequent revisions to the
FIRM should be adopted within 12 months



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.022  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas as determined in § 151.021.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.023  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.024  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.025  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.026  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within those
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not
create liability on the part of the town, or by any officer or employee
thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.040  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Planning Director or designee, hereinafter referred to as the
“Floodplain Administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.041  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain
development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any
development activities located within special flood hazard areas. The
following items shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply
for a floodplain development permit:



      (1)   A plot plan, drawn to scale, which shall include but
shall not be limited to the following specific details of the proposed
floodplain development:



         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions and elevations of
the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures,
utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas,
drainage facilities and other development;



         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as
delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in § 151.021, or a
statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area;



         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed
development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined
in § 151.021;



         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in § 151.021;



         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE), where provided, as
set forth in § 151.021, § 151.042 or § 151.062;



         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and



         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered
land surveyor or professional engineer.



      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all
development within a special flood hazard area, including but not limited to:



         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;



         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and



         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.



      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form
81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise
and maintenance of floodproofing measures;



      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include
details of the proposed foundation system, to ensure all provisions of this
chapter are met. These details include but are not limited to:



         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable
(i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation,
open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and



         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with § 151.061(D)(3), when
solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE and A1-30.



      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest
floor;



      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage;



      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal
permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been
received;



      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles
and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure the provisions of §
151.061(F) and (G) of this chapter are met; and



      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects
of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse,
and the effects on properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map
(if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.



   (B)   Permit requirements.  The floodplain development permit shall
include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit;



      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the
proposed development per available data specified in § 151.021;



      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the reference level and all attendant utilities;



      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for
the protection of all public utilities;



      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;



      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development
shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse,
as applicable; and



      (7)   The flood opening requirements, if in Zone A, AO, AE or
A1-30.



   (C)   Certification requirements.



      (1)   Elevation certificates.



         (a)   An elevation certificate is required prior to the
actual start of any new construction.  It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level.  The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. 
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
prior to the beginning of construction.  Failure to submit the certification
or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit.



         (b)   A final as-built elevation certificate is required
after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately, and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance
of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.  If non-residential
floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting
data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan, is
required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and
all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and
the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval.  Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance
of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE
or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height
above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required per §
151.061(C)(2).



      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a
professional engineer’s certified report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse, and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the
location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, shall all be
submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit.



      (5)   Certification exemptions.  The following structures, if
located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the
elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in divisions
(C)(1) and (2) above:



         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
151.061(F)(1);



         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
151.061(G); and



         (c)   Accessory structures with footprints of less than
150 square feet meeting requirements of § 151.061(H).



   (D)   Determinations for existing buildings and structures.  For
applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures,
including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of
occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements,
repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such
buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with
the Building Official, shall:



      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to
obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent
appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of
the proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or
structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any
repairs are made;



      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to
repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs
of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the
building or structure;



      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and



      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, and that
compliance with the flood-resistant construction requirements of the State
Building Code and this chapter is required.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.042  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:



   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue
permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;



   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard
areas to assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been
received, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334;



   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Public
Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the National
Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of this notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);



   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
maintained;



   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment
areas, unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
151.064 are met;



   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) of all attendant utilities of all new or
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of §
151.041(C);



   (G)   Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the new or substantially improved structures and all utilities have
been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of § 151.041(C);



   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities, in accordance with the provisions of § 151.041(C);



   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure,
obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 151.041(C) and 151.061(B);



   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways or non-encroachment
areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this subchapter;



   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 151.021, obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any BFE data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data
available from a federal, state or other source, including data developed
pursuant to § 151.062(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this
chapter;



   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided, but no
floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with
the provisions of § 151.021, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
floodway data and/or non-encroachment area data available from a federal,
state or other source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;



   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a
structure or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood
hazard area is above the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property
owner of the option to apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from
FEMA.  Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain
development permit file;



   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this chapter and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy
Act of 1974, as amended;



   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work
pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain
Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary
to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the
local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the
Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action;



   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or
part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in
violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to
be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed
to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific
work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor;



   (Q)   Revocation of floodplain development permits as required. The
Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain
development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the
reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans or specifications; for refusal
or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for
false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any
floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable
state or local law may also be revoked;



   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood hazard
areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator
and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;



   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of § 151.043;



   (T)   Review, provide input and make recommendations for variance
requests.



   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not be
limited to, the FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies
adopted in accordance with the provisions of § 151.021, including any
revisions thereto, including letters of map change, issued by FEMA.  Notify
state and FEMA of mapping needs.



   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including
letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision
(LOMRs).



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.043  CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Violations to be corrected.  When the Floodplain
Administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall
be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the
violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the
violations of law cited in the notification.



   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action.  If
the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective
action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by
personal service, stating that:



      (1)   The building or property is in violation of the
floodplain management regulations;



      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain
Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after
the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel, and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to
the matter; and



      (3)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may
issue an order to alter, vacate or demolish the building; or to remove fill
as applicable.



   (C)   Order to take corrective action.  If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall
find that the building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or
she shall make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to
remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than 60
calendar days, nor more than 150 calendar days. Where the Floodplain
Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property,
he or she may order that corrective action be taken in a lesser period as may
be feasible.



   (D)   Appeal.  Any owner who has received an order to take
corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing body,
by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the
Clerk, within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence
of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The
local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may
affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



   (E)   Failure to comply with order.  If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no
appeal has been made, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.044  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment, as established by the town,
hereinafter referred to as the “Appeal Board,” shall hear and decide
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal the decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.



   (C)   Variances may be issued for:



      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures,
upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure, and
that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure;



      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities, if determined to meet
the definition as stated in § 151.005, provided the provisions of divisions
(I)(2),(3) and (5) of this section have been satisfied, and such facilities
are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood
and create no additional threats to public safety; or



      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the
requirements of this section.



   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of that damage on the individual
owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location
as a functionally dependent facility, as defined in § 151.005, where
applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the floodwaters, and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets
and bridges.



   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.



   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach any conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter.



   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation
(BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built, and that such
construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage.  Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance.



   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request.



   (I)   Conditions for variances:



      (1)   Variances may not be issued when the variance will make
the structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws, regulations
or ordinances;



      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway or non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief;



      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development
permit approval.



      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities
or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards and chemical
storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas, provided
that all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community;



      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the
special flood hazard area;



      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or
floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection level;



      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal,
state and local laws; and



      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the State
Department of Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least 30
days prior to granting the variance.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 151.060  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are
required:



   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure;



   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;



   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages;



   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
include but are not limited to HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes,
utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters and electric outlets/switches;



   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;



   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems, and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters;



   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
structure in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall meet the
requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter;



   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction or replacement of a building or structure existing on the
effective date of this chapter, and located totally or partially within the
floodway, non-encroachment area or stream setback; provided there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area or stream setback; and provided that the
repair, reconstruction or replacement meets all of the other requirements of
this chapter;



   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards and chemical storage facilities shall
not be permitted, except by variance as specified in § 151.044(J). A
structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use,
or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment
facility, may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure
or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood
protection elevation, and certified according to § 151.041(C);



   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;



   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical,
and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage;



   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;



   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals
shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies
for which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood
hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new
construction and substantial improvements.



   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or
in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the
provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest
base flood elevation (BFE) shall apply.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.061  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data
has been provided, as set forth in § 151.021 or § 151.062, the following
provisions, in addition to the provisions of § 151.060, are required.



   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 151.005.



   (B)   Nonresidential construction.  New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than
the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 151.005.
Structures located in A, AE, AO and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed to the
regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation, provided that all
areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight,
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy.  A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this
division are satisfied.  Such certification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator as set forth in § 151.041(C), along with the
operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan.



   (C)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   New or replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated
so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in § 151.005.



      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement, either by a certified engineered foundation system, or in
accordance with the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. §
143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of
the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall
be supported by reinforced piers or an engineered foundation. When the
elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering
certification is required.



      (3)   All enclosures or skirting shall be in accordance with
division (D) below.



      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of
all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas.
This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator
and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.



   (D)   Elevated buildings. A fully enclosed area, of new construction
and substantially improved structures, that is below the lowest floor:



      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but
shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access or limited
storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access
to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of
vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard
exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The
interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned
into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood-resistant
materials at least to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and



      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE and A1-30, flood
openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls, by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the
openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect, or
meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides
of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be
at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;



         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area,
each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to
automatically enter and exit;



         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be
no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade;



         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not
considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require
flood openings.  Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural
status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined
above.



   (E)   Additions/improvements.



      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures,
when the addition and/or improvements, in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure, are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages, and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure; or



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial
improvement, with no modifications to the existing structure other than a
standard door in the common wall, shall require only the addition to comply
with the standards for new construction.



      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures,
when the addition and/or improvements, in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure, are:



         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; or



         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing
structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards
for new construction.



      (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking
place during a one-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the improvement or
repair is started, must comply with the standards for new construction. For
each building or structure, the one-year period begins on the date of the
first improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter. If the structure has sustained substantial
damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The requirement does not, however, include
either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required
to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by
the Building Official, and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe
living conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as a historic structure.



   (F)   Recreational vehicles.



      (1)   Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles placed
temporarily in flood hazard areas shall;



         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or



         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A
recreational vehicle or park model is READY FOR HIGHWAY USE, if it is on its
wheels or its jacking system is attached to the site only by quick,
disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and it has no permanent
attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches.



      (2)   Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that do not
meet the limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements
for new construction,



   (G)   Temporary nonresidential structures.  Prior to the issuance
of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant
must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of the
structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of
flood-warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in
writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:



      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will
be permitted.  Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to
one year;



      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure
will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood-warning notification);



      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with
the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and



      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location
outside the special flood hazard area to which the temporary structure will
be moved.



   (H)   Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds,
detached garages and the like) are to be placed within a special flood hazard
area, the following criteria shall be met:



      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);



      (2)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;



      (3)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential;



      (4)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters;



      (5)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with § 151.060(A);



      (6)   All service facilities, such as electrical and heating
equipment, shall be installed in accordance with § 151.060(D);



      (7)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below the regulatory flood
protection elevation in conformance with division (D)(1) above; and



      (8)   An accessory structure with a footprint of less than 150
square feet, or that is a minimal investment of $3,000 or less, and that
satisfies the criteria outlined above, is not required to meet the elevation
or floodproofing standards of § 151.061(B). Elevation or floodproofing
certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance
with § 151.041(C).



   (I)   Tanks.  When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed
within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:



      (1)   Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the
design flood, including the effects of buoyancy, assuming the tank is empty;



      (2)   Above-ground tanks, elevated.  Above-ground tanks in
flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design
flood elevation, on a supporting structure designed to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood.
Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the
applicable flood hazard area;



      (3)   Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks
that do not meet the elevation requirements of division (B) of this section
shall be permitted in flood hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or
otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions
of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy, assuming the tank is
empty, and the effects of flood-borne debris.



      (4)   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings,
outlets and vents shall be:



         (a)   At or above the design flood elevation or fitted
with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and



         (b)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
during conditions of the design flood.



   (J)   Other development.  Prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of the structure(s) in
the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood-warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted, in writing, to
the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:



      (1)   Fences in regulated floodways and NEAs.  Fences in
regulated floodways and NEAs that have the potential to block the passage of
floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire-mesh fences, shall meet the
limitations of § 151.064.



      (2)   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated
floodways and NEAs.  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways that involve
the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of §
151.064.



      (3)   Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways
and NEAs. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges,
culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians
to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach
into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of § 151.064.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.062  STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD
ELEVATIONS.



   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A
and established in § 151.021, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the
provisions of § 151.060, shall apply:



   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development, shall be permitted within a
distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank, or five times the width of
the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification, with supporting
technical data, by a registered professional engineer is provided,
demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be determined, based on the following criteria:



      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from
other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such
areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and
shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§
151.060 and 151.061.



      (2)   When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from
a federal, state or other source, all new construction and substantial
improvements within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also comply
with the requirements of §§ 151.061 and 151.064.



      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other
development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data, if
development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured
home sites.  Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by
reference in accordance with § 151.021 and utilized in implementing this
chapter.



      (4)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available
from a federal, state or other source as outlined above, the reference level
shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in § 151.005. All other applicable
provisions of § 151.061 shall also apply.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.063  STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS,
BUT WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.



   Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is
provided by FEMA, or is available from another source, but neither floodway
nor non-encroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on
the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all
development within such areas:



   (A)   Standards of §§ 151.060 and 151.061; and



   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is
designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or other development, shall be permitted unless certification,
with supporting technical data, by a registered professional engineer is
provided, demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.064  FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.



   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are
located within the special flood hazard areas established in § 151.021. The
floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the
velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and
potential projectiles.



   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
§§ 151.060 and 151.061, shall apply to all development within these areas:



      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments, shall be permitted unless:



         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice, and presented to the
Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit;
or



         (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has
been approved by FEMA.  A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be
obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment.



      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this
chapter;



      (3)   Manufactured homes may be permitted, provided the
following provisions are met:



         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
151.061(C); and



         (b)   The no encroachment standard of division (B)(1)
above.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS



§ 151.080  EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.



   (A)   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of
the provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted October 6,
2003, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal, but rather to
reenact and continue to enforce without interruption such existing
provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder
are reserved and may be enforced.  The enactment of this chapter shall not
affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending.  All provisions
of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the town enacted on October 6,
2003, as amended, that are not reenacted herein are repealed.



   (B)   Municipal: The date of the initial Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance for Surrey County is October 29, 1979.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.081  EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development, or any part thereof,
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator, or his or her authorized agents, before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under an
outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking any other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. eff. 10-6-2003; Ord. eff. 3-12-2012; Ord. eff. 8-11-2014; Ord. eff.
11-10-2014)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   152.01   Subdivisions; adopted by reference



§ 152.01  SUBDIVISIONS; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The subdivisions regulations for the town are hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in full herein. Copies are available through the town
offices and on the town’s website.



(Ord. eff. 11-3-1997; Ord. eff. 8-11-2003; Ord. eff. 5-8-2006; Ord. eff.
9-14-2009)



CHAPTER 153:  ZONING



Section



   153.01   Zoning regulations; adopted by reference



   153.02   Digital zoning map



§ 153.01  ZONING REGULATIONS; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The zoning regulations of the town are hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in full herein.  Copies are available through town offices and on
the town’s website.



(Ord. eff. 4-25-1958; Ord. 11-15-1962; Ord. eff. 7-14-1966; Ord. eff.
4-8-1970; Ord. eff. 2-3-1975; Ord. eff. 10-3-1977; Ord. eff. 12-5-1977; Ord.
eff. 2-6-1978; Ord. eff. 9-8-1980; Ord. eff. 10-6-1986; Ord. eff. 5-2-1988;
Ord. eff. 5-2-1988; Ord. eff. 10-3-1988; Ord. eff. 2-5-1990; Ord. eff.
3-4-1991; Ord. eff. 4-1-1991; Ord. eff. 10-7-1991; Ord. eff. 12-2-1991; Ord.
eff. 12-7-1992; Ord. eff. 1-1-1993; Ord. eff. - -[1993]; Ord. eff. 5-3-1993;
Ord. eff. 5-3-1993; Ord. eff. 10-1-1993; Ord. eff. 12-6-1993; Ord. eff.
10-2-1995; Ord. eff. 12-4-1995; Ord. eff. 12-4-1995; Ord. eff. 6-3-1996; Ord.
eff. 8-5-1996; Ord. eff. 8-5-1996; Ord. eff. 9-23-1996; Ord. eff. 12-2-1996;
Ord. eff. 4-7-1997; Ord. eff. 6-2-1997; Ord. eff. 10-6-1997; Ord. eff.
3-2-1998; Ord. eff. 3-2-1998; Ord. eff. 11-9-1998; Ord. eff. 12-14-1998; Ord.
eff. 3-8-1999; Ord. eff. 3-8-1999; Ord. eff. 3-8-1999; Ord. eff. 5-10-1999;
Ord. eff. 4-12-1999; Ord. eff. 8-9-1999; Ord. eff. 12-13-1999; Ord. eff.
4-10-2000; Ord. eff. 10-9-2000; Ord. eff. 10-8-2001; Ord. eff. - -; Ord. eff.
7-8-2002; Ord. eff. 9-2-2002; Ord. eff. 9-8-2003; Ord. eff. 9-8-2003; Ord.
eff. 12-15-2003; Ord. eff. 8-9-2004; Ord. eff. 8-9-2004; Ord. eff.
12-13-2004; Ord. eff. 12-13-2004; Ord. eff. 6-13-2005; Ord. eff. 8-8-2005;
Ord. eff. 2-13-2006; Ord. eff. 4-10-2006; Ord. eff. 8-14-2006; Ord. eff.
9-11-2006; Ord. eff. 10-9-2006; Ord. eff. 1-8-2007; Ord. eff. 7-16-2007; Ord.
eff. 7-16-2007; Ord. eff. 9-8-2008; Ord. eff. 10-20-2008; Ord. eff.
11-10-2008; Ord. eff. 8-10-2009)



§ 153.02  DIGITAL ZONING MAP.



   The official zoning map of the town dated 1990 is hereby replaced with
the digital “Official Zoning Map of the Town of Elkin,” dated May 9, 2005.



(Ord. eff. 5-9-2005)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[Reserved]




PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to North Carolina General Statutes



References to 1940 Code



References to Resolutions



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Section
 
Code Section




1-593
 
10.05


Ch. 1A
 
93.10


Ch. 7A
 
151.044


7A-227
 
150.24


7A-228
 
150.24


Ch. 14, Art. 27A
 
90.32


14-1(a)
 
72.99


14-4
 
33.99, 70.99, 71.19, 71.99, 72.70, 72.99, Ch. 73, 90.99, 93.031, 93.999,
94.01, 94.99, 95.01, 95.04, 95.99, 96.999, 97.999, 110.99, 111.99, 112.99,
130.99, 150.99


14-4(a)
 
10.99, 72.99


14-4(b)
 
70.99


14-269
 
130.35


14-304 through 14-309
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


14-399
 
90.25


14-415.11(c)
 
90.19


14-415.23
 
90.19


18B-1001
 
116.01


20-171.6
 
90.17


42-29
 
150.24


42-30
 
150.24


Ch. 44A
 
91.09


Ch. 63, Art. 4
 
92.46


90-86 et seq.
 
90.24


Ch. 105
 
35.23; Ch. 110 Appx A


Ch. 105, Art. 3
 
35.16


Ch. 105, Subch. I
 
35.16


Ch. 105, Subch. 1, Art. 9
 
35.22, 35.99


105-38
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


105-41
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


105-58
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


105-88
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


105-164.16
 
35.20


Ch. 113, Art. 22A
 
94.60


113-35(a)
 
90.24, 90.25


113-274(c)(1a)
 
94.60


115C-1 et seq.
 
93.024


Ch. 130A, Art. 9
 
151.005


130A-184
 
94.01


130A-290(a)(6)
 
151.005


130A-290(a)(35)
 
151.005


130A-290(a)(36)
 
151.005


136-141
 
91.12


136-143
 
91.12


Ch. 143, Art. 8
 
34.06


Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6
 
151.001


Ch. 143, Art. 33C
 
32.06, 32.07


143-129
 
34.07


143-129(e)
 
34.03


143-143.15
 
151.061


143-145(7)
 
150.17


143-318.10(d)
 
32.06


143-318.10(e)
 
32.06


143-318.11
 
32.06


153A-263
 
99.01


Ch. 160A, Art. 8
 
151.001


Ch. 160A, Art. 10
 
150.24, 150.52


Ch. 160A, Art. 12
 
34.21


Ch. 160A, Art. 18
 
90.01, 90.02


Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Parts 3, 5 and 8
 
151.001


Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 6
 
150.15


160A-174
 
150.15


160A-175
 
10.99, 93.031


160A-175(c)
 
72.28


160A-175(d)
 
72.28


160A-175(e)
 
72.28


160A-186
 
94.01


160A-187
 
94.01


160A-188
 
94.60


160A-193
 
91.02


160A-211
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


160A-266(c)
 
34.24


160A-296
 
71.18, 96.075


160A-301
 
72.20


160A-301(b)
 
72.40


160A-303
 
91.02


160A-303.2
 
91.02


160A-314(b)
 
51.06


160A-350 et seq.
 
90.15


160A-353
 
90.02


160A-441
 
150.15, 150.45


160A-443
 
150.49


160A-443(5)
 
150.51


160A-444
 
150.15


160A-445
 
150.20


160A-446(f)
 
150.49


160A-446(g)
 
150.49


160A-446(6)
 
150.52


164-7
 
10.14


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1940 CODE



 

1940 Code Section
 
2013 Code Section




Ch. A, § 2
 
30.16


Ch. A, § 3
 
30.17


Ch. A, § 4
 
30.18


Ch. A, § 5
 
30.19


Ch. A, § 6
 
30.20


Ch. A, § 7
 
30.21


Ch. A, § 8
 
30.22


Ch. A, § 9
 
30.23


Ch. A, § 11
 
30.36


Ch. A, § 12
 
30.37


Ch. A, § 14
 
30.38


Ch. A, § 16
 
30.55


Ch. A, § 17
 
30.56


Ch. A, § 18
 
30.57


Ch. A, § 20
 
30.39


Ch. A, § 21
 
30.58


Ch. A, § 23
 
30.59


Ch. B, Art. I, § 1
 
30.01


Ch. B, Art. I, § 2
 
30.02


Ch. B, Art. II, § 1
 
31.01, 31.20


Ch. B, Art. II, § 2
 
31.21


Ch. B, Art. II, § 3
 
31.22


Ch. B, Art. III, § 4
 
31.02


Ch. B, Art. III, § 5
 
31.03


Ch. D, Art. I, § 1
 
35.01


Ch. D, Art. I, § 2
 
35.02


Ch. G, Art. I, § 1
 
70.01


Ch. G, Art. I, §§ 2, 3, 4
 
70.01


Ch. G, Art. III, § 1
 
70.30


Ch. G, Art. III, § 2
 
70.31


Ch. G, Art. III, § 3
 
70.32


Ch. G, Art. III, § 4
 
70.33


Ch. G, Art. III, § 5
 
70.34


Ch. G, Art. III, § 6
 
70.35




 



 

1940 Code Section
 
2013 Code Section




Ch. G, Art. IV, § 1
 
70.50


Ch. G, Art. IV, § 2
 
70.51


Ch. G, Art. IV, § 3
 
70.52


Ch. G, Art. IV, § 6
 
70.53


Ch. G, Art. IV, § 7
 
70.54


Ch. G, Art. IV, § 8
 
70.55


Ch. G, Art. V, § 3
 
72.08


Ch. G, Art. V, § 12
 
72.09, 72.99


Ch. G, Art. V, § 13
 
72.10


Ch. G, Art. V, § 14
 
72.11


Ch. G, Art. V, § 15
 
72.12


Ch. G, Art. V, § 16
 
72.13


Ch. G, Art. V, § 17
 
72.14


Ch. G, Art. V, § 19
 
72.15


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 1
 
71.01


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 2
 
71.02


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 3
 
71.03


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 4
 
71.04


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 6
 
71.05


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 7
 
71.06


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 8
 
71.07


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 9
 
71.08


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 10
 
71.09


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 12
 
71.10


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 13
 
71.11


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 14
 
71.12


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 15
 
71.13


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 16
 
71.14


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 18
 
71.15


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 19
 
71.16


Ch. G, Art. VI, § 20
 
71.17


Ch. G, Art. VII, § 1
 
71.35


Ch. G, Art. VII, § 2
 
71.36


Ch. G, Art. VII, § 3
 
71.37


Ch. G, Art. VII, § 4
 
71.38


Ch. G, Art. VII, § 5
 
71.39


Ch. G, Schedule I
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


Ch. G, Schedule V
 
72.12


Ch. G, Schedule X
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


Ch. G, Schedule XI
 
Ch. 73 Sched. III


Ch. H, § 5
 
130.52




 



 

1940 Code Section
 
2013 Code Section




Ch. H, § 6
 
130.01


Ch. H, § 8
 
130.20


Ch. H, § 10
 
130.21


Ch. H, § 13
 
130.38


Ch. R, Art. I, § 1
 
96.035


Ch. R, Art. I, § 2
 
96.036


Ch. R, Art. I, § 4
 
96.037


Ch. R, Art. I, § 5
 
96.038


Ch. R, Art. I, § 6
 
96.039


Ch. R, Art. II, § 2
 
96.055


Ch. R, Art. II, § 3
 
96.056


Ch. R, Art. II, § 4
 
96.057


Ch. R, Art. II, § 5
 
96.058


 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


-
 
5-4-1998
 
30.15


 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
- -
 
72.16, 72.99


-
 
- -
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


-
 
- -
 
Ch. 73 Sched. III


2
 
- -
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


8
 
- -
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


9
 
- -
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
- -
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
6-9-2003
 
92.45 – 92.56, 92.99


-
 
10-8-2001
 
113.01 – 113.15, Ch. 113, Appx A


-
 
- -
 
130.37


-
 
- -
 
153.01


-
 
7-19-1954
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
10-6-1955
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VI


-
 
7-16-1956
 
Ch. 73 Sched. I


-
 
10-7-1957
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
4-25-1958
 
153.01


-
 
11-20-1958
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
8-4-1959
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VI


-
 
9-1-1961
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
1-1-1962
 
70.70, 70.99, Ch. 73 Sched. VI


-
 
11-15-1962
 
153.01


-
 
10-9-1964
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
2-18-1965
 
130.37, 130.99


-
 
9-10-1965
 
130.02, 130.99


-
 
12-9-1965
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
1-6-1966
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
2-7-1966
 
99.01 – 99.04


-
 
4-7-1966
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
7-14-1966
 
153.01


-
 
12-5-1966
 
52.08


-
 
9-1-1967
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
11-1-1967
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
12-1-1967
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
7-4-1968
 
Ch. 73 Sched. IV


-
 
7-16-1968
 
130.51, 130.99


-
 
1-30-1969
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
4-8-1970
 
153.01


-
 
7-15-1970
 
33.01 – 33.07, 33.99


-
 
8-21-1970
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
10-12-1970
 
130.50, 130.99


-
 
10-12-1970
 
150.01, 150.99


-
 
11-13-1970
 
33.08, 33.99


-
 
1-4-1971
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
3-1-1971
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
3-1-1971
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
5-17-1971
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VI


-
 
5-19-1971
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
6-18-1971
 
150.01, 150.99


-
 
6-23-1971
 
71.18, 71.99


-
 
6-23-1971
 
Ch. 73 Sched. IV


-
 
12-15-1971
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
5-3-1972
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
10-11-1972
 
96.075, 96.999


-
 
3-5-1973
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
6-30-1974
 
Ch. 73 Sched. IV


-
 
8-1-1974
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VI


-
 
8-22-1974
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
10-14-1974
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
11-27-1974
 
72.18


-
 
2-3-1975
 
153.01


-
 
5-26-1975
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
6-6-1977
 
52.01 – 52.07


-
 
10-3-1977
 
153.01


-
 
12-5-1977
 
153.01


-
 
2-6-1978
 
153.01


-
 
5-5-1978
 
130.50, 130.99


-
 
10-2-1978
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
10-2-1978
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
5-7-1979
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
5-7-1979
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
7-7-1980
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
9-8-1980
 
153.01


-
 
3-2-1981
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
1-5-1982
 
72.70


-
 
3-15-1982
 
90.46, 90.99


-
 
5-3-1982
 
90.45, 90.99


-
 
7-15-1982
 
72.01 – 72.07, 72.99


-
 
12-5-1983
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
4-3-1984
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
4-24-1984
 
150.45 – 150.53


-
 
11-17-1984
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
11-17-1984
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
11-17-1984
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
- -[1985]
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
6-10-1985
 
71.40


-
 
8-4-1986
 
94.25 – 94.28


-
 
10-6-1986
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
10-6-1986
 
153.01


-
 
5-2-1988
 
153.01


-
 
5-2-1988
 
153.01


-
 
10-3-1988
 
153.01


-
 
4-1-1989
 
72.40 – 72.44, 72.99


-
 
5-1-1989
 
150.46 – 150.52


-
 
11-6-1989
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
1-1-1990
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


-
 
2-5-1990
 
153.01


-
 
6-4-1990
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
3-4-1991
 
153.01


-
 
4-1-1991
 
153.01


-
 
6-3-1991
 
96.001


-
 
7-1-1991
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
10-7-1991
 
153.01


-
 
12-2-1991
 
153.01


-
 
6-1-1992
 
93.30 – 93.34, 93.99


-
 
10-1-1992
 
130.36, 130.99


-
 
12-7-1992
 
153.01


-
 
- -[1993]
 
153.01


-
 
1-1-1993
 
153.01


-
 
5-3-1993
 
153.01


-
 
5-3-1993
 
153.01


-
 
10-1-1993
 
153.01


-
 
10-4-1993
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
12-6-1993
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
12-6-1993
 
153.01


-
 
3-1-1994
 
95.35 – 95.37, 95.99


-
 
8-2-1994
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
10-3-1994
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
4-4-1995
 
50.01


-
 
6-30-1995
 
52.07


-
 
10-2-1995
 
153.01


-
 
12-4-1995
 
130.35, 130.99


-
 
12-4-1995
 
153.01


-
 
12-4-1995
 
153.01


-
 
- -[1996]
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
5-7-1996
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
6-3-1996
 
153.01


-
 
8-5-1996
 
153.01


-
 
8-5-1996
 
153.01


-
 
9-23-1996
 
153.01


-
 
12-2-1996
 
153.01


-
 
3-1-1997
 
95.20 – 95.22, 95.99


-
 
4-7-1997
 
153.01


-
 
6-2-1997
 
153.01


-
 
8-5-1997
 
98.01 – 98.07


-
 
10-6-1997
 
153.01


-
 
11-3-1997
 
152.01


-
 
3-2-1998
 
153.01


-
 
3-2-1998
 
153.01


-
 
11-9-1998
 
153.01


-
 
12-14-1998
 
153.01


-
 
3-8-1999
 
153.01


-
 
3-8-1999
 
153.01


-
 
3-8-1999
 
153.01


-
 
3-12-1999
 
71.55 – 71.60, 71.99, Ch. 73 Sched. V


-
 
4-12-1999
 
153.01


-
 
5-10-1999
 
153.01


-
 
8-9-1999
 
153.01


-
 
10-11-1999
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
12-13-1999
 
153.01


-
 
4-10-2000
 
153.01


-
 
10-9-2000
 
153.01


-
 
7-1-2001
 
110.01 – 110.11, 110.99, Ch. 110 Appx A


-
 
10-8-2001
 
153.01


-
 
12-10-2001
 
51.01 – 51.13, 51.30-51.38, 51.50, 51.51, 51.65, 51.66


-
 
3-18-2002
 
112.01 – 112.07, 112.99


-
 
6-10-2002
 
35.15 – 35.26, 35.99


-
 
7-8-2002
 
153.01


-
 
8-12-2002
 
96.015 – 96.022, 96.999


-
 
9-2-2002
 
153.01


-
 
6-9-2003
 
92.01 – 92.09, 92.20-92.32


-
 
8-11-2003
 
152.01


-
 
9-8-2003
 
153.01


-
 
9-8-2003
 
153.01


-
 
10-6-2003
 
72.17, 72.99


-
 
10-6-2003
 
151.001 – 151.005, 151.020-151.026, 151.040-151.044, 151.060-151.064,
151.081, 151.999


-
 
12-15-2003
 
153.01


-
 
4-12-2004
 
94.40 – 94.48, 94.99


-
 
8-9-2004
 
153.01


-
 
8-9-2004
 
153.01


-
 
12-13-2004
 
153.01


-
 
12-13-2004
 
153.01


-
 
2-14-2005
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


-
 
5-9-2005
 
153.02


-
 
6-13-2005
 
91.01 – 91.13


-
 
6-13-2005
 
153.01


-
 
8-8-2005
 
153.01


-
 
10-10-2005
 
94.01 – 94.11, 94.99


-
 
2-13-2006
 
153.01


-
 
4-10-2006
 
153.01


-
 
5-8-2006
 
152.01


-
 
8-14-2006
 
153.01


-
 
9-11-2006
 
153.01


-
 
10-9-2006
 
153.01


-
 
1-8-2007
 
153.01


-
 
7-16-2007
 
153.01


-
 
7-16-2007
 
153.01


-
 
1-1-2008
 
130.36, 130.99


-
 
4-4-2008
 
30.35, 31.20


-
 
9-8-2008
 
34.01 – 34.07, 34.20-34.24


-
 
9-8-2008
 
95.01 – 95.05


-
 
9-8-2008
 
153.01


-
 
10-20-2008
 
153.01


-
 
11-10-2008
 
153.01


-
 
8-10-2009
 
153.01


-
 
9-14-2009
 
152.01


-
 
9-13-2010
 
32.01 – 32.12


-
 
4-12-2010
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


-
 
5-24-2010
 
Ch. 110 Appx A


-
 
6-12-2010
 
110.25 – 110.32, 110.99


-
 
6-14-2010
 
150.15 – 150.30


-
 
12-13-2010
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


4-213
 
- -[2011]
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


4-214
 
- -[2011]
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
12-11-2011
 
90.01 – 90.03, 90.15-90.32, 90.99


-
 
1-10-2011
 
111.01, 111.02, 111.99


-
 
8-8-2011
 
72.09, 72.99


-
 
3-12-2012
 
151.001 – 151.005, 151.020-151.026, 151.040-151.044, 151.060-151.064,
151.080, 151.081, 151.999


-
 
5-13-2013
 
94.60


-
 
6-10-2013
 
Ch. 73 Sched. VII


-
 
8-5-2013 (passed)
 
Adopting Ordinance


-
 
4-14-2014 (passed)
 
95.01


-
 
5-12-2014
 
114.01 – 114.04


-
 
8-11-2014
 
90.01 – 90.03, 90.15 – 90.34, 90.99


-
 
8-11-2014
 
151.001 – 151.005, 151.020 – 151.026, 151.040 – 151.044, 151.060 –
151.064, 151.080, 151.081, 151.999


-
 
10-6-2014
 
114.02


-
 
11-10-2014
 
51.01 – 51.13, 51.30 – 51.38, 51.50, 51.51, 51.65, 51.66


-
 
11-10-2014
 
151.001 – 151.005, 151.020 – 151.026, 151.040 – 151.044, 151.060 –
151.064, 151.080, 151.081, 151.999


2015-09-0416
 
9-14-2015
 
90.01 – 90.03, 90.15 – 90.34, 90.45, 90.46, 90.99


2015-12-0426
 
12-14-2015
 
93.001, 93.020 – 93.032, 93.060 – 93.066, 93.999


-
 
9-14-2015
 
115.01 – 115.08


-
 
11-9-2015
 
72.20 – 72.28


-
 
2-8-2016
 
72.20 – 72.28


-
 
4-11-2016
 
36.01 – 36.05


2016-11-0453
 
11-14-2016
 
71.19


2017-02-0456
 
2-13-2017
 
71.19


2017-03-0452
 
- -
 
97.001 – 97.024, 97.040 – 97.045, 97.060 – 97.066, 97.080, 97.999


2017-08-0483
 
8-14-2017
 
116.01


2017-08-0484
 
8-14-2017
 
Ch. 73, Sch. VII


2018-01-0001
 
1-8-2018
 
130.37, 130.99


2018-05-0006
 
5-14-2018
 
94.12


i
ZONING ORDINANCE
TOWN OF ELKIN
05/08/18
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Articles and sections
Pages
ARTICLE I AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE............................. 1
ARTICLE II SHORT TITLE.............................................................................. 1
ARTICLE III JURISDICTION........................................................................... 1
Section 30 Territorial jurisdiction......................................................... 1
Section 31 Bona Fide farms exempt..................................................... 1
ARTICLE IV DEFINITIONS............................................................................. 2
Section 40 Interpretations of commonly used terms and words........... 2
Section 41 Definitions of specific terms and words................................ 2
ARTICLE V ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS............................................. 7
Section 50 Use Districts named.............................................................. 7
Section 51 District boundaries shown on zoning map............................. 7
Section 52 Due considerations given to district boundaries............................. 7
Section 53 Rules governing interpretation of district boundaries.................... 7
ARTICLE VI APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.................................................. 8
Section 60 Zoning affects every building and use......................................... 8
Section 61 Reduction of lot and yard area prohibited................................... 8
Section 62 Relationship of building to lot..................................................... 8
Section 63 Street access................................................................................. 8
Section 64 Uses prohibited............................................................................ 8
ARTICLE VII GENERAL PROVISIONS................................................................. 9
Section 70 Non-conforming uses................................................................. 9
Section 71 Signs.......................................................................................... 10
Section 72 Off-street parking and storage.................................................... 24
Section 73 Off-street loading and unloading space...................................... 27
Section 74 Temporary uses.......................................................................... 27
Section 75 Accessory structures, CSU…………………………………… 28
Section 78 Landscaping, screening and buffering....................................... 28
ARTICLE VIII........................................................................................................... 33
Section 80 R-12 Residential district........................................................... 33
Section 81 R-8 Residential district.............................................................. 35
Section 82 R-20 Residential district............................................................ 37
Section 83 MA Medical Arts district.......................................................... 38
Section 83A MA Medical Arts district alternative..................................... 41
Section 84 B-1 Central Business district.................................................... 41
Section 85 B-2 Highway Business district................................................. 43
Section 86 B-3 Neighborhood Business district........................................ 47
Section 87 M-1 Industrial district.............................................................. 48
Section 88 M-2 Heavy Industrial district................................................... 50
Section 89 MH Manufactured Home Park District………………………. 51
Section 90 V-1 Village Development District……………………………. 52
ARTICLE IX AREA, YARD, LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 59
iii
ARTICLE X EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.......................................... 62
Section 100 Lot of Record......................................................................... 62
Section 101 Front yard for dwellings......................................................... 62
Section 102 Height Limitations ................................................................ 62
Section 103 Visibility at intersections ...................................................... 62
Section 104 Fences in residential zones; retaining walls.......................... 62
Section 105 Rules Applicable Specifically to the Watershed Overlay .... 63
Section 106 By-Pass Overlay……………………………………………………. 75
Section 107 B-1, Design guidelines ……………………………………………. 83
Section 108 Wireless Communication Towers………………………………….. 100
Section 109 Solar Farms…………………………………………………………. 108
ARTICLE XI CONDITIONAL USES.................................................................... 113
Section 110 Purposes................................................................................ 113
Section 111 Jurisdiction............................................................................ 113
Section 112 Procedure for obtaining a conditional use approval............. 113
Section 113 Conditions and Guarantees.................................................. 115
Section 114 General provision in granting conditional use..................... 115
ARTICLE XII GROUP DEVELOPMENTS........................................................... 116
Section 120 Procedure............................................................................... 116
Section 121 Development Plan.................................................................. 116
Section 122 Shopping Centers................................................................... 117
Section 123 Multi-family developments.................................................... 117
Section 124 Planned Unit Development (PUD)........................................ 117
Section 125 Mobile Home Park................................................................. 120
ARTICLE XIII ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT............................. 121
Section 130 Zoning enforcement officer.................................................... 121
Section 131 Zoning Permit required........................................................... 121
Section 132 Application for zoning permit................................................. 121
Section 133 Certificate of occupancy......................................................... 121
Section 134 Remedies Available................................................................ 121
ARTICLE XIV BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT......................................................... 122
Section 140 Creation of Board of Adjustment............................................ 122
Section 141 Length of terms...................................................................... 122
Section 142 Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment............................... 122
Section 143 Powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment...................... 123
Section 144 Decision of the Board of Adjustment..................................... 124
Section 145 Duties of the zoning enforcement officer, Board of
Adjustment, courts and Town Board of Commissioners
on matters of appeal....................................................... 125
ARTICLE XV AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES................................................ 125
Section 150 Motion to amend.................................................................... 125
Section 151 Protest against amendment..................................................... 126
Section 152 Planning Board action............................................................ 126
Section 153 Board of Commissioners Action…………………………… 127
ARTICLE XVI LEGAL PROVISIONS.................................................................. 127
Section 160 Interpretation, purpose and conflict....................................... 127
Section 161 Validity................................................................................... 127
Section 162 Penalties.................................................................................. 127
Section 164 Effective date................................................................. …… 127
iv
ZONING ORDINANCE
ELKIN, NORTH CAROLINA
ARTICLE I
AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE
In pursuance of authority granted by the General Assembly of North Carolina in the General Statutes, specifically Chapter 160A, Article 19, the Town of Elkin may enforce zoning regulations to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; to promote the orderly development of the community; to lessen congestion in the roads and streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public facilities, all in accordance with a well considered comprehensive plan.
ARTICLE II
SHORT TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as "The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Elkin, North Carolina", and the map referred to which is identified by the title Official Zoning Map, Elkin, North Carolina, shall be known as the Zoning Map.
ARTICLE III
JURISDICTION
Section 30. TERRITORIAL APPLICATION
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of the town of Elkin and within the territory beyond such corporate limits as shown on the zoning map and/or described in the extraterritorial zoning resolution. The extraterritorial boundary will follow physical features when possible, but at no point will the outside boundary extend more than one mile from the corporate limits in any direction.
However, the jurisdiction and authority herein granted to the Town of Elkin shall not be exercised with the limits of Wilkes County unless the area has been annexed by the Town of Elkin; or within any part of that territory adjacent to the corporate limits of Jonesville or its extraterritorial planning area.
Section 31. BONA FIDE FARMS EXEMPT
The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to bona fide farms, except as delineated in Section 105 of this ordinance. This ordinance exercises limited controls over crop lands, timber lands, pasture lands, idle or other farm lands, nor over any farm house, barn poultry house, or other farm buildings including tenant or other houses for persons working on said farms, as long as such houses shall be in the same ownership as the farm and located on the farm. Such agricultural uses maintain the openness of the land and achieve the purposes of this ordinance without the need for limited regulation. Residences for non-farm use or occupancy and other non-farm uses shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
2
ARTICLE IV
DEFINITIONS
Section 40. INTERPRETATION OF COMMONLY USED TERMS AND WORDS
40.1 Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
40.2 Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
40.3 The word "person" includes a firm, association, corporation, trust and company, as well as an individual.
40.4 The words "used for" shall include the meaning "designed for".
40,5 The word "structure" shall include the word "building".
40.6 The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", "parcel", or "tract".
40.7 The word "shall " is always mandatory and not merely discretionary.
Section 41. DEFINITIONS OF SPECIFIC TERMS AND WORDS
41.1 ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building.
41.2 ADULT ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment open only to the adult public, including, but not limited to; adult arcade, adult bookstores, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult video stores, escort agency, nude model studios, sexual encounter center, adult mini-motion picture theater, or adult live entertainment businesses as defined in Article 26A of the North Carolina General Statutes Chapter 14, Section 202.10 entitled "Adult Establishment" as amended.
41.3 ALLEY. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
AUCTION GALLERY/HOUSE. A use which allows for the sale of goods and merchandise either through the internet or on site public sale to the highest bidder. No sale of agricultural products or living animals is permitted. Outdoor storage of merchandise is not permitted.
BIG BOX RETAILER. Any commercial building that has more than 50,000 square feet of gross floor area.
41.4 BUFFER STRIP. A buffer strip shall consist of a planted strip at least ten (10) feet in width, composed of deciduous or evergreen trees or mixture of each, spaced not more than twenty (20) feet apart, and not less than one (1) row of dense shrubs, spaced not more than five (5) feet apart.
41.5 BUILDING. Any structure enclosed and isolated by exterior walls or columns constructed or used for residence, industry, or other public or private purposes, or accessory thereto. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or parts thereof".
41.6 BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A building subordinate to the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal building and located on the same lot
3
therewith.
41.7 BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
41.8 BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding the outermost three (3) feet of any uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters and similar fixtures, and the street right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto.
41.9 CONDITIONAL USE. A development that would not be generally appropriate without restriction throughout the zoning district, but which if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood would promote the health, safety, morals or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in a zoning district by either the governing body or Board of Adjustment, if specific provisions are made in the zoning ordinance.
41.9.1 CONVERTED STORAGE UNIT (CSU): shall be defined as any storage container/vehicle not originally designed or built for storage and shall include trailers originally maintained with wheels and axels; buses; cars; vans; trucks; portable boxes; shipping containers; and any other similar unit.
41.10 CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION. Any use conducted for gain entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there is no display; provided further, no person, not a resident on the premises, shall be employed specifically in connection with the activity; no mechanical equipment shall be installed or used except such as is normally used for domestic or professional purposes; and not over twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor space of any structure shall be used for home occupations.
41.11 CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, recreational, or like activities operated on a non-profit basis for the benefit of members.
41.12 DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, providing complete and permanent living facilities for one (1) family. The term "dwelling" shall not be deemed to include a motel, hotel, tourist home, mobile home, or other structure designed for transient residence.
41.13 DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family.
41.14 DWELLING, TWO FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other.
41.15 DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, and group housing projects.
41.16 GROSS FLOOR AREA. The total area of all buildings in the project including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, exclusive of stairways and elevator shafts. It excludes separate service facilities outside the main building such as boiler rooms and maintenance shops.
41.17 GROUP DEVELOPMENT. A group of two (2) or more principal structures built on a single lot, tract, or parcel of land not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and which will not be so
4
subdivided, and designed for occupancy by separate families, businesses, or other enterprises. Examples would be: cluster-type subdivisions, row houses, apartment courts, housing projects, school and hospital campuses, shopping centers and industrial parks.
41.18 FAMILY. One or more individuals occupying a premise and living as a single, non-profit housekeeping unit, including domestic servants, provided that a group of four or more persons who are not related by blood or marriage shall not be deemed to constitute a family.
HIGH DENSITY LIVING FACILITIES. Residential living facilities which exceed the standard density standard of ten (10) units per acre and are wholly contained in one building. These facilities will be on town water and sewer.
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES FOR THE ELDERLY. A residential facility which provides housing and supportive services for the elderly including housekeeping, meals, a 24 hour emergency call system, transportation and organized activities.
4.19 JUNK YARD. The use of more than six hundred (600) square feet of the area of any lot for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals, or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
41.20 LOT. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to same.
41.21 LOT, CORNER. A lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of two (2) street lines which make an angle of more than forth-five degrees (45) and less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees with each other. The street line forming the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot except where the two (2) street lines are equal, in which case the owner shall be required to specify which is the front when requesting a zoning compliance permit.
41.22 LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
41,23 LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Surry County, or a lot described by meets and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
41.24 LOT WIDTH. The distance between side lot lines measured at the building setback line.
41.25 MOBILE HOME. A trailer home, double wide house trailer, house car, or similar vehicle suitable for year-round occupancy as a dwelling unit. Further defined, such mobile home includes any portable or moveable vehicle which is mounted, or designed to be mounted on wheels, skids, rollers, either self-propelled or propelled by other means, including any such dismounted vehicle which has been placed on a temporary or permanent foundation and including structural additions to such vehicle. Such vehicle constructed according to the Uniform Standards Code for Mobile Homes Act shall be defined as mobile homes. This definition does not include camping-type trailers which are parked and unoccupied or those vehicles primarily designed for the transportation of goods.
41.26 MOBILE HOME PARK. Any place or tract of land maintained, offered, or used for the parking of two (2) or more mobile homes or trailer houses, used or intended to be used for living or sleeping purposes.
41.27 MODULAR UNIT. A factory-fabricated transportable building designed or intended to be used, by itself or to be incorporated with similar units as a building site into a modular structure. The term is intended to apply to major assemblies and does not include prefabricated sub-elements
5
which are to be incorporated into a structure at the site. In addition to the other requirements of this definition, modular units must meet all structural, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, heating, and other provisions of the North Carolina State Building Code or amendments.
41.28 MORATORIUM. A legislative tool to temporarily delay land development and zoning approvals. See §160A 381(d) for details.
41.28.1 MURALS. A mural is any piece of artwork painted or applied directly on a wall, ceiling or other
large permanent surface. A particularly distinguishing characteristic of mural painting is that the
architectural elements of the given space/building are harmoniously incorporated into the picture.
In addition, this artwork shall not contain any advertisement of a current business or product, but
may be a restoration of historical signage created prior to 1970.
41.29 NON-CONFORMING USE. Any use of building or land which does not conform to the use regulations of this ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this ordinance.
41.30 OPEN STORAGE. Unroofed storage area, whether fenced or not.
41.31 RESTAURANT. A commercial establishment where food is prepared and served exclusively for customers inside the facilities. Food may, however, be sold to customers for consumption at places other than on restaurant property.
41.32 RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. A commercial establishment where food is prepared and served to customers inside the main structure and/or customers sitting in parked cars, if the parked cars are located on the same lot as the principal use.
41.32.1 PARK. Those areas developed for both passive and active recreational activities. The
development may include, but shall not be limited to, walkways, benches, open fields, multiuse courts, swimming pools, wading pools, amphitheaters, etc. The term, park shall not include zoos, recreational vehicle parks, manufactured home parks, amusement parks, equestrian racing facilities or dog racing facilities.
41.33 PARKING SPACE. A storage space of not less than ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet for one (1) automobile in the Commercial and Residential Districts and the storage space of nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet for one (1) automobile in the Industrial Districts, plus the necessary accessory space. It shall always be located outside the dedicated street right-of-way. Amended 8/5/96
41.34 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. The planned unit development is a use designed to provide for development incorporating a single type or a variety of residential and related uses which are planned and developed as a unit. Such development may consist of individual lots or common building sites. Common land must be an element of the plan related to affecting the long-term value of the entire development.
41.35 SHOPPING CENTER. Two or more commercial establishments planned or constructed as a single unit with off-street parking and loading facilities provided on the property and related in location, size, type, and shape to the trade area which the unit services.
41.36 SHORT TERM HOUSING. A structure that contains one or more individual sleeping rooms and where tenancy of all rooms may be arranged for periods of time not to exceed three (3) months. This short term housing facility will provide boarding, lodging and ancillary services on its premises, and shower or bath facilities may or may not be shared. The facility is managed by a public or non-profit agency to provide habitation with or without a fee. Examples include
6
transitional housing and emergency shelter where individual rooms are provided. This does not include rehabilitation, half-way houses or treatment centers.
41.37 SIGNS. Any form of publicity, visible from any public street directing attention to an individual activity, business service, commodity, or product and conveyed by means of words, figures, numerals, lettering, emblems, devices, designs, trade marks, or trade names or other pictorial matter designed to convey such information and displayed by means of bills, panels, posters, paints, or other devices erected on open framework, or attached or otherwise applied to posts, stakes, poles, trees, buildings, or other structures or supports.
a. Billboards (off-site). A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, activity, service or product not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
b. Business Signs (on-site). A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.
41.38 SIGN AREA. Sign area shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which will encompass the entire advertising copy area excluding architectural trim and structural member. In computing area only one (1) side of a double faced sign shall be considered.
41.39 SIGNS, FREESTANDING. A sign separated from any structure that might be located on a lot. It may be mounted on pillars or posts that are permanently anchored to the ground.
41.40 SIGNS, ATTACHED. Any sign physically attached to the principal or accessory structure on a lot.
41.41 SOLID FENCE. In addition to a barrier used as a boundary or means of protection, a solid fence provides a visual barrier which blocks from view of the general public any items that may be stored behind or inside the fenced area.
41.42 SPORTS BAR. An establishment containing a minimum of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, a full service restaurant and may include any of the following amenities: a microbrewery, multiple television sets, billiard tables/pool tables, darts, video games and other recreational activities. This use specifically excludes video gambling machines.
41.43 STORY. That portion of a principal building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. A basement is not counted as a story.
41.44 STREET. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
41.45 STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground.
41.46 TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT. Any location where tattooing is engaged in or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. Tattooing defined in North Carolina G.S. 130-283.
41.47 VARIANCE. A modification of the existing zoning ordinance when strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is granted.
7
41.48 WINERY. A manufacturing facility or establishment engaged in the processing of grapes to produce wine or wine-like beverages.
41.49 YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted.
41.50 YARD, FRONT. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building. It shall be situated from the edge of the right-of-way to the nearest point of beginning of any building located on the lot.
41.51 YARD, REAR. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot.
41.52 YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard.
41.53 RETAIL FLOOR SPACE OR RETAIL FLOOR AREA. Total area of all buildings in the project including basements, mezzanines, and all floors, exclusive of stairways, elevator shafts, offices, restrooms, kitchens or food preparation rooms, merchandise assembly rooms, storage rooms and separate service facilities outside the main building such as boiler rooms and maintenance shops. 5/3/93
ARTICLE V
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
Section 50 USE DISTRICTS NAMED
For the purpose of this ordinance the Town of Elkin is divided into nine (9) use districts with the designations and purposes listed below:
R-12 Residential District (Medium density)
R-8 Residential District (High density)
R-20 Residential District (Low density)
MA Medical Arts District
B-1 Central Business District
B-2 Highway Business District
B-3 Neighborhood Business District
M-1 Light Manufacturing District
M-2 Heavy Manufacturing District
Section 51. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES SHOWN ON ZONING MAP
The boundaries of the districts are shown on the map accompanying this ordinance and made a part hereof entitled "Official Zoning Map, Elkin, North Carolina". The zoning map and all the notations,
8
references, and amendments thereto, and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this ordinance the same as if such information set forth on the map were all fully described and set out herein. The zoning map properly attested is posted at the Town Hall in Elkin and is available for inspection by the public.
Section 52. DUE CONSIDERATION GIVEN TO DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
In the creation, by this ordinance, of the respective districts, careful consideration is given to the peculiar suitability of each and every district for the particular uses and regulations applied thereto, and the necessary and proper grouping and arrangement of various uses and densities of population in accordance with a well considered comprehensive plan for the physical development of the community.
Section 53. RULES GOVERNING INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: (Such uncertainty shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment)
53.1 Where such district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street, alley, or highway lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
53.2 Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
53.3 Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, alleys, or highways, or the rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map.
53.4 Where a district boundary line divides a lot or tract in single ownership, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot or tract shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided such extensions shall not include any part of a lot or tract more than thirty-five (35) feet beyond the district boundary line. The term "least restricted" shall refer to zoning restrictions, not or tract size.
ARTICLE VI
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
Section 60. ZONING AFFECTS EVERY BUILDING AND USE
No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
Section 61. REDUCTION OF LOT AND YARD AREAS PROHIBITED
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein, except for street widening. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance.
Section 62. RELATIONSHIP OF BUILDING TO LOT
Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal building and its customary accessory buildings on any lot, except in the case of a specially designed complex of institutional, residential, commercial or industrial buildings in
9
an appropriate zoning district, i.e., school campus, cluster housing, shopping center, industrial park and so forth, as permitted by Article XII.
Section 63. STREET ACCESS
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not have access to an open street which is either a public street or a public maintained street.
Section 64. USES PROHIBITED
If either a use or class of uses is not specifically indicated as being permitted in a district either as a right or as a conditional use, then such use or class of use is prohibited.
ARTICLE VII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 70. NON-CONFORMING USES
Any non-conforming building, structure or use of land shall comply with the following provisions:
70.1 Change of Use. A non-conforming use shall not be changed to any use except those permitted in the district where the non-conforming use is located.
70.2 Expansion of Use. A non-conforming use shall not be extended or enlarged. However, a non-conforming use may be extended through an existing building, and structural alterations may be permitted if required by law or ordered by an authorized officer to secure the safety of the building. Additionally, existing single-family residential structures in business or industrial districts may be enlarged, extended or structurally altered provided no additional dwelling units result. When any enlargement, extension or alteration occurs, it shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the R-12 District.
70.3 Discontinuance of Use. A non-conforming use may not be re-established after discontinuance for a period of one (1) year.
70.4 Reconstruction of Use. A non-conforming use may not be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding sixty (60) percent of its fair market value immediately prior to damage. (Such determination shall be made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.) When a damaged structure is repaired or reconstructed, it shall be accomplished without any increase in the cubical content of the floor area, with any change in the building location except to provide greater front or side yard areas; that such reconstruction and repair be completed within one hundred and eighty (180) days from the date of damage, and the reconstruction does not result in a change from one non-conforming use to another. Any previously granted variances concerning the destroyed property are null and void, and shall not be considered in any future variance requests. Non-conforming owner occupied single family dwellings may be reconstructed regardless of the extent of the destruction.
70.5 Removal of Certain Non-Conforming Uses. The outdoor storage of three (3) or more wrecked or broken-down vehicles, or other sizable items of scrap material, in any zoning district, except in the M-1 and M-2 Industrial districts, shall be considered a junk yard. As a non-conforming use these junk yards shall be eliminated not later than three (3) years after the date of adoption of this ordinance.
10
70.6 Exceptions. None of the restrictions set forth in this section shall apply to a building or other structure which is non-conforming only with respect to lot area, setback or yards, or provisions of off-street parking or loading space, except that no building or other structure shall be altered, enlarged, or reconstructed to extend further into or to cover more of a deficient yard or to increase its height, except in compliance with the district regulations.
SECTION 71 SIGNS
71.1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this section to promote the general welfare and appearance of the Town of Elkin by setting standards for the type and placement of signs.
The purpose of this section is, therefore:
a. To preserve the scenic natural environment by allowing signs which are consistent with an attractive town appearance.
b. To provide for the safety of vehicular traffic by limiting visual interference.
c. To protect the general public from injury caused by distracting and/or improperly placed signs.
d. To promote the general welfare of the Town of Elkin by providing a pleasing environmental setting.
e. To protect property values and promote the economic welfare of Elkin by encouraging visually appealing, non-distracting forms of information transfer.
71.2 Applicability
This section shall apply to all signs located within the Town of Elkin and its extraterritorial jurisdiction unless excluded as per Section 71.4
71.3 Definitions
A sign is any display of any letters, words, numbers, figures, devices, emblems, pictures, or any parts or combinations thereof, by any means whereby the same are made visible for the purpose of making anything known, whether such display be made on, attached to or as a part of a structure, surface or any other thing, including, but not limited to the ground, a rock, tree or other natural objects. A sign includes all poles, frames and other supports upon which such display is made.
Signs do not include the recognized flag or emblem of any nation, state, or city; nor merchandise and pictures or models of products incorporated in a window display; nor works of art which in no way identify a product; nor scoreboards located on athletic fields.
71.3.1 Advertising Sign A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is attached.
71.3.2 Attached Sign A sign which is mounted flush to a building wall or attached to the face of a canopy. Such sign shall be attached throughout its entire length and shall not extend above the highest point indicated below:
a. Signs mounted flush to a building wall shall not extend above the highest vertical point of the
11
building.
b. Signs mounted to the face of a canopy shall not extend above the highest point of the face of the canopy.
c. Signage of “flush mounted menu board” wooden or metal framed ( shadow box ) showcasing establishments menu attached to the eatery building interiorly illuminated with a maximum of 3 square feet in area. This signage is included in total square footage allowed, by district.
71.3.3 Billboard/ Poster Board A sign identifying, advertising and/or directing the public to a business, merchandise, service, entertainment or product which is located at a place other than the property on which such sign is located. These signs are also known as off-premise, outdoor advertising signs.
71.3.4 Business Identification Signs Flat mounted signs which are placed on multi-use buildings to identify tenants within.
71.3.5 Canopy Sign A sign which is suspended from or attached to the sides, front, or underside of a canopy.
a. A canopy is defined as a permanent structure, other than an awning made of cloth or other material, attached or unattached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons or automobiles, or as a decorative feature on a building wall. A canopy is not a completely enclosed structure.
71.3.6 Construction Sign Signs which identify firms and/or builders and which are erected on the premise of the construction site during the period of construction.
71.3.7 Direction Sign A sign which is located off-premise and indicates the location of public buildings, parks, schools, churches, hospitals, and scenic or historic places.
71.3.8 Directory Sign A sign listing the names of more than one business, activity or professional office conducted within a building, group of buildings or commercial center.
71.3.9 Elevated Merchandise Merchandise raised from the ground for the purpose of advertising.
71.3.10 Festival Sign A sign which is placed to commemorate and/or attract attention to a recognized festival within the Town of Elkin.
71.3.11 Freestanding Sign A sign supported by a sign structure placed in the ground and which is wholly independent of any building, fence, vehicle, or object other than the sign structure for support. Signage is allowed in a yard if 8’ above public sidewalks elevation, if any portion encroaches over sidewalk it must have 8’ of clearance above sidewalk.
71.3.12 Gasoline Pump Signs Signs which are normally associated with the sale of gasoline and the price, self-service, etc. information contained on the pump.
71.3.13 Holiday Decorations The decorations normally associated with the holiday season from November to January and other recognized holidays.
71.3.14 Home Occupation Signs A sign permitted in association with a legitimate home occupation conducted on the premises of the dwelling unit occupied by the operator of the business.
71.3.15 Marquee A sign of a theater, auditorium, fairground, or museum which advertises present and scheduled events.
71.3.16 No Trespassing/No Loitering Signs Such signs, and similar ones, which are placed to inform the
12
public of private regulations.
71.3.17 Occupant/Street Number Sign A sign bearing only the name of the principal occupant of a residence or street number of any residential, commercial or other structure.
71.3.18 Painted Wall Sign A sign painted directly on any exterior building wall or door surface, exclusive of window and door glass areas.
71.3.19 Portable Sign Any sign designed or intended to be readily relocated. This shall include signs on wheels, trailers, truck beds, A-frames or any other device which is capable of/or intended to be moved from one location to another.
71.3.20 Private Traffic Directional Sign Signs such as in/out, do-not-enter, entrance/exit, etc., which are placed on private property to direct vehicular traffic.
71.3.21 Projecting Sign A sign which is attached to a building wall with the face of the sign perpendicular to the building wall. Such signs shall not project into any street right-of-way and shall be at least eight (8) feet above the ground.
71.3.22 Public Service Signs Sign displayed for the direction or the convenience of the public such as signs for rest rooms, public telephones and the like.
71.3.23 Real Estate Signs A sign which advertises the sale and/or lease of the property on which said sign is located.
71.3.24 Temporary Sign A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic, paper, plywood or other light material and intended to be displayed for a short period of time to inform the public of an unusual or special event. This shall include banners, balloons, flags, streamers, spinners, placards, pennants and other wind activated devices. Non-Profits are allowed to register banners with the Planning Director. Those violation the terms of banner registration will lose privilege to display future banners.
71.3.25 Time and Temperature Sign Signs which display time and temperature in alternating light cycles.
71.3.26 Window Signs Signs which are painted or affixed to windows.
71.3.27 Yard Sale/Open House Signs A sign which serves to direct the public to such events and is placed off the premise of such event/sale, for brief periods of time.
71.3.28 Awning A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework.
71.3.29 Vehicular Signs A sign or advertisement placed on a vehicle by owner or lessee, which directs attention to a specific business of said premises or any other commercial properties in which above mentioned has a possessor or vested interest.
71.4 Exempt Signs
The following signs and/or displays shall be exempt from the regulations of this ordinance:
71.4.1 Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the property on which they are located.
71.4.2 Signs of a duly-constituted governmental body, including traffic or similar regulatory devices, legal devices or warnings. This shall include street signs of a non-commercial type which are used on-premise to identify public buildings such Elkin Town Hall. Also included are political signs and posters during an election year, except as prohibited under Section 71.7.17.
13
71.4.3 City directory and welcome signs approved by the Elkin Planning Board which are erected to welcome visitors to Elkin. Such signs may have affixed to them names and/or emblems of civic groups and churches.
71.4.4 Trade names and graphics which are customarily painted on newspaper and soft drink dispensers.
71.4.5 Publicly owned memorial tablets or signs.
71.4.6 Official flags of religious, fraternal and civic organizations provided that such flags are flown at meeting places of such organizations and/or special events of these organizations.
71.4.7 Murals which conform to said definition as listed in Section 41 of this ordinance.
71.5 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited in the Town of Elkin and in its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
71.5.1 No sign shall be erected which imitates or in any way approximates official highway signs, nor shall any sign be erected which obscures a sign displayed by a public authority.
71.5.2 No sign shall be erected which displays flashing, blinking or intermittent lights or lights of changing intensity. No moving signs or moving parts of signs will be allowed. Time and temperature signs shall be allowed as per Section 71.7.15.
71.5.3 Temporary signs as defined in Section 71.3.24, except those of a temporary nature as per Section 71.9 are prohibited.
71.5.4 No sign shall be erected or placed in such a manner to obstruct driver vision of any vehicle entering a roadway from any street, alley, driveway or parking lot.
71.5.5 Commercial identification or advertising signs are prohibited on public utility poles, telephone poles, trees, fences, benches and refuse containers, except the latter two may display a logo. In addition, no signs shall be painted on roofs nor placed on roofs.
71.5.6 Pavement marking of any kind other than for traffic control are prohibited.
71.5.7 Any sign located in such a way as to intentionally deny an adjoining property owner a visual access to an existing sign is prohibited.
71.5.8 No billboards or off-premise advertising as defined in Section 71.3.3, shall hereafter be erected within the Town of Elkin or its extra-territorial jurisdiction .
71.5.9 No floodlights or signs shall be erected or placed in such a manner as to cause glare that impairs driver vision on a roadway or causes a nuisance to adjacent property.
71.5.10 No sign shall be placed in a public right-of-way or within 10 feet of the pavement if no right-of-way is recorded.
71.5.11 No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape or any window or door or opening used as a means of egress or so as to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. No sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner as to interfere with an opening required for legal ventilation.
71.5.12 No sign that violates any provision of any law of the State of North Carolina relative to outdoor advertising shall be erected or permitted.
14
71.5.13 Any other sign which does not comply with the regulations of this ordinance shall be prohibited.
71.6 Permit Procedure
No sign shall hereafter be erected, attached, suspended, changed or relocated until a permit has been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Each application shall be accompanied by plans which shall:
a. Indicate the proposed site by identifying the property by ownership, location and use;
b. Show the location of the sign on the lot in relation to property lines and buildings, zoning district boundaries, right-of-way lines, and existing signs;
c. Show size, character, complete structural specifications and methods of anchoring and support;
d. If warranted, the zoning officer may require additional information that will enable him to determine whether or not the sign will be erected in conformance with this ordinance.
71.7 Signs Which Do Not Require a Permit
No permit is necessary for these signs, provided they are not prohibited as defined in Section 71.5 and provided that they comply with the conditions herein described.
Signs permissible as per this section shall not be considered in determining total sign area. However, if a sign exceeds the size or in any other way does not comply with these limitations, it shall be subject to all other provisions in this Ordinance.
71.7.1 Public Service Signs Signs displayed for the direction or convenience of the public. This shall include signs for public rest rooms, telephones, vehicle inspection, credit cards accepted, hours of operation.
71.7.2 Real Estate Signs Signs which advertise the sale or lease of the property on which said sign is located, subject to the following conditions:
a. One sign per premise or one per 500 feet of lot frontage.
b. Signs shall be non-illuminated.
c. Sizes shall not exceed:
Zone TOTAL SQ FT MAX HEIGHT
R-8, R-12 6 6 ft.
R-20, MA, B-3 less than 1 acre 6 6 ft.
1-3 acres 16 8 ft.
over 3 acres 32 10 ft.
B-1 6 6 ft.
B-2, M-1, M-2 32 12 ft.
d. Real estate signs must be removed by the realtor within seven (7) days of the closing of the transaction.
e. No off-premises real estate signs are allowed. Location of real estate signs to be limited to the property which is for sale. Amended 12/13/04
15
f. Lead-in signs four (4) square feet will be allowed. Text will be limited to an arrow and firm name or logo. Permission to locate must be secured from property owner. Signs must be removed on day of closing.
g. New subdivision signs located on the property can be 32 square feet and can remain until 75% of the property is sold.
71.7.21 Vehicular Signs provided:
1. The vehicle shall be parked on commercial property only.
2. The vehicle must be parked in a standard parking place in a pre-approved site plan.
3. The vehicle is limited to a standard single rear axle car, truck or van. (no tractor trailers, step-vans or oversized vehicles)
4. The vehicle must possess a current and valid license tag, insurance and inspection sticker (no dealer tags)
5. The vehicle must be able to move on its own power and must be moved every ten (10) days.
6. All advertisement shall be permanently affixed or painted to the vehicle. (banner tied on or to vehicle not permitted)
71.7.3 Residential operation, freight entrances, etc. Such signs shall not exceed a total surface area of four (4) square feet per sign, and may be illuminated.
Yard Sale/Open House Signs No more than three (3) signs per event or per premise for sale shall be allowed. Two may be placed off-premise on private property with the permission of the property owner. The signs may remain in place for seventy-two (72) hours only. Such signs shall serve as directional aids and text on such signs shall be limited to Yard Sale/ Garage Sale or Open House and an arrow. Signs shall be placed out of the street right-of-way and shall not be illuminated.
71.7.4 Festival Signs Signs, non-illuminated, which are associated with activities recognized by the Elkin Town Board such as Tour du Pont, Street Scene or the Fourth of July Festival.
71.7.5 Holiday Decorations Seasonal decorations are allowed to remain two (2) weeks following the holiday. Such decorations may be illuminated in compliance with Section 71.5.2.
Other recognized holiday decorations will be allowed for the week preceding and week following the holiday.
71.7.6 Construction Signs Non-illuminated signs corresponding in size to the permitted real estate signs of Section 71.7.2 may be placed on-premise to identify firms and\or builders during the period of construction. They shall be removed no later than seven (7) days after completion of the project.
71.7.7 No Trespassing, No Dumping, No Loitering, For Private use Only, etc. Such signs may be placed where necessary. Such signs shall be non-illuminated and not exceed six (6) square feet in size.
71.7.8 Changing Copy A permit shall not be required to change copy such as on a theater marquee or legal outdoor advertising sign, nor shall a permit be required for the maintenance changes provided that in no way is the size of the sign altered.
71.7.9 Occupant/Street Number Signs Non-illuminated signs affixed to mailboxes, decorative light posts, driveway entrances and the like which serve to identify occupants and/or street number. Street numbers are required to be placed on all residential, commercial and other structures in a manner to be visible from the street.
71.7.10 Direction Signs Signs as defined by Section 71.3.7, are permitted provided that they do not exceed four (4) square feet.
71.7.11 Business Identifications Signs Non-illuminated signs may be placed on buildings to identify the
16
tenants within. Such signs shall contain no advertising other than trade name and/or logo and shall not exceed two (2) square foot per sign, per business.
71.7.12 Gasoline Pump Signs Signs giving information such as self-service instructions, price, type of fuel, etc. shall be permitted on gasoline pumps. These may contain the trade name and/or emblem, but they shall not exceed beyond the side of the gasoline pump and not more than one (1) foot above it. In addition, establishments that sell gasoline shall be allowed one (1) price sign (or two (2)) if the station is located on corner property) which displays price only, and does not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area. This sign may be added to the free standing sign.
71.7.13 Window Signs Window signs as defined in this ordinance provided they are not lighted. If lighted, the sign is considered attached and must comply with the regulations for attached signs.
71.7.14 Private Traffic Directional Signs This shall include such signs as in-out, entrance, exit, parking, one-way, etc. Signs may be illuminated but may not exceed four (4) square feet and sign copy shall be limited to the directional information and the trade name or logo of the business.
71.7.15 Time and Temperature Signs One time and temperature sign with alternating cycles is allowed. This sign may be in addition to other permitted signs. It may not contain any advertising other than the name or logo of the business and it must comply with all requirements of the district in which it is located.
71.7.16 Drive-Thru Menu Signs Menu signs for Drive-Thru Restaurants are permitted as either a free standing sign or an attached wall sign. Such signs may not exceed twenty-eight (28) square feet and should not generally be visible from the front of the restaurant. If a free standing menu sign is used, such sign may not exceed eight (8) feet in height. No more than two (2) drive-through menu boards are permitted for each drive-thru restaurant.
71.7.17 Political The following regulations shall apply solely to political signs, poster, etc.:
a. Signs are to be located entirely on private property, outside of any public right-of-way. For the purposes of this section only and for the benefit of candidates and their campaign staff, the right-of-way is interpreted to be from the ditch line on one side of the road to the ditch line on the opposite side of the road. In cases where the ditch line is not visible, the right-of-way shall be interpreted to be a minimum of 10 (ten) feet from the edge of the pavement on one side of the road to 10 (ten) feet from the edge of pavement on the opposite side of the road.
b. Signs shall be located a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the intersection of the pavement of two or more roads measured parallel to the road surface.
c. No signs shall be placed on public utility poles, telephone poles, or any other sign or sign support structure erected by a duly constituted governmental body.
d. Portable signs, as defined in Section 71.3.19, shall not be allowed for political use.
e. Political signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size. They cannot be erected more than forty-five (45) days before election day and must be removed 7 days following the election.
f. The Zoning Officer or his designee may remove signs placed in violation of these regulations.
g. The candidate will beheld responsible for violations and must obtain written permission from property owners before posting signs. Amended 12/13/04
71.7.18 Elevated Merchandise
Merchandise raised from the ground for the purpose of advertising shall be set back from the property line
17
in accordance with the building set-back requirements for the district in which the business is located.
71.7.19 Church and non-profit organization bulletin boards. These signs shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area.
71.7.20 Auction Signs. Signs which announce or promote the sale of a property by means of a public auction to the highest bidder. Sign may be located upon the property being sold with the following conditions:
a, One sign per premise or per 500 feet of frontage.
b. Signs shall not be illuminated.
c. Signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in size located on the property to be auctioned.
d. Signs shall be allowed up to two weeks prior to the sale and removed within 7 days of the sale.
e. “Lead-in-signs” (signs directing to the property being sold at auction) are not to exceed 6 square feet, will be allowed for 2 weeks prior to the sale and must be removed 1 week following the sale. Permission to place the lead-in signs must be secured from the property owner on which signs are placed.
f. Signs advertising a “Silent Auction” shall conform to the regulations for real estate signage set forth in Section 71.7.2 of this Ordinance.
g. Any violation of this ordinance shall be removed by the Town. 8/8/2005
71.8 On-Premise Sign Regulations
71.8.1 General requirements
a. All freestanding signs, support structures and required landscaping areas shall be at least one (1) foot from any right-of-way or easement and ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement.
b. Freestanding signs must be placed in a landscaped area which is at least three (3) feet in width and at least the length of the greatest dimension of the sign. Curbing, railroad ties, bricks, fencing and/or other suitable vehicular barrier shall enclose the landscape area.
c. Signs shall be placed on the premise of the business being advertised and the sign copy shall be used primarily to identify the on-premise business. However, a shopping center, mall or unified business establishment which lacks arterial road frontage but whose property is immediately adjacent to a business with arterial frontage may share signage with that business. This arrangement must be in the form of a mutual agreement between the property owners and/or business operators involved. No sign devoted solely to off-premise advertisement shall be allowed. All signs erected under the provisions of this section shall comply with the size, height and other requirements for that zoning district as well as all other general provisions in Section 71.8.1
d. A sign may contain changeable copy in the B-2 zone, however in no case shall the changeable copy portion of the sign exceed (50%) of the total sign area. In the case of electronic or computer controlled signs the text or copy shall not change more often than once ever (1) minute. (Section 71.5.2 prohibits flashing, blinking or intermittent lights or lights of changing intensity.) Amended 8/14/06
e. The area of a sign shall be measured according to the following rules as applicable:
i. In the case of freestanding, projecting and marquee signs, area consists of the entire surface area on which copy could be placed. The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall not be counted as a part of the sign area unless such structure or bracing is made part of the sign message. Where a sign has two (2) display faces back to back, the area of only one face hall be considered as the sign area. When a sign has more than one display face, all areas which can be viewed simultaneously shall be considered the sign area.
18
ii. In the case of a sign (other than freestanding, projecting, or marquee) whose message is fabricated together with the background which borders or frames that message, sign area shall be the total area of the entire background.
iii. In the case of a sign (other than freestanding, projecting, or marquee) whose message is applied to a background which provides no border or frame, sign area shall be computed by including the entire area within not more than 8, continuous rectilinear lines, or a circle or an ellipse enclosing the extreme limits of the letter, writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed.
f. Interior lighting for signs, where permitted, shall not exceed eleven (11) watts per bulb (the standard industry size). In the case of the use of exterior lighting by floodlights, such lights must comply with Section 71.5.12. Non-illuminated interior window signs are permitted. Illuminated interior window signs shall be considered attached signs and shall count as one of the permitted signs and must conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
g. Signs permitted in all zones shall include all applicable signs as permitted in Section 71.7 (Signs Which Do Not Require A Permit).
h. Businesses located on a corner lot may be permitted one attached sign in addition to those otherwise permitted herein.
i. No freestanding sign shall be placed less than forty (40) feet from another freestanding sign. No more than one freestanding sign on any lot with 100 feet or less of frontage. However, another freestanding sign shall be permitted for each additional one hundred feet of lot frontage.
j. Freestanding signs shall not be located in satellite parcels of real estate, whether the parcel is connected by deed or easement.
71.8.2 Signs Permitted in R-12, R-8, and R-20 Districts
The residential districts provide for a quiet environment and sound neighborhoods. While some service-oriented businesses are allowed, the general usage is for family life. The intent of this section is therefore to provide for a limited use of signs which are generally not illuminated and which will preserve the family-oriented character of neighborhoods.
(1) Professional and Home Occupation Sign
(a) One sign per premise.
(b) It may not be illuminated.
(c) The sign must be an attached sign mounted flat on the building.
(d) The sign may not exceed four (4) square feet in size.
(2) One identification sign announcing the name of a subdivision, residential development, school, church or other permitted use.
(a) The sign copy is limited to the name only.
(b) The sign may be freestanding or placed on the entrance wall of a development.
(c) The sign may not exceed forty (40) square feet in area, or ten (10) feet in height.
(d) It may be illuminated.
(e) The sign may not be placed nearer than ten (10) feet to any property line.
(3) All signs shall meet the general requirements of Section 71.8.1.
71.8.3 Signs Permitted in the B-1 District
19
a. Each business is permitted two (2) signs chosen from the following categories: attached, canopy, projecting. In no case may both signs be in the same category. Signs may be illuminated. Painted wall signs are prohibited.
b. Attached signs shall not exceed an area equal to the greater of sixteen square feet or one-half (1/2) square foot of sign area per linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum allowable square footage of attached sign of forty-eight (48) square feet, regardless of building frontage.
c. Projecting signs may not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
d. Awning signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet. Awning signs may be attached to the awning at the face of, side of, or under the awning. No sign may be attached to the support structures.
Signs which are suspended under an awning and/or cantilevered roof shall be at least eight (8)) feet above the sidewalk at their lowest point.
Signs which are attached to the face or side of an awning may not exceed twelve (12)) inches in height and no support structures shall be visible.
e. All signs shall meet the additional requirements of Section 71.8.1.
g. In addition to the signs listed above, there shall also be allowed one of the following:
1. A projecting sign which may contain the name of the business and any logo which the business chooses to adopt. The sign may not exceed four (4) square feet in size, and the bottom of the sign shall be no more and not less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. It shall display only the name of the business and/or buildings which it is attached to and the building and/or business logo or logos and no more than one (1) per building.
2. A freestanding sign which may be a maximum size of two (2) feet by two (2) feet, and the bottom of said sign shall be no more and not less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. It shall display only the name of the business and/or building which it is located in front of, and the building and/or business logo or logos and no more than one (1) per building
h. Cut-Outs of merchandise will be allowed, as a part of the total attached signage allowed by the district. ( Note: not adding to sign allowance)
71.8.4 Signs Permitted in the B-3 and MA Districts
a. Signs may be illuminated.
b. Each business is permitted two signs. They may be chosen from the following categories: attached, freestanding, canopy, projecting. In no case may the signs be of the same category except that a business may have two attached signs. Painted wall signs are not permitted.
c. Attached signs shall not exceed an area equal to one (1) square foot of sign area per linear foot of building frontage. The maximum allowable square footage of attached sign is eighty (80) square feet, regardless of the size of the building.
d. Freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area and twenty (20) feet in height.
e. Projecting signs may not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
f. Awning signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area.
20
Awning signs may be attached at the face of, side of, or under the awning. No signs may be attached to the awning support structures.
Signs which are projecting or are suspended under an awning and/or cantilevered roof shall be at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk at their lowest point.
Signs which are attached to the face or side of an awning may not exceed twelve (12) inches in height.
g. All signs shall meet the general requirements of Section 71.8.1.
71.8.5 Signs Permitted in the B-2 District
The B-2 districts are located on all major access roads to Elkin. It is on these roads that the visitor receives a first impression of the Town. It is the intent of this ordinance to allow the visitor to locate business establishments easily and quickly and yet not to allow signs which might interfere with views and vistas. The B-2 districts provide a variety of services primarily oriented toward vehicular traffic. Because vehicles in this area travel at speeds up to 45 m.p.h., it is important to insure that signs are clear, distinct and readable in a brief space of time. The requirements identify establishments quickly and easily.
a. Signs may be illuminated.
b. Each business is permitted two (2) signs which may be of any type, however no more than one canopy sign per business.
c. Freestanding signs shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area and thirty (30) feet in height.
d. No freestanding sign shall be placed less than forty (40) feet from another freestanding sign.
e. Projecting signs may not exceed sixteen (16) square feet.
f. Awning signs may be attached to the awning at the face of, side of, or under the awning. No sign may be attached to the awning support structure.
Signs which are projecting or are suspended under an awning and/or cantilevered roof shall be at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk at their lowest point.
Signs which are attached to the face or side of the awning may not exceed twelve (12) inches in height and no support structures shall be visible.
g. Attached signs and painted wall signs may not exceed an area equal to two (2) square feet of sign area per linear foot of the building frontage. For example, a building which is fifty (50) feet across the front may have a one hundred (100) square foot attached or painted wall sign. The maximum square footage of attached or painted wall signs is two-hundred-forty (240) square feet regardless of building size.
h. All signs shall meet the general requirements in Section 71.8.1.
71.8.6 Signs Permitted in the M-1 and M-2 Districts
Each industrial use shall be permitted one advertising sign. The sign must comply with Section 71.8.1 and the following:
a. The sign may be attached or freestanding.
b. It may be illuminated.
c. Attached signs may not exceed an area equal to two (2) square feet per linear foot of building frontage
21
not to exceed two-hundred-forty (240) square feet.
d. Freestanding signs may not exceed eighty (80) square feet in size and thirty (30) feet in height.
e. All signs shall meet the general requirements of Section 71.8.1.
71.8.7 Marquee Signs
Theaters, museums, auditoriums, and other entertainment facilities are permitted one changeable copy marquee in addition to their permitted signs. Marquee signs shall conform to the applicable sign requirements for the zone in which they are located, however the area of the marquee sign shall be permitted an increase in size up to an additional one-hundred (100%) percent provided that one of the other signs to which the business is entitled is reduced in size. The percentage of increase in area shall be equal to the reduction in area of the other permitted sign. If the marquee is a freestanding sign, the height of the marquee may not be increased over that permitted in the zone in which it is located.
71.8.8 Sign Regulations for Shopping Centers, Malls and Unified Business Establishments
a. Directory Signs - A shopping center, mall or unified business establishment consisting of two or more businesses in one building or in connecting buildings shall be permitted a directory sign which announces the name of the commercial center and/or establishments within. Directory signs may be attached or freestanding and shall conform to the area requirements as follows:
In the B-1 zone, the permitted area of an attached directory sign shall not exceed the greater of twenty (20) square feet or one-half (1/2) square foot per linear foot of total frontage of the building to a maximum of forty-eight (48) square feet. Freestanding directory signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area and ten (10) feet in height.
In the B-2 zone, the permitted area of an attached directory sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of frontage of the building to a maximum of eighty (80) square feet. A freestanding directory sign shall not exceed one-hundred-fifty (150) square feet in area, and thirty (30) feet in height.
In the B-3 and MA zones, an attached directory sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of building frontage to a maximum of one-hundred-twenty (120) square feet. A freestanding directory sign shall not exceed the greater of fifty (50) square feet in area or ten (10) square feet in area for each one-hundred-fifty (150) linear feet of arterial road frontage of the lot on which it is located. The height of the directory sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
When a shopping center, mall or unified business establishment has in excess of four-hundred (400) feet on an arterial road(s) and consists of more than five (5) acres, one directory sign per arterial road upon which it fronts is permitted.
b. Entrances to interior malls may be identified by an attached sign in addition to the other sign permitted to the business establishment. Such signs shall be attached to the building over the entrances or besides the entrances only. The signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in the B-1 zone, eight (8) square feet in the B-2 zone.
c. Signs for Tenants within Shopping Centers, Malls and Unified Business Establishments.
Businesses within shopping centers, malls and unified business establishments are permitted two (2) signs from the following categories: attached. canopy, and projecting.
71.9 Temporary Signs
71.9.1 Temporary signs must conform to all regulations of this section. These signs shall not be
22
required to obtain a sign permit but must be registered with the Town Zoning Officer. Information required to register a temporary sign will be name and address of sign owner, date of erection of sign, date for removal of sign, and description of sign (size, shape and material of construction).
71.9.2 Signs for Special Events of a Religious, Charitable, Civic, Fraternal or Political Nature.
It is the intent of this section to allow use of Community Marquee signs for the above purposes. Temporary signs as defined by Section 71.3.24 advertising special events of a religious, charitable, civic, fraternal or political nature may be erected provided that:
a. The size of any such sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area.
b. The signs may not be illuminated.
c. The signs may not be displayed earlier than thirty (30) days prior to the event to which they pertain and must be removed within seven (7) days after the event.
d. Only one sign per premise is allowed, except during an election year when the display of political advertising shall be liberally allowed.
71.9.3 Signs for Newly Established Businesses
Businesses which are newly established or have changed locations may display a temporary sign as defined by Section 1.3.24 above provided that:
a. The size of any such sign is not in excess of twenty-four (24) square feet in area.
B. The sign may be displayed for a period of sixty (60) days. This sixty day period may begin no earlier than sixty days prior to the opening date of the business nor later than thirty (30) days after the Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the Building Inspector.
c. Only one such sign is allowed per premise, however, this one sign may be used in addition to other permitted signs.
71.9.4 Signs for Special Sales and Promotions
Temporary signs as defined by advertising special sales and promotions by merchants and other profit-making concerns may be erected in addition to other permitted signs provided:
a. The size of such sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet.
b. The signs may not be illuminated.
c. The signs may be displayed for a period of ten (10) days only.
d. Only one (1) sign per premise is allowed.
e. A business establishment may receive registration for temporary signs for four (4) or less separate events during a twelve month period. An interval of thirty (30) days shall separate each event.
71.9.5 Coming Soon, Under Construction
Businesses which are under construction or will be may display a temporary sign as defined by Section 71.3.24 above provided that:
a. The size is not in excess of thirty-two (32) square feet.
23
b. The sign may be displayed for a period of six (6) months.
c. The sign may not be illuminated.
71.10 Exceptions and Modifications
71.10.1 Business With Only One Sign
Where a business establishment elects to erect only one sign and that sign is to be an attached sign the permitted area of this sign may be increased as follows:
a. The permitted area of an attached sign may be increased by fifty (50%) percent.
b. The attached sign permitted by this section shall meet all other applicable requirements regarding placement, lighting, permit procedures, etc., of this ordinance.
c. In the event that the business should desire a second sign after the attached sign allowed by this section is erected, no permit for the additional sign shall be issued until the attached sign meets the size requirements of the zone in which it is located as specified in Section 71.8
71.10.2 Portable Signs It is the intent of this Ordinance to discourage the use of portable signs as defined in Section 71.3.19. However, limited use will be allowed.
a. Portable signs as defined in Section 71.3.19 will need a permit and the permit will be valid for only fourteen (14) days. Only four portable sign permits per business per year will be issued with an interval of 30 days between permits required.
b. The sign will not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area.
c. Only one such sign is allowed per premise in addition to other permitted signs.
d. Portable signs will be permitted in the following zoning districts: B-2 Highway business, M-1 Light Industrial and M-2, Heavy Industrial.
71.10.3 Business or Industrial Parks Over 200 Feet from a Thoroughfare
An off-premises directory sign will be permitted in addition to other permitted signs for business and industrial parks located more than 200 feet from a thoroughfare.
a. The sign will be limited to the name and logo only.
b. The sign may be free standing.
c. The sign may not exceed forty (40) square feet or ten (10) feet in height.
d. It may not be illuminated.
e. It must be outside the right-of-way.
f. Permission of the property owner must be secured.
71.10.4 Interstate 77 Intersection
Business within 1200 feet of I-77 in the Highway Business Zoning District may seek a Conditional Use permit to deviate from the sign regulations for Highway Business as herein stipulated. The Board of Commissioners will act on the request on recommendation of the Planning Board.
71.10.5 Big Box Retailers
24
Big Box Retailers larger than 50,000 square feet located on corner lots may be allowed two free standing signs and one attached sign. Free standing signs may not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. The two free standing signs may not total more than one hundred sixty (160) square feet in surface area, however the maximum limit of any one sign is 126 square feet. The maximum limit for an attached sign is 350 square feet.
71.11 Maintenance of Signs
71.11.1 All sign supports, braces, poles, wires, and anchors thereof shall be kept in good repair. They shall be maintained in safe conditions, free from deterioration, missing parts, and peeling paint. Any sign not in compliance with these standards shall be deemed a nuisance and the following action may be taken.
a. The Town Zoning Officer shall give written notice to the owner specifying the sign indicated and telling what needs to be done to bring the sign into compliance.
b. The owner of the sign shall respond to the notice within two (2) weeks and shall have sixty (60) days to complete said repairs. Additional time shall be granted by the Zoning Officer only upon delay of parts when it has been clearly shown that the parts have been ordered.
c. Failure to complete repairs in the specified time shall result in the Zoning Officer causing the sign to be repaired, removed or altered at the expense of the owner(s). Costs of removal or repair, court costs and attorney fees incurred by the Town shall be assessed against the owner(s), to be collected by the Town in an action in the nature of a debt.
d. In the event of a sign which is damaged in excess of fifty (50%) percent of its reproduction value, such sign shall be restored or repaired only in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
71.12 Relocation of Signs
Signs for which a sign permit has been issued may be relocated in conformance with the regulations of this article upon notification to the Zoning Officer. Signs which are non-conforming may not be relocated except upon removal of all non-conforming features of the sign.
71.13 Obsolete or Abandoned Signs
71.13.1 Signs or parts of signs which advertise or pertain to a business, product, service, commodity, event, activity, or purpose which no longer exists or that has not been in use for ninety (90) days or more shall be deemed to be an abandoned sign.
71.13.2 Obsolete or abandoned signs are prohibited and shall be removed by the owner or his agent within thirty (30) days of termination of the business, activity, event, etc., with the exception of political signs, which shall be removed within seven (7) days after elections.
71.13.3 Failure to remove such signs or parts of signs shall result in written notice from the Zoning Officer. Failure to comply with these terms shall result in the sign being removed at the owners expense. Costs of removal or repair, court costs and attorney fees incurred by the Town shall be assessed against the owner(s), to be collected by the Town in an action on the nature of the debt.
71.14 Non-Commercial Copy Permitted on Any Authorized Sign
Any sign authorized in this Ordinance is allowed to contain non-commercial copy in lieu of any other copy.
71.15 Appeals
25
The provisions of Section 145 of the Zoning Ordinance entitled "Duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Board of Adjustment, Courts and Town Board of Commissioners on Matters of Appeal" shall apply to this sign Ordinance.
71.16 Validity
The provisions of Section 161 of the Zoning Ordinance, entitled "Validity" and containing severability provisions, shall be applicable to this sign Ordinance.
Section 72. OFF-STREET PARKING AND STORAGE
Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established in all districts except the B-1 Central Business District. At the time of the erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, or before conversion from one type of use to another, permanent off-street parking space in the amount specified by this section shall be provided. Such parking space may be provided in a parking garage or properly graded open space.
72.1 Certificate of Minimum Parking Requirements. Each application for a zoning permit or certificate of occupancy submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer as provided for in Article XIII shall include information as to the location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space and means of ingress and egress to such space. This information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine whether the requirements of this section are met.
72.2 Combination of Required Parking Space. The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one (1) lot, but the required space assigned to one (1) use may not be assigned to another use, except that one-half (1/2) of the parking space required for churches, theaters, or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays.
72.3 Remote Parking Space. If the off-street parking space required by this ordinance cannot be reasonable provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such space may be provided on any land within five hundred (500) feet of the main entrance to such principal use, provided such land is in the same ownership as the principal use. Said land shall be used for no other purpose so long as no other adequate provision for parking space meeting the requirements of this ordinance has been made for the principal use.
72.4 Requirements for Parking Lots in Residential Districts. Where parking lots for more than five (5) automobile are permitted or required in residential districts, the following provisions shall be complied with:
72.4 The lot may be used only for parking in relation to the principal use of the lot and not for any type of loading, sales, repair work, dismantling or servicing.
72.42 All entrances, exits, barricades at side walks, and drainage works shall be approved by the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to construction.
72.43 A buffer strip shall be required along all side and rear lot lines. (See Section 78 Landscaping)
72.5 Minimum Parking Requirements. The required number of off-street parking spaces are specified below for each use:
LAND USE REQUIRED PARKING SPACE
Automobiles sales and One (1) space for each one (1) employee at maximum
repair garages employment on a single shift, plus two (2) spaces for each
three hundred (300) square feet of repair or maintenance space.
26
Bowling Alleys Three (3) spaces for each lane, plus one (1)
additional space for each one (1) employee.
Churches, Funeral Homes, One (1) space for each four (4) seats.
Assembly Halls, theater, and
Auditoriums
Day Care Centers One (1) space for each six hundred (600) square feet
of gross floor area or fraction thereof, plus adequate
off-street loading and unloading space.
Elementary School and One (1) space for each classroom and administrative office,
Junior High School, plus plus adequate parking for buses.
Public or Private
Home occupations In addition to residence requirements, one (1) parking space
per five hundred (500) feet of floor devoted to the home
occupation.
Hospitals One (1) space for each four (4) patients beds plus one (1)
space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one (1) space
for each two employees.
Hotels, Motels, and One (1) space for each one (1) room plus one (1)
Tourist Homes additional space for each two (2) employees.
Libraries One (1) space for each four hundred (400) square
feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof in the principal
building.
Medical Offices Five (5) spaces for each doctor practicing at the clinic,
and clinics plus one (1) space for each employee.
Mobile Homes Two (2) spaces for each mobile home
Nursing Homes One (1) parking space for each five (5) beds intended
for patient use and one (1) space for each three (3)
employees.
Offices, Business, One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet
Profession, or Public of gross floor space or fraction thereof.
(including banks)
Places of Public Assembly, One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet
including Private Clubs, Lodges of gross floor space or fraction thereof.
Dance Halls, Poolrooms,
Gymnasiums, Amusement Parks,
Community Centers, and all
similar places of public assembly
Rescue Squads and Armories Parking space equivalent to three (3) times the floor space in
the main building.
Residential Dwellings, One (1) space for each dwelling unit.
Single family, two family and
multi-family
27
Restaurants, Cafe, Tavern or One (1) space for each three (3) seats plus one (1) space for other place serving food or drink, each two (2) employees.
exclusively in the main building
Restaurants, drive-ins Parking space equivalent to five (5) times the floor space
in the main building.
Retail Business and Consumer One space for each two hundred (200) square feet
Service outlets. of gross floor area.
Rooming and Boarding Houses One space for each room rented plus normal residential requirements
Senior High Schools, and One (1) space for each ten (10) students for whom the school
Colleges, both public and private was designed; one (1) space for each classroom and administrative office; and adequate parking and convenient loading and unloading areas for students.
Service Stations Five (5) parking spaces for each grease rack or wash rack.
Shopping Centers One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of retail floor space.
Wholesale and Industrial Uses One (1) space for each employee on the largest shift.
One bedroom dwelling units One and one-half parking spaces
in apartments
Section 73. OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. For the purposes of this section, an off-street loading space shall have a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by forty (40) feet and an overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet in height above the alley or street grade.
The number of required off-street loading berths for nonresidential structures shall be as follows:
Square feet of gross floor area Required number of berths
0 to 40,000 1
40,000 to 100,000 2
100,000 to 160,000 3
160,000 to 240,000 4
240,000 to 320,000 5
320,000 to 400,000 6
Each 90,000 above 400,000 1
Section 74 TEMPORARY USES
74.1 Purpose. It is the intent of this section to permit the temporary uses customarily accompanying the erection of permitted structures or the establishment of permitted uses, or the accomplishment of permitted operations, as necessary to such work and not substantially injurious to the public
28
health, safety, welfare or morals. It is also the intent to permit customary uses of open land and of existing buildings and surrounding land, which are temporary in nature.
74.2 Temporary Uses Permitted
If applicable requirements of the Health Department are met, customary temporary use shall be permitted including but not limited to the following:
a. Temporary structures, mobile homes, or storage areas on construction sites;
b. Temporary structures on sites of grading operations;
c. Temporary structures, mobile homes, or storage area of public agencies, in the conduct of proprietary or government operations.
d. The use of open land for meetings, circuses or carnivals or fairs, or the sale of Christmas trees, baked goods, or collected clothing and the like if no structure is erected other than tents;
e. The use of a trailer or camper by visitors to the occupant of the principal building for a period not exceeding seven (7) days without a permit.
f. The use of a residence or other building and surrounding land by any non-profit, charitable, religious or educational organization for the purpose of exhibiting and purveying indoors and out-of-doors, art or craft products, jewelry, clothing, foods, beverages, horticultural specimens, home furnishings and decorations, and similar or related items and for presenting musical, film or theatrical programs indoors.
24.3 Permit. Any temporary use shall be established only after the issuance of a zoning permit by the zoning inspector for such use. Duration of the temporary use shall be specified on such permit except that the use of a trailer or camper by visitors shall not be more than thirty (30) days and shall not be renewed. A permit for a temporary use shall not be renewed more than twice. In no case shall any single permit or single renewal be issued for a temporary use to exceed one (1) year.
Section 75. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, CSU
CSU’s may not be permitted in any residential zone, except on a temporary basis for “moving in”, “moving out”, or construction projects, including re-model. The zoning enforcement officer shall issue a permit for these limited uses, which permit shall set forth the maximum permitted time, the CSU may be present on the property. There shall be a $20.00 charge for this permit.
CSU’s in Commercial zones shall be permitted only as follows:
1) A maximum of two CSU’s shall be permitted on any commercial property for use as non-retailing storage of inventory or goods. These CSU’s shall be located at the rear of the buildings; or, if located in the side, must be screened from view of the fronting street; shall be located on a paved or gravel surface, and shall not be in an area of “Approved parking spaces”. These permits shall be $100.00 for each CSU and shall be for a maximum of 90 days; but may be renewed for an additional 90 days for additional $300.00 permitting fee, for each CSU. (In accordance with current fee schedule)
29
2) Construction trailers and “construction trash dumpsters” shall be exempt from permitting during demolition and construction. These trailers must be removed within ten (10) working days of construction completion or issuance of final Certificate of Occupancy ( C.O. ). If not removed after ten (10) days, they must be permitted
3) Utility trailers used by businesses for storage and sale of seasonal merchandise which are not expected to remain on the property in excess of two weeks; and, utility trailers used to collect used goods, donations, and equipment which are not expected to remain stationary in excess of two weeks shall be exempt from permitting.
4) CSU’s shall be allowed without permitting on industrial property (M-1 and M-2 Districts) subject only to “screening” requirements from residential and commercial zones set forth in other sections of this ordinance.
Section 78. LANDSCAPING, SCREENING AND BUFFER AREAS
PURPOSE
The following requirements are intended to enhance the appearance and natural beauty of the town and to protect property values through preservation and planting of vegetation, screening, and landscaping material. The requirements are intended to reduce excessive heat, glare, and accumulation of dust; to provide privacy from noise and visual intrusion; to prevent the erosion of soil and the excessive run-off of water and the consequent depletion of the ground water table and pollution of water bodies.
78.1 Applicability
The provisions of this section shall apply to all improvements of 3,000 square feet or more of impervious surface or rezoned areas except as hereinafter setforth. The provisions of Section 78.4 and 78.5 shall not apply to areas zoned B-1.
78.2 DEFINITIONS
berm An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.
buffer A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences, or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and screen incompatible land uses from each other.
deciduous A plant with foliage that is shed annually.
evergreen A plant with foliage that persists and remains green year-round.
ornamental tree A deciduous tree planted primarily for its ornamental value or for screening purposes; tends to be smaller at maturity than a shade tree.
screen A method of reducing the impact of noise and unsightly visual intrusions with less offensive or more harmonious elements, such as plants, berms, fences, walls, or any appropriate combination thereof.
shade tree Usually a deciduous tree--rarely an evergreen--planted primarily for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy.
shrub A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground; may be deciduous or evergreen.
30
specimen tree A particularly impressive or unusual example of a species due to its size, shade, age, or any other trait that epitomized the character of the species.
tree A large, woody plant having one or several self-supporting stems or trunks and numerous branches. May be classified as deciduous or evergreen.
woodlands, Existing trees and shrubs of a number, size, and species that accomplish the same general function as new plantings.
78.3 General Provisions. Landscaping, trees, and plant material shall be planted in a growing condition according to accepted horticultural practices and they shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition. Any landscaping, trees, and plant material in a condition that does not fulfill the intent of these regulations shall be replaced by the property owner during the next planting season.
A screening fence or wall area shall be maintained by the property owner, in good condition, throughout the period of the use of the lot.
To the extent possible, existing trees, vegetation, and unique site features shall be retained and protected. Existing healthy, mature trees, if properly located, shall be fully credited against the requirements of these regulations.
Trees shall be a minimum of 5 feet in height, with a minimum circumference of 2-2.5 inches measured at the top of the root ball, immediately after planting. Trees shall reach an expected height of 25-35 feet at maturity. Trees shall be planted 25 to 35 feet on enter depending on species.
Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 6 feet immediately after planting.
Shrubs and hedges shall be minimum of 1-2 feet in height immediately after planting.
Ground cover may include any plant material that reaches an average height of not more than 12 inches. Alternative materials may be used in lieu of grass provided they present a finished appearance and provide a reasonably complete coverage at the time of planting.
Plants that restrict sight visibility at intersections of streets or driveways, such as tall shrubs or low branching trees, are prohibited.
Where lot size, shape, topography or existing structures make it not feasible to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, the Director of Planning may modify these provisions provided the alternate proposal will afford a degree of landscaping, screening and buffering equivalent to or exceeding the requirements of these regulations.
78.4 Front Landscaped Area. A front landscaped area shall be required for all two-family, multi-family, and non-residential uses. The required landscaped area shall be contiguous to the front lot line of the property and have an average minimum width of 10 feet. The area shall be covered with grass or other ground cover and shall include appropriate trees and shrubs. At a minimum, 1 tree and 10 shrubs shall be planted within the front landscaped area and for each 50 feet or fraction thereof of lot frontage. The purpose of the landscaping is to enhance the appearance of the use of the lot but not to negate access or screen the use from view.
78.5 Buffer Area. A buffer area shall be required to separate and screen incompatible land uses from each other. A buffer area shall be required along all boundaries of a two-family, multi-family, or non-residential lot abutting a less intensive use. Such buffer shall comply with the following minimum standards.
78.5.1 A buffer area shall be located within the boundaries of the subject property. The buffer may be
31
located on abutting property, provided the owners of all abutting properties agree in writing to the proposal. Said agreement must be recorded and run with the land and provide stipulations for maintenance and upkeep, as deemed necessary.
78.5.2 The minimum width of the buffer area shall be following the buffer matrix below:
Proposed Use
Single-Family - - - - - -
Two-Family 5 - - - - -
Medical 10 5 - - - -
Commercial 15 10 5 - - -
Multi-Family 15 10 5 - - -
Industrial 25 20 15 10 10 -
SF TF M C MF IND Adjacent uses
78.5.3 The buffer area shall consist of trees and shrubs of such a type, height, spacing and arrangement to effectively buffer the activity on the lot from the neighboring area. At a minimum, the planting shall consist of 2 trees and 10 shrubs per 100 linear feet for 5-10 foot buffers, 5 trees and 15 shrubs per 100 linear feet for 15-20 foot buffers and 8 trees and 20 shrubs per 100 linear feet for 25 foot buffers.
78.5.4 An earthen berm, fence, or wall of a location, height, design, and material approved by the Department of Planning may be substituted for any portion of the required planting and/or buffer area. Fences and walls, if substituted, shall be constructed of materials congruous with the materials of the main building. Trees and shrubs shall supplement earthen berms, fences, or wall areas.
78.6 Landscaped Parking area. Parking areas shall comply with the following minimum standards.
78.6.1 All uses required to have more than thirty (30)off-street parking spaces shall have at least 10 square feet of interior landscaping, within the paved portion of the parking area, for each parking space and at least one small tree for every ten (10) parking spaces or fraction thereof.
78.6.2 Each interior landscaped area shall contain a minimum of 200 square feet and shall be planted with shrubs and trees.
78.6.3 A landscaped area shall be provided along the perimeter of any parking area. The required landscaped area shall have a minimum width of 5 feet and shall be planted with 2 trees and 10 shrubs per 100 linear feet of perimeter area.
78.6.4 Interior landscaped areas shall be spaced throughout the lot to reduce the visual impact of long rows of parked cars. At a minimum, landscaped areas shall be distributed approximately once every 10 spaces for residential and once every 15 spaces for other developments.
78.6.5 Landscaped areas shall be provided at the ends of parking aisles and shall be planted with shrubs and/or trees.
78.6.6 The required number of parking spaces may be reduced by one parking space for each 150 square feet of interior planting area, not exceeding 10%.
78.7 Screening of Outdoor Storage Areas. (Defined Section 41.28 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Elkin.) Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view of adjacent streets, and from all residentially zoned land by a double row of evergreen shrubs or trees planted to form a continuous hedge of at least 6 feet in height within 2 years of installation.
78.8 Screening of Mechanical Equipment. All non-residential uses shall screen from view from public
32
places and neighboring properties all mechanical equipment, such as but not limited to, ground or roof mounted air conditioning, air conditioners, or pumps, through the use of features such as berms, fences, false facades or dense landscaping compatible with the site.
78.9 Central Solid Waste Storage Area. All new buildings and uses except for single-family and two-family dwellings, shall provide facilities for the central storage of solid waste within the lot. Where such facilities are provided outside of a building they shall be screened from adjacent property by an enclosure constructed of materials congruous with the materials on the exterior wall of the main buildings.
78.10 Outdoor Lighting. Adequate lighting for security purposes will be provided.
78.11 Unoccupied Lot Areas. All areas of a developed lot not occupied by buildings, structures, pedestrian and vehicle circulation ways, off-street parking and outside storage shall be appropriately improved with ground cover, trees, shrubbery or mulch.
No exposed soils shall be permitted after issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, except for agricultural activities or extraction of earth products.
78.12 Planting List. The following trees and shrubs by way of example but not by way of limitation are suitable for use in the Elkin area.
Large Trees (mature height 35 feet or greater and 35 feet spacing)
Willow Oak Black Gum
Sugar Maple Littlelead Linden
Red Maple White Oak
Scarlet Oak Japanese Scholartree
Pin Oak Gingko
Southern Magnolia English Oak
London Plane-tree Japanese Katsuratree
River Birch Schumard Oak
Japanese Zelkova Chinese Elm
Tulip Poplar
Medium Trees (mature height 25-35 feet and 30 feet spacing)
Mountain Silverbell Weeping Cherry
Sourwood Kwansan Cherry
Thornless Honeylocust Yellowood
Eastern Redbud Ironwood
Mountain Ash Pistachio
Yoshino Cherry Redwood Linden
Golden-Rain-Tree American Holly
Saucer Magnolia
Small Trees (mature height less than 25 feet and 25 feet spacing)
Japanese Maple Crabapple
33
Japanese Dogwood Amur Maple
Flowering Dogwood Russian Olive
Smoketree Wax Myrtle
Crepe Myrtle Star Magnolia
Shrubs (mature height approximately 36 inches)
Evergreen
Warty Barberry Mugo Pine
Dwarf Burford Holly Juniper
Japanese Holly Euonymous
Azalea Leatherleaf Viburnum
Deciduous
Forsythia Potentilla
Dwarf Burning Bush Ornamental Grass Varieties
Thunberg Spriea Oregonholly Grape
Viburnum Red Chokeberry
Oakleaf Hydrangea Nandina
Japanese Flowering Quince Dwarf Nandina
Screening Plants (installation height 6 feet)
American Holly Hetz Juniper
Burford Holly Arborvitae
Nelly Stevens Holly Easter Red Cedar
Wax Myrtle Japanese Black Pine
ARTICLE VIII
USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT
Section 80. R-12 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The R-12 Residential District is established as a district where the principal use of land is for medium density single-family residential development along with limited home occupations and public and private community uses. It is expected that all dwellings will have access to municipal water and sewer supplies.
80.1 Permitted Principal uses
34
Churches and their customary related buildings including cemeteries, provided that all buildings and graves shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property line.
Cemeteries
Dwellings, Single-family
Kindergartens and Day Nurseries, provided that not less than seventy-five (75) square feet of play area for each child is provided and provided that the aggregate play area is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least six (6) feet in height.
Public elementary and secondary schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
80.2 Permitted accessory uses
Customary accessory uses.
Customary home occupations.
Signs, subject to Section 71.
80.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Commissioners
Planned Unit Developments, subject to Article XII
Short term housing
Multi-family-Subject to Article XII
Dwellings-Two family-subject to the dimensional requirements of Section 81.4
Board of Adjustment
Funeral Homes
Public works and public utilities including electrical transmission, distribution and substation equipment, pumping stations, water towers, and telephone exchange provided:
a. such facilities are essential to the service of the immediate area and no vehicles or materials shall be stored on the premises;
b. all buildings and apparatus (except utility lines) shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area.
c. such facilities as water towers, pumping stations, etc., shall be surrounded by a chain link fence six (6)
feet in height.
80.4 Dimensional Requirements
80.41 Twelve thousand (12,000) square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit.
80.42 Eighty (80) feet minimum mean lot width.
80.43 Thirty (30) feet minimum building setback line.
80.44 Minimum required side yards for the principal building shall be at least ten (10) feet, except
35
that any side yard abutting a street or highway shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.
80.45 Minimum required rear yard shall be twenty (20) percent of the mean lot depth, provided that such rear yard need not exceed thirty (30) feet.
80.46 Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.
80.47 Height of buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet unless the depth of the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet, or fraction thereof, of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet.
80.48 Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required front or side yard or within twenty (20) feet of any street or highway line. An accessory building or use may be located in a rear yard provided it is located not less than ten (10) feet from the principal building and five (5) feet from the rear yard line.
80.49 Off-street parking shall be provided as required in Section 72 of this ordinance.
Section 81. R-8 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The R-8 Residential District is established in which the principal use of land is for single-family, two-family and multi-family residences. The regulations of this district are intended to provide areas in the community for those persons desiring small residences and multi-family structures in relatively high density neighborhoods. The regulations are intended to prohibit any use which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature of this district. It is expected that municipal water and sewerage facilities will be available to each lot in such districts.
81.1 Permitted Principal Uses
Churches and their customary related uses including cemeteries, proved that all buildings and graves shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property line.
Dwellings, single-family.
Dwellings, two-family
Kindergartens and Day Nurseries, provided that not less than seventy-five (75) square feet of play area is provided for each child and the aggregate play space is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least six (6) feet in height.
Offices for doctors, dentists, chiropractors, attorneys, accountants, insurance men and similar professional persons (the determination of other appropriate professions shall be handled by the Board of Adjustment).
Public and private elementary and secondary schools if the private facilities have a curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
Public or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools, fishing lakes, family campgrounds, and similar recreational uses.
Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters, provided:
a. all vehicles and equipment shall be stored indoors;
36
b. all buildings shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area.
Rest and Convalescent Homes.
Rooming and boarding houses and tourist homes.
81.2 Permitted Accessory uses
Customary accessory use.
Customary home occupation.
Signs, subject to Section 71.
81.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Commissioners
Dwellings, multi-family, subject to Article XII
Planned Unit Development, subject to Article XII
Board of Adjustment
Funeral homes.
Public works and public utilities including electrical transmission, distribution and substation equipment, pumping stations, water towers, and telephone exchanges provided:
a. such facilities are essential to the service of the immediate area and no materials shall be stored on the premises;
b. all buildings and apparatus (except utility lines) shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area.
c. such facilities as water towers, pumping stations, etc., shall be surrounded by a chain link fence six (6) feet in height.
81.4 Dimensional Requirements
81.41 Eight thousand (8,000) square feet minimum required lot area or the first dwelling unit, five thousand (5,000) square feet additional lot area required for the second dwelling unit, and three thousand (3,000) square feet additional lot area per dwelling unit in excess of two (2) up to a maximum of ten (10) dwelling units per acre.
81.42 Seventy (70) feet minimum required mean lot width for the first dwelling unit; then (10) feet additional mean lot width for the second dwelling unit and each dwelling unit in excess of two (2).
81.43 Thirty (30) feet minimum required front yard setback.
81.44 Minimum required side yards for the principal building shall be at least ten (10) feet, except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least twelve (12) feet.
81.45 Minimum required rear yard shall be twenty percent (20%) of the mean lot depth, provided that such rear yard need not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.
37
81.46 Maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.
81.47 Height of buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet unless the depth of the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet, or fraction thereof, of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet.
81.48 Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required front or side yard or within twenty (20) feet of any street or highway line or within five (5) feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. An accessory building or use may be located in a rear yard provided it is located not less than ten (10) feet from the principal building and five (5) feet from the rear yard line.
81.49 Off-street parking shall be provided as required in section 72 of this ordinance.
Section 82. R-20 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The R-20 Residential district is established as a district in which the principal use of the land is for low density residential or agricultural purposes, and to provide and protect low density residential areas for those desiring that type of environment. These districts are intended to insure that residential development not having access to public water supplies and dependent upon septic tanks for sewage disposal will occur at a sufficiently low density to provide a healthful environment.
82.1 Permitted Principal Uses
Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the sale of products at a retail stand on the property where produced.
Backyard workshops.
Churches and their customary related uses including cemeteries, provided that all buildings and graves shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property line.
Dwellings, Single Family.
Kindergartens and day nurseries, provided that not less than seventy-five (75) square feet of play area is provided for each child and provided further said aggregate play space is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least six (6) feet in height.
Public and elementary and secondary schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools.
Public, or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools, fishing lakes, family camp grounds and similar recreational uses
Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters, provided:
(a) all vehicles and equipment shall be stored indoors;
(b) all buildings shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from all property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area.
Rest and Convalescent homes not used primarily for the treatment of contagious diseases, alcoholics, drug addicts and psychotics.
82.2 Permitted accessory uses
38
Customary accessory uses.
Customary home occupations.
Signs, subject to Section 71.
82.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Commissioners
Mobile Homes on individual lots, provided they are treated as principal uses and meet the same area, yard and sanitary requirements as non-mobile dwelling units. Deleted 3/8/99
Multi-family dwellings, subject to Article XII.
Planned Unit Developments, subject to article XII.
Two-Family Dwelling Units.
Kennels - for boarding dogs and cats for fees, only if the enclosure (fenced area or building in which they are kept) is located at least 100 feet from the front lot line and 50 feet from the sides and back lot line of the property involved and the enclosure is shielded by evergreen trees or shrubs or fence so the enclosure cannot be seen from adjacent or across the street property.
Board of Adjustment
Funeral Homes
Mobile home parks, subject to Article XII.
Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers, and telephone exchanges, provided:
a. such facilities are essential to the service of the immediate area and no vehicles or materials shall be stored on the premises;
b. all buildings and apparatus (except utility lines) shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area.
c. such facilities as water towers, pumping stations, and so forth, shall be surrounded by a chain link fence six (6) feet in height.
Winery
82.4 Dimensional requirements
82.41 Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet minimum required area for the first dwelling unit and twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area for each additional dwelling unit. Where the residence is service by municipal water the first dwelling unit need only be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and each additional unit five thousand (5,000) square feet. However, where the residence is served by municipal water and sewerage facilities, the lot area for the first dwelling unit need only be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and each additional unit five thousand (5,000) square feet.
82.42 One hundred (100) feet minimum required main lot width for the first dwelling unit and ten (10)
39
feet for each additional dwelling unit.
82.43 Forty (40) feet minimum required building setback line.
82.44 Minimum required side yards for the principal building shall be at least twelve (12) feet except that any side yard abutting a street shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.
82.45 Minimum required rear yard shall be twenty (20) percent of the mean lot depth, provided that such rear yard need not exceed thirty (30) feet.
82.46 Maximum permissible lot coverage for the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total lot area.
82.47 Height of buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet unless the depth of the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet, or fraction thereof, of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet.
82.48 Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required front or side yard or within twenty (20 feet of any street line or within five (5) feet of any lot line not a street line. An accessory building or use may be located not less than ten (10) feet from the principal building and five (5) feet from the rear yard line.
82.49 Off-street parking shall be provided as required in Section 72 of this ordinance.
Section 83. MA-MEDICAL ARTS DISTRICT
The MA Medical Arts District is established where hospitals, clinics, professional offices for medical doctors, and other related medical facilities may be compatibly mixed in order to facilitate the interaction between doctor and patient while at the same time maintaining a healthy living environment for neighboring residential areas.
83.1 Permitted Principal Uses
Apothecary, prescription center, or drug store, subject to the following conditions:
a. licensed pharmacist must be employed;
b. prescription and non-prescription drugs may be sold on the premises, but the sale of general merchandise is prohibited;
c. vending machine my be on the premise, but a soda fountain or lunch counter is prohibited.
Hospitals
Medical and dental clinics
Physical therapist's office
Professional offices for doctors
Public works and public utilities including electrical transmission, distribution and substation equipment, pumping stations, water towers, and telephone exchange provided:
a.. such facilities are essential to the service of the area and no vehicles or materials shall be stored on the premises.
40
b. all buildings and structures (except utility lines) shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area.
c. such facilities as water towers, pumping stations, etc., shall be surrounded by a chain link fence at least six (6) feet in height.
Resthomes
83.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
Customary accessory uses.
Signs, subject to Section 71.
83.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Commissioners
Veterinary Hospitals
Board of Adjustment
Flower or gift shops
83.4 Dimensional Requirements
83.41 Minimum lot area and yard requirements shall be:
a. Fifty (50) feet minimum front yard.
b. Ten (10) feet minimum side yard.
c. Twenty (20) feet minimum rear yard.
83.42 The total ground area covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total lot area.
83.43 No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height unless the depth of the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet, or fraction thereof, of building height in excess of thirty-five feet.
83.44 Buildings constructed or converted to uses permitted in this district shall provide off-street loading and unloading space as required in Section 73 of this ordinance.
83.45 Off-street parking space shall be provided as required in Section 72 of this ordinance.
Section 83A MA MEDICAL ARTS DISTRICT ALTERNATIVE
In addition to Section 83. Section 83. MA Medical Arts District as set out in the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Elkin, North Carolina" an alternative to Section 83 of the said Zoning Ordinance is designated as Section 83A and hereby passed as follows:
The MA Medical Arts District Alternative is established where hospitals, clinics, professional offices for medical doctors, and other related medical facilities may be compatibly mixed in order to facilitate the interaction between doctors and patient while at the same time maintaining a healthy living environment for neighboring residential areas. The MA Medical Arts District Alternative allows for separate or additional owners to provide the open areas, loading space, and parking space required by this Ordinance.
41
83.1A Same as Section 83.1
83.2A Same as Section 83.2
83.3A Same as Section 83.3
83.4A Dimensional Requirements:
Section 83.4A (a), (b), (c) shall be the same as Section 83.41 EXCEPT the front yard, side yard, and rear yard requirements of Section 83.41 are met if an owner of the property adjacent to the building and the owner of the building continuously maintain the front yard, side yard, and rear yard therein set out free from building or structure and said open area does not extend into areas of front yard, side yard or rear yard reserved for other buildings or structures.
83.42A If the property owners meet all other requirements of Section 83, then the requirements set out in Section 83.42 are eliminated.
83.43A Shall be the same as Section 83.44 EXCEPT the property owner may join with adjacent property owners or contract with common owners to continuously provide space to meet the requirements of Section 73 of this Ordinance.
83.45A Shall be the same as Section 83.45 EXCEPT if the owner of the building along with other owners of buildings continuously furnish enough common parking spaces to satisfy the requirements of off-street parking spaces for all buildings within a single health-care complex or subdivision, the requirements of Section 83.44A are satisfied.
Section 84 B-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
The Central business District (B-1) is established as the centrally-located trade and commercial service area of the community. The regulations of this district are designed to encourage the continued use of land for community trade and commercial service uses, and to permit a concentrated development of permitted uses while maintaining a substantial relationship between the intensity of land uses and the capacity of utilities and streets.
84.1 Permitted Principal Uses
Art Gallery / Museums
Art schools, music and dance studios and similar uses
Auction House
Automobile parking lots and structures
Banks and other financial institutions, including loan and finance companies
Barber and beauty shops
Billiard Halls
Brewery / Winery / Distillery
Car wash and auto detail shops
Drug stores, with or without fountains
42
Event Centers
Hotel, Motel and Vacation Rentals
Jewelry repair shops and Jewelry sales
Locksmith and gunsmith
Mixed uses, buildings erected for both dwelling and business purposes, provided such buildings shall have office retail business on the main street floor and residential on the second floor. Any other combination of use will be reviewed as a conditional use.
Murals.
Newspaper offices and printing shops incidental to such offices
Business and Professional Offices open to the public other than medical, dental and physical therapy clinics and offices
Outdoor / Outfitters
Photographic studios
Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters
Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants, provided such drive-in restaurants are fenced on all sides which abut residential districts. Such fences shall be solid from the ground to a height of six (6) feet.
Any business establishment for the sale to the public at retail goods and services including, but not limited to mercantile goods, clothing, shoes, arts, crafts, gifts, jewelry, toys, sporting goods, electrical and motor vehicle parts, books and stationary, floral products, firearms, furniture, hardware, equipment, appliances, floor coverings, food items, and similar products; excluding, however, the sale of motor vehicles, all-terrain vehicles and any other recreational vehicles.
Schools Public or Private, Learning Centers
Shoe repair and shine shops.
Tailor and dressmaking shops.
Taxicab stands and Limo services.
Video Arcade
Theaters, indoor.
84.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
Customary accessory uses and structures when located on the same block as the principal structure, excluding, however, open storage.
Signs, subject to Section 71
43
84.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Commissioners
Bus Stations
Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, but excluding industrial trade schools
Churches and their customary accessory uses, but excluding cemeteries.
Dry Cleaning and laundry pick-up stations and dry cleaning plants having not more than two thousand (2,000) square feet
Funeral homes and mortuaries.
Launderettes and laundromats.
Multi-family dwellings, subject to Article XII
Automobile, Motor cycle, Recreational Vehicle and All-Terrain Vehicle Sales, new and used
Board of Adjustment
Light manufacturing operations.
Mixed uses, new buildings erected for both dwelling and business purposes, provided such buildings shall be furnished with side yards on each side of the building measuring not less than eight (8) feet in width, provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the street side of a corner lot.
Mixed uses, other than commercial on the main floor and residential on upper floors.
Single Family Residential.
84.4 Dimensional Requirements
84.41 No building shall be closer to the center of the street than the closer of either of the adjacent buildings. No other yards are required except that where the rear lot abuts a residential district there shall be a fifteen (15) foot rear yard and where a lot abuts the side of a lot zoned residential there shall be a side yard not less than ten (10) feet in width. On all other cases where a side yard, not required, is provided it shall be at least eight (8) feet in width.
84.42 In the B-1 Central Business District every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to exceed fifty (50) feet in height, shall be set back from the front lot line on the ratio of one (1) foot for each two (2) feet rise above said fifty (50) feet, but in no case shall the required set back exceed ten (10) feet.
84.43 Buildings constructed or converted to commercial use after the effective date of this ordinance which have access to a public alley shall provide off-street loading and unloading berths as required in Section 73 of this ordinance.
84.44 Any multi-family developments shall comply with R-8 Residential dwellings dimensional requirements specified in Section 81.4.
44
Section 85. B-2 HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT
The B-2 Highway Business Districts are generally located on major thoroughfares and collector streets in the planning area. They are intended to provide for offices, personal services, and the retailing of durable and convenience goods for the community. Because these commercial uses are subject to public view and are important to the economy of the area, they should have ample parking, controlled traffic movement and suitable landscaping.
85.1 Permitted Principal Uses
Animal hospitals, provided no pens or kennels are located closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line.
Apple packaging sheds.
Assembly halls, coliseums, armories, ballrooms and similar structures.
Automobile sales, new and used.
Automobile washing establishments.
Auction Gallery/House
Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing or packaging food products for wholesale distribution.
Bicycle sales and repair shops.
Boat and trailer works and sales.
Bottling works.
Bowling alleys and skating rinks, miniature golf courses, riding stables, go-cart tracks, and other commercial recreation facilities.
Billiard, Pool Halls, Game rooms, or Amusement Centers.
Banks and other financial institutions including loan and finance companies.
Above ground storage tanks when constructed in conformance with National Fire Protection Association Standards.
Building materials storage and sales yards.
Cabinets, woodworking and upholstery shops.
Cemeteries
Churches
Contractors' offices and storage yards.
Dairy products processing and distributing facilities, including dairy bars.
Dry Cleaning and laundering plants.
Electrical supplies and equipment, sales and repairs.
Freezer lockers and ice plants.
45
Funeral homes.
Industrial trade schools and research laboratories.
Machine welding shops
Mobile home display lots.
Monument works and sales.
Motels and hotels.
Motorcycle, lawnmower and power saw sales and service.
Murals.
Newspaper offices, printing plants incidental to such offices and printing, publishing and reproduction establishments.
Plumbing and heating supply houses.
Public safety equipment facilities such as fire and police and rescue facilities.
Public works and utility facilities, including electrical transmission distribution and substation equipment, pumping station, water towers and telephone exchange
Public recreational parks
Professional offices
Restaurants, including drive-in.
Retail stores.
Service stations.
Second hand stores and swap shops
Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing and heating and refrigeration shops.
Sign painting and fabricating shops.
Trucking terminals, transfer companies.
Wholesale and warehousing establishments.
Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products, including bottled gas and oxygen.
85.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
Customary accessory uses and structures including storage, provided the area devoted to open storage is enclosed by a solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
Signs, subject to Section 71.
85.3 Conditional Uses
46
Board of Commissioners
Multi-family dwellings, subject to dimensional requirements in R-8 Residential District and Article XII.
Kindergartens and day nurseries, provided that not less than seventy-five square feet of plan area is provided for each child and provided further that the space is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least six (6) feet in height. 9/11/06
Shopping Centers, subject to Article XII.
Short Term Housing
Single-Family dwellings, subject to dimensional requirements in R-8 Residential District.
Two-family dwellings, subject to dimensional requirements in R-8 Residential District and Article XII.
Big Box Retailers
Adult Establishment, for conditions see Ordinance passed March 2, 1998.
Tattoo Establishment, for conditions see Ordinance passed March 2, 1998.
Conditions to be required:
1. Location: No adult establishment or tattoo establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any zoning district boundary line of R-8, R-12, R-20; and/or within 1000 feet of a property line of any school, park, church, or similar place of religious service; and /or within one-half mile of any other adult establishment or tattoo establishment.
Use: Any adult establishment or tattoo establishment must meet all Town requirements regarding privilege license requirements as well as comply with Article 26A, Section 14-202.10 of the NC General Statutes as amended. Further, no adult establishment may be located on the same premises or in conjunction with a place of transient occupancy.
Enclosed Building. The adult establishment must be conducted within an enclosed building so that viewing, display, or sound from inside the building cannot be experienced outside the walls of the building.
Yard Requirements. Any building containing an adult establishment must be at least fifty (50) feet from the side and rear yard property lines and thirty (30) feet from the edge of right-of-way of a publicly owned road.
Screening. Any adult establishment located next to a residential use must be screened along all property lines with an opaque fence at least six (6) feet in height or a solid landscaped area at least fifteen (15) feet in width and at least five (5) feet in height at time of initial planting. The landscaped area shall be properly maintained at all times.
Signage. Signs shall comply with all requirements set forth in Section 71 Signs. Further, signs shall not contain materials, words, objects, images or displays that suggest or relate to specified anatomical areas and/or specified sexual activities as defined by NC General Statutes 14-202.10 or contain displays that have been determined by community standards to be harmful to minors as defined by NC General Statutes 14-190.13-15.
Licensing. No building, septic, health department permit or privilege license may be issued for sexually oriented establishments or tattoo establishments until a compliance permit has been obtained for the business.
47
Board of Adjustment
Light Manufacturing Operations
Mixed uses, such as building erected for both dwelling and business purposes, provided such buildings shall be furnished with side yards on each side of the building measuring not less than eight (8) feet in width; provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the street side of a corner lot.
Theaters, drive-in, provided that:
a. No part of any theater screen projection booth or other building shall be located closer than five hundred (500) feet to any residential district or closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line or public right-of-way; and no parking space shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any residential district;
b. The theater screen shall not face a major street or highway; and reserved parking space off the street shall be provided for patrons awaiting admission in an amount of not less than thirty (30) percent of the vehicular capacity of the theater.
Wireless Communication Towers
85.4 Dimensional Requirements
85.41 Minimum yard requirements shall be:
a. Fifty (50) feet minimum front yard where street or highway is less than seventy-five (75) feet in width; thirty-five (35) feet minimum front yard where street or highway is seventy-five feet or more in width.
b. Ten (10) feet minimum side yard, except in a Shopping Center, different owners of property may have buildings contiguous with or without joint walls, or may be closer together than ten (10) feet.
c. Twenty (20) feet minimum rear yard.
85.42 The total ground area covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total lot area.
85.43 No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height unless the depth of the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet, or fraction thereof, of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet.
85.44 Buildings constructed or converted to uses permitted in this district shall provide off-street loading and unloading space as required in Section 73 of the ordinance.
85.45 Off-street parking space shall be provided as required in Section 72 of this ordinance.
Section 86. B-3 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
The B-3 Neighborhood business District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for the retailing of goods and services to the adjacent residential neighborhoods. The regulations of this district are intended to provide for retail trades and services in designated shopping areas, with standards designed to protect abutting residential areas.
86.1 Permitted Principal Uses
Business, medical professional, public and financial offices (including branch banks)
48
Barber and beauty shops.
Public works and public utilities including electrical transmission, distribution and substation equipment, pumping stations, water towers, and telephone exchanges provided:
a. such facilities are essential to the service of the area and to vehicles or materials shall be stored on the premises.
b. All buildings and structures (except utility lines) shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area.
c. Such facilities as water towers, pumping stations, etc., shall be surrounded by a chain link fence at least six (6) feet in height.
Retail stores such as drug, electrical appliances, gifts and flowers, groceries, magazines, meats and notions stores.
Shoe shop.
Watch repair shop.
86.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
Customary accessory uses.
Signs, subject to Section 71.
86.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Adjustment
Mixed uses, such as buildings, erected for both dwelling and business purposes, such buildings, shall be furnished with side yards on each side of the building measuring not less than eight (8) feet in width, provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the street side of a corner lot.
86.4 Dimensional Requirements
86.41 No B-3 Neighborhood Business District shall contain less than on (1) acre nor more than five (5) acres.
86.42 No building shall be less than forty (40) feet from any street or highway right-of-way line, or ten (10) feet from any side lot line, or twenty (20) feet from any rear lot line.
86.43 No building in this district shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height unless the depth of the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet, or fraction thereof, of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet.
86.44 The total ground area covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings including any roofed areas shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.
86.45 Off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided as required in Section 73 of this ordinance.
86.46 Off-street parking space shall be provided as required in Section 72 of this ordinance.
Section 87. M-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
49
The M-1 Industrial District is established for those areas of community where the principal use of land is for light industrial and warehousing uses. These uses, by their nature, may create some nuisance but may properly be associated with residential, commercial and/or service establishments.
87.1 Permitted Principal Uses
Automobile parking lots and structures.
Amusement, recreation and sporting goods manufacturing.
Apparel and clothing manufacturing, including hosiery.
Automobile parts and accessories manufacturing.
Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared food products for wholesale distribution.
Bedding and carpet manufacturing.
Boat and trailer works and sales.
Bottling works.
Building materials and specialties manufacturing.
Above ground storage tanks when constructed in conformance with National Fire Protection Association Standards.
Building materials storage and sales yards, provided all open storage is fenced by a solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
Business machines manufacturing.
Cabinet, woodworking and upholstery shops.
Contractors' offices and storage yards, provided all open storage is fenced by a solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
Dairy products processing and distributing facilities.
Drugs, medicines and cosmetics manufacturing.
Dry cleaning and laundry plants.
Electrical appliances and electronic equipment manufacturing.
Feed stores, fruit stands and produce markets.
Flour and feed mills.
Furniture manufacturing.
Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries.
Hardware and housewares manufacturing.
Ice and cold storage plants and freezer lockers.
Industrial supplies and equipment, sales and service, provided all open storage is fenced by a solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
Industrial trade schools and research laboratories.
Leather products, including luggage and shoe manufacturing.
Musical instruments manufacturing.
Murals.
Offices pertaining to any permitted use.
Outdoor recreation uses, such as miniature and par-3 golf courses, co-cart tracks and riding stables.
Manufactured Home Sales provided:
Provide a site plan to the Zoning Administrator which shows that the property boundary is 500 feet from any residential zone or use, is not in any designated 100 year floodway,
defines all display and sales areas and designates the proposed use for each defined area, (other accessory uses may not be located on the site unless they have been designated on the site plan), all travel lanes and parking spaces shall be paved or graveled, display areas for homes may be natural grass and shall be regularly maintained, display area for any one unit shall be not less than 5000 square feet, parking spaces shall be at a ratio of 1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of office space and 1 space for each 5,00 sq. ft. of display area., maximum lot coverage allowed is 80%, the display area shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from the street ROW or the front zoning district and 10 feet from all other property lines, storage and repair of damaged homes on site is prohibited, signs are prohibited on the homes except for 1 sign not to exceed 3 sq. ft in size stating the price of that home, must provide proof of a state licensing authority and a landscaped strip averaging eight feet in width but in no case less than five feet shall be located between the front lot line
50
and the vehicle display area and shall be heavily landscaped with evergreen shrubs and flowering plants. (The number of plants may be reduced if used in conjunction with and placed on the street side of an opaque, decorative wall at least two and one half feet in height. June 2005
Plastic products manufacturing.
Plumbing and heating supply houses, provided all open storage is fenced by a solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
Precision instruments and jewelry manufacturing.
Printing, engraving and publishing establishments.
Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squads.
Public works and public utilities including electrical transmission, distribution, and substation equipment.
Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants.
Service stations, including major repair work provided that all gasoline pumps shall be located at least twelve (12) feet behind the property line.
Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing heating and refrigeration shops.
Sign painting and fabricating shops.
Textile and cordage manufacturing.
Tobacco basket and pallet manufacturing.
Trucking terminals.
Wholesale and warehousing establishments, except for the storage of dangerous or offensive items such as uncured hides and explosives.
87.2 Permitted Accessory Uses
Customary accessory uses and structures, including open storage, provided the area devoted to open storage is enclosed by a fence at least six (6) feet in height.
Signs, subject to Section 71.
87.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Adjustment
Other light manufacturing uses not otherwise listed , but which meet the intent and spirit of this zoning district.
Commercial uses
Wireless Communication Towers
87.4 Dimensional Requirements
87.41 Minimum yard requirements shall be:
a. Fifty (50) feet minimum front yard setback.
b. Fifteen (15) feet minimum side yard on each side of every principal building.
c. Twenty (20) feet minimum required rear yard.
87.42 No building shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height unless the depth of the front and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet or fraction thereof, of building height in excess of fifty (50) feet
87.43 Buildings constructed or converted to uses permitted in this district shall provide off-street loading and unloading space as required in Section 73 of this ordinance.
87.44 Off-street parking shall be required as specified in Section 72 of this ordinance.
51
Section 88. M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
The M-2 Heavy Industrial District is established to provide and protect areas for those industrial uses which would offend the community by excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust, airborne debris, other objectionable characteristics.
88.1 Permitted Principal Uses
All uses permitted in the M-1 Light Manufacturing District
Acid manufacturing and storage
Bulk petroleum plants and storage
Concrete products manufacturing and storage
Livestock sales pavilion or auditorium
Machine and welding shops
Metal fabricating plants.
Monument works and sales.
Murals.
Paper products manufacturing
Above ground storage tanks when constructed in conformance with National Fire Protection Association Standards.
Planing and saw mill.
Recycling collection and distribution centers, provided all open storage is enclosed being a solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height.
Quarrying and mining.
Railroad and freight classification yards
Rubber and glass products
Slaughterhouses or stockyards.
Stone and gravel works
88.2 Customary Accessory Uses
Customary accessory uses.
Signs, subject to Section 71.
88.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Adjustment
Other manufacturing uses not otherwise named which meets the general spirit of the heavy manufacturing district.
Wireless Communication Towers –8/9/04
88.4 Dimensional Requirements
88.41 All manufacturing uses shall comply with the requirements specified in the M-1 Light Manufacturing district under Subsection 87.4
Section 89 MH MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT
The MH, Manufactured Home Park District is created to accommodate manufactured home parks that have been developed in the past and to provide appropriate standards for manufactured home parks within the Town’s jurisdiction.
89.1 Permitted Principal Uses
52
Manufactured Homes – single family
Dwellings – single family
Recreational areas
Kindergartens and Day Nurseries, provided that not less than seventy-five (75) square feet of play area for each child is provided and provided that the aggregate play area is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least six (6) feet in height.
89.2 Permitted accessory uses
Customary accessory uses
Customary home occupations
Signs, subject to Section 71
89.3 Conditional Uses
Board of Commissioners
None
Board of Adjustment
Public works and public utilities including electrical transmission, distribution and substation equipment, pumping stations, water towers, and telephone exchanges provided:
a. such facilities are essential to service of the immediate area and no vehicles or materials shall be stored on the premises;
b. all buildings and apparatus (except utility lines) shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in the with the surrounding area; and
c. such facilities as water towers, pumping stations, etc., shall be surrounded by a chain link fence six (6) feet in height.
89.4 Dimensional Requirements
Developments will be built to the development standards for Mobile Home Parks found in Article XII. Section 125 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Elkin or to the Surry County Manufactured Home Park Ordinance, whichever standards are more restrictive shall apply.
Section 90 V-1 VILLAGE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
Village Development District
Ordinance
July 17, 2007
53
Table of Contents
Village Development District52
Ordinance52
(A) Purpose. .................................................................................................................. 54
(B) Requirements. ......................................................................................................... 54
(C) Development Parameters ........................................................................................ 54
(1) Development Size ............................................................................................... 54
(2) Development Density .......................................................................................... 54
(3) Perimeter Buffer Requirements ........................................................................... 54
(D) Design Standards .................................................................................................... 55
(1) Neighborhood Form ............................................................................................ 55
(2) Land Uses and Allocation of Different Uses ...................................................... 55
(3) Lot and Building Placement ................................................................................ 56
(4) Streets, Alleys and Pathways .............................................................................. 57
(5) Parking ................................................................................................................ 57
(6) Landscape ............................................................................................................ 58
(E) Master Plan Application and Approval Process. .................................................... 58
(1) Submittal Procedure ............................................................................................ 58
(2) Hearing Schedule ................................................................................................ 58
(3) Filing Fees ........................................................................................................... 58
(4) Review Schedule ................................................................................................. 58
(5) Approval/Refusal ................................................................................................ 58
(6) Re-submission ..................................................................................................... 59
(7) Revisions and Minor Amendments ..................................................................... 59
(8) Procession............................................................................................................ 59
54
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this district is to allow for the development of fully integrated, mixed-use pedestrian oriented neighborhoods. The intent is to minimize traffic congestion, suburban sprawl, infrastructure costs, and environmental degradation.
The provisions of this district are based on urban design and development conventions which were widely used in the United States from colonial times until the 1940’s and were based on the following principles:
(1) All neighborhoods have identifiable centers and edges.
(2) The center of the neighborhood is easily accessed by non-vehicular means from lots on the edges (i.e. approximately ¼ mile from center to edge, or a 5-minute walk).
(3) Uses and housing types are mixed and in close proximity to one another.
(4) Street networks are interconnected and blocks are small.
(5) Civic buildings are given prominent sites throughout the neighborhood.
(B) Requirements. It is recommended that a Master Plan in compliance with traditional neighborhood design principles (listed above) be provided with any application to reclassify a property using the Village Development designation. A rezoning request for Village Development zoning is contingent upon the approval of a Master Plan; if a Master Plan is not approved for the property, then it reverts to its previous zoning classification(s). No use or development of any property located in a Village Development district shall be permitted until a Master Plan, showing the proposed uses and development of the property, has been approved by the Board of Commissioners, upon a recommendation made by the Planning Board. Once the Master Plan has been approved, the developer must follow the processes and regulations set forth in the Town of Elkin’s Subdivision Regulations to proceed with development of the property.
If a developer proposes to construct the subdivision in phases, then the Master
Plan shall be prepared for the entire property, and shall show the proposed phases of development. Each phase of development shall be preceded by the submission and approval of a preliminary plat for that phase as outlined in Town of Elkin Subdivision Standards followed by the submission and approval of a final plat as outlined in by the Article II: Review Procedure for Major Subdivision Plats.
The Master Plan shall:
(1) show the topography of the site using available contour information
(2) show floodplain and floodway boundaries,
(3) show natural features such as wooded areas, rock outcrops, marshes, water bodies and any other natural features affecting the site, and show plans to preserve the unique features of the property,
(4) show the location and hierarchy of streets and public open spaces,
(5) show the location of residential, commercial and civic building lots, street sections and/or plans,
(6) provide an outline of any additional regulatory intentions,
(7) show intended phasing of development, and
(8) include any other information, e.g. conceptual building prototypes, which may be required to evaluate the interior pedestrian environment and conditions at project edges.
The Master Plan shall be certified by a registered architect, registered landscape architect or certified planner.
A. (C) Development Parameters
(1) Development Size
(a) No minimum development size; however 20 acres is recommended.
(b) No maximum development size; however 200 acres is recommended.
(2) Development Density
(a) Maximum permitted densities and total number of dwelling units shall be established during the Master Plan review process, and shall not exceed the maximum number of permitted units in the underlying zoning classification.
(3) Perimeter Buffer Requirements
(a) Perimeter buffer requirements shall be established during the Master Plan review process.
55
B. (D) Design Standards
(1) Neighborhood Form
(a) Dwellings at the edge of the neighborhood shall be roughly a five-minute walk to the center of the neighborhood.
(b) A great variety of housing types shall exist in the neighborhood.
(c) Within a neighborhood the following land uses shall be arranged to serve the needs of the residents in a convenient walking environment: open space/recreational areas, civic buildings, low and high density residential, retail/commercial, business/workplace, and parking.
(d) The neighborhood shall be made up of blocks, streets, lots and open space.
(e) Similar land uses shall generally affront across each street. Dissimilar land uses shall generally abut at rear lot lines. Corner lots which front on streets of dissimilar use shall generally observe the setback established on each fronting street.
(f) Along existing streets, new buildings shall respect and be compatible with the general spacing of structures, building mass and scale, and street frontage relationships of existing buildings.
(g) The appearance of the neighborhood should blend in with existing neighborhoods and feature the use of natural materials in construction.
(h) In addition to open space the Master Plan will identify developed areas as Core, Center, General, and Edge.
(2) Land Uses and Allocation of Different Uses
(a) Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be based on the general category of use that has been established for a lot or group of lots in the Master Plan. The lot compatibility matrix illustrates the lot types that could be allowed within each zone. All residential dwellings are permitted to have accessory dwelling units. Civic buildings are permitted in every zone.
LOT COMPATIBILITY MATRIX
Lot Type
Zone
●
●
●
Core ●
●
●
●
●
●
Center ●
●
●
●
●
●
General ●
●
●
●
●
●
Edge Mixed-Use Building
Live/work Building
Mansion Apartment
Rowhouse
Courtyard House
Tree House
Cottage
House
Villa
The general land use categories are listed below with particular uses allowed and suggested amounts for each, expressed as a percentage of the total gross area of the neighborhood:
(1) Public Parks, plazas, squares, greenbelts, sidewalks/ walkways, streets, alleys
56
(2) Residential (Single, two & multi-family homes, apartments, flats, condominiums, rowhouses, etc.)*
(3) Civic Buildings (include, but are not limited to municipal buildings, churches, libraries, recreation facilities and places of assembly)
(4) Office,
(5) Retail, including eating establishments, and
(6) Other commercial uses provided they produce little or no noise, odor,
(7) Lodging
(b) Conditional Uses:
(1) Churches
(2) Electric power and public utility stations or substations and public utility transmission lines
(3) Group care facilities
(4) Nurseries, day care centers, day care homes, kindergarten or pre-school
(5) Agriculture and agricultural operations
(6) Stalls or merchandise stands for outdoor sale of goods at street front
(c) Prohibited Uses:
(1) Any commercial use which encourages patrons to remain in their automobiles while receiving goods or services, including service stations
(2) Carting, moving, or hauling terminal or yard
(3) Chemical manufacturing, storage or distribution as a primary use
(4) Enameling, painting or plating, except artist’s studios
(5) Kennels with pens for more than 8 animals
(6) Landfills
(7) Manufacturing, storage or disposal of hazardous waste materials
(8) Mobile homes
(9) Outdoor advertising or billboard as a principle use
(10) Parking lot as principal use
(11) Prisons, detention centers, or half-way houses
(12) Sand, gravel, or other mineral extraction
(13) Scrap yards
(14) Any use which produces the following adverse impacts; noise at a level greater than typical street or traffic noise, offensive vibration, emission of noxious solids, liquids, or gases.
(15) Permanent Outdoor movie theaters.
(16) Public swimming pools
(17) Adult Establishments, as defined in the Town of Elkin Ordinance.
* Accessory structures may be used for rental housing on attached and detached home lots.
(3) Lot and Building Placement
Each lot will be assigned a side yard setback, which shall be a minimum. In the event of a discrepancy between fire codes or building codes and the minimum setback, the fire code or building code shall take precedence.
(a) All lots shall share a frontage line with a street or public space; lots fronting on a public space shall have access to a rear alley.
(b) Build-to lines shall be established along all streets and public space frontages in accordance with zones designated in the Master Plan.
(c) All buildings, except accessory structures, shall have their main entrance opening on a street or public space.
57
(d) No structure shall exceed 45 feet in height. Towers, cupolas, steeples, or other vertical architectural elements are permitted to exceed 45 feet so long as they are less than 200 square feet in area.
(e) Large-scale, single use facilities (e.g. conference centers, theaters, athletic facilities) shall generally occur above or behind smaller scale street front space.
(f) Front porches are required on all detached dwellings and shall be no less than 8 feet deep. Front porches may encroach into front build-to area. Balconies, awnings, colonnades or marquis are required on all mixed use buildings and live/work dwellings and shall occur forward of the Build-to-line and may encroach into the Right of Way, but shall not extend to the planting zone. Balconies may have roofs, but are required to be open, un-air-conditioned parts of the building. On corners buildings, balconies may wrap around the side of the building facing a side street. Colonnades shall be no less than 8 feet deep and shall occur forward of a build-to-line, but shall not extend past the curb line.
Specific Dimensional Requirements
Core
Center
General
Edge
Front Built-to-line
0’ (from front property line)
0’ – 5’ (from front property line)
4’ – 10’ (from front property line)
10’ – 12’ (from front property line)
Rear Setback
5’ (from rear property line)
5’ (from rear property line)
5’ (from rear property line)
5’ (from rear property line)
Side Setback
0’ (from side property line)
0’ (from side property line)
0’ or 5’ (from side property line)
5’ (from side property line)
Height (stories)
2 stories minimum
4 stories maximum
2 stories minimum
3 stories maximum
1 story minimum
3 stories maximum
2 stories minimum
3 stories maximum
Parking
On-street, in rear*
On-street, in rear*
On-street, in rear*
On-street, in rear*
* Alleys or lanes shall be the primary source of access to off-street parking.
(4) Streets, Alleys and Pathways
(a) Designs shall permit comfortable use of the street by motorists, pedestrians, and bicyclists. Pavement widths, design speeds and the number of motor travel lanes should be minimized to enhance safety for motorists and non-motorists alike. The specific design of any given street must consider the building types which front on the street and the relationship of the street to the overall town street network.
(b) All tracts and lots shall have access to public or private streets
(c) Streets and alleys shall, wherever practical, terminate at other streets within the neighborhood and connect to existing and projected streets outside the development. Cul-de-sacs and dead-end streets are discouraged and should only occur where absolutely necessary due to natural conditions.
(d) No block face should have a length greater than 500 feet without dedicated alley or pathway providing through access.
(e) To prevent the build-up of vehicular speed, disperse traffic flow, and create a sense of visual enclosure, long uninterrupted segments of straight streets should be avoided.
(f) A continuous network of rear alleys is recommended for all lots.
(g) Utilities shall be underground and shall run along alleys wherever practical.
(h) Streets shall be organized according to a hierarchy based on function, size, capacity and design speed. Streets and rights-of-ways are therefore expected to differ in dimension. The proposed hierarchy of streets shall be indicated on the submitted Master Plan and each street type shall be separately detailed in the Master Plan.
(i) Every street, except alleys, shall have a sidewalk on at least one side that is at least 5 feet wide.
(5) Parking
(a) On-street parking should be provided on all streets. Occasional on-street parking can be accommodated without additional pavement width. For streets which serve workplace and storefront buildings, on-street parking is required and should be marked as such. On-street parking should be parallel to street unless the street lends itself to other parking layouts.
(b) Parking lots shall generally be located at the rear or at the side of buildings and shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjoining properties by land forms or evergreen vegetation so as to provide a barrier that will be at least three feet high and provide a 75 percent visual barrier within two years.
58
(c) To the extent practicable, adjacent parking lots shall be interconnected.
(d) Small and strategically placed parking areas are recommended.
(e) Common parking areas shall be prepared as required in Section 72 of the Town of Elkin Zoning Ordinance and all parking areas and traffic lanes shall be clearly marked.
(f) The number, width and location of curb cuts shall be such as to minimize traffic hazards, inconvenience and congestion.
(g) Off-street parking and loading requirements are outlined in Section72.
(h) Shared parking is encouraged and the developer shall demonstrate the provision of adequate parking and off-street loading areas for different areas of the development, based on the uses allowed and the density of development.
(i) In addition to landscaping provided for screening above, trees should be planted around the perimeter and interior of parking lots to provide shade.
(6) Landscape
(a) Trees shall be planted within right-of-ways parallel to the street along all streets except alleys.
(b) Tree spacing shall be determined by species type. Large maturing trees shall be planted a minimum of 30 feet and a maximum of 50 feet on center. Small and medium maturing trees shall be planted a minimum of 10 feet and a maximum of 30 feet on center.
(c) Large maturing trees shall generally be planted along residential streets and along the street frontages and perimeter areas of parks, squares, greenbelts and civic structures.
(d) Small maturing trees shall generally be planted along nonresidential streets, interior portions of parks, squares, greenbelts and civic lots. Storefronts shall not be obstructed by the planting pattern.
(e) All other landscape elements shall conform to Section 78 of the Elkin Zoning Ordinance.
C. (E) Master Plan Application and Approval Process.
(1) Submittal Procedure
The owner or developer shall submit ten copies of the Master Plan to the Zoning Administrator for consideration by the Planning Board at least ten (10) working days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the Planning Board.
(2) Hearing Schedule
The Zoning Administrator shall submit to the Planning Board at its next meeting any Master Plan that is in compliance with the Design Standards set forth in the Village Overlay District.
(3) Filing Fees A filing fee of $250.00 (With recommendation to be made by Planning Director to Board of Commissioners for consideration as to what the fees should be.) shall be paid with the submitted documents. Any Master Plan resubmitted within one year for substantially the same property shall not pay an additional filing fee.
(4) Review Schedule
The Planning Board shall review a Master Plan submission or re-submission for no more than 60 days from the first meeting it is presented, in order to make a recommendation to the Board of Adjustment. Failure to make a recommendation accordingly shall cause the Master Plan to be forwarded to the Board of Commissioners without a recommendation. The applicant may withdraw a Master Plan by a written request to the Zoning Administrator. A withdrawn Master Plan may be re-submitted to the Planning Board for further reconsideration at a later time.
(5) Approval/Refusal
Due to the general nature of the requirements for the Village Overlay, the Board of Commissioners may refuse to approve a master land use plan (or phase thereof) for any of the following reasons:
(a) Failure to comply with any specific requirement of this chapter.
(b) Failure to protect nearby properties from the adverse effects of higher intensity uses.
59
(c) Failure to protect the public from dangerous volumes and arrangements of vehicular traffic.
(d) Size of project.
(6) Re-submission
Master Plans not approved by the Board of Commissioners and subsequently revised shall be re-submitted through the approval process.
(7) Revisions and Minor Amendments
Approved Master Plans shall not be revised without re-submission through the approval process. However, minor amendments at the site plan level for specific land uses or developments may be approved by the Zoning Administrator, provided:
(a) building floor areas are not changed by more than 20 percent,
(b) building or structure heights are not increased by more than 20 percent,
(c) parking areas or spaces are not diminished by more than 20 percent,
(d) relocated buildings or uses maintain the same general building relationships, landscaping and utility standards, and
(e) The natural features of the landscape shall be incorporated into the
landscaping plan.
(f) All plantings shall be with native or appropriate species
(g) the amendment preserves compliance with any specific requirement of this
Chapter.
(8) Procession
Once a Master Plan has been approved, the project may proceed through the Subdivision and other review and permitting processes outlined by the Town of Elkin Planning Director.

61
ARTICLE IX
AREA, YARD LOT COVERAGE AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
Districts Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Requirements Maximum Lot Maximum Height
Coverage
Residential Lot area in Square feet Lot width Front yard Side yard Rear yd. Principal buildings In feet
R-20 square feet per additional in feet at set back in feet ratio and all accessory
dwelling building line buildings
(without public water + sewer)
Single-family 30,000 100 40 12 (a) 20% of the mean Shall not exceed 20% of the 35(c)
lot depth (b) Total lot area
Multi-family 30,000 20,000 100 40 12 (a) same 35(c)
(With public water and without sewer)
Single-family 20,000
Multi-family 20,000 5,000 SAME AS ABOVE
(With public water and public sewer)
Single family 15,000
Multi-family 15,000 5,000 SAME AS ABOVE
(a) When side yard abuts a street or highway, it shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.
(b) Provided further that such rear yard need not exceed thirty (30) feet.
(c) See subsection 80.47 of this Ordinance
62
DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS (CON’T)
Districts Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Requirements Maximum Lot Maximum Height
Coverage
Residential Lot area in Square feet Lot width Front yard Side yard Rear yd. Principal buildings In feet
R-12 square feet per additional in feet at set back in feet ratio and all accessory
dwelling building line buildings
(with public water + sewer)
Single-family 12,000 80 30 10 (a) 20% of the mean Shall not exceed 30% of the 35(c)
lot depth (b) Total lot area
R-8 Residential (with public water and sewer)
Single-family 8,000 70 30 10(a) 20% (b) Shall not exceed 40% of the 35 (c)
Two-family 8,000+ 5,000 80 30 10(a) 20% (b) total lot
Multi-family 8,000 5,000 for 100 30 10(a) 20% (b) 35 (c)
Second unit + 3,000 for each unit in
excess of two
(a) When side yard abuts a street or highway, it shall be at least fifteen (15) feet.
(b) Provided further that such rear yard need not exceed thirty (30) feet.
(c) See subsection 80.47 of this Ordinance
63
DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS (CON’T)
Districts Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Requirements Maximum Lot Maximum Height
Coverage
Lot area in Lot width Front yard Side yard Rear yd. Principal buildings In feet
square feet in feet at set back in feet feet and all accessory
building line buildings
B-1, Central Business NA No closer to center 10(e) 15 (e) NA 50(f) of street than adjacent
buildings
B-2, Highway Business NA 50 ft. where street is 10 20 50% 35 (c)
less than 75 ft. in
width; 35 ft. where st. is b) 75 ft. or more in width
B-3, Neighborhood Not more NA 50ft. from r-o-w 10 20 40% 35(c)
Business than 5 acres nor less
than 1 acre
MA, Medical Arts NA NA 50 Ft. 10 20 50% 35(c)
M-1, M-2, INDUSTRIAL NA NA 50 Ft. 15 (e) 20 (e) NA 50 (f)
MH, Manufactured Home Park At least two acres See Section 125
NA – Not applicable
(e)required only where the side or rear of a lot abuts a residential district. Where a side yard not required is provided, it shall be at least eight (8) feet in width.
(f) Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to exceed fifty (50) feet in height shall be set back from the front lot line on the ratio of one (1) foot for each two 2) feet or fraction thereof, of rise above fifty (50) feet. In the M-1 Industrial District, this incremental set back shall be measured from the normal fifty (50) foot set back.
64
ARTICLE X
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Section 100. LOT OF RECORD
Where the owner of a lot of official record in any residential district at the time of the adoption of this ordinance or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this ordinance, such a lot may be used as a residential building site provided, however, that the requirements of the district are complied with or a variance is obtained from the Board of Adjustment.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever two (2) or more adjoining vacant lots of record are in single ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance and such lots individually have less area or width than the minimum requirements of the district in which such lots are located, such lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots which meet the minimum requirements of this ordinance for the district in which such lots are located.
Section 101 FRONT YARD FOR DWELLINGS
The front yard requirements of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or partially within one hundred (100) feet on either side of the proposed dwelling and on the same side of the street in the same block and use district as such lot is less than the minimum required front yard depth. In such case the front yard on such lots may be less than the required front yard but not less than the average of the existing front yard on the aforementioned lots, or a distance of ten (10) feet from the street right-of-way, whichever is greater.
Section 102. HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers observation towers, utility poles, structures, and transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, radio towers television towers, masts, aerials and similar structures, except as otherwise provided in the vicinity of airports.
Section 103. VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS
On a corner lot in any residential district no planting, structure, sign, fence, wall or obstruction to vision more than three (3) feet in height measured from the center line of the street shall be placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way lines and a straight line connecting points on said street right-of-way lines each of which is thirty-five (35) feet distant from the point of intersection
Section 104. FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES: RETAINING WALLS
65
In any residential district fences or walls may be erected in a required side yard adjacent to a side lot line provided such wall or fence does not exceed five (5) feet in height. Fences and walls may be erected in a required rear yard adjacent to a rear lot line provided such wall or fence does not exceed eight (8) feet in height. For retaining walls the height limitations specified herein shall apply only to the height above the top of the soil retained by such wall. Utility substations in Residential zones may be surrounded by a fence that exceed these height limitations.
Section 105 Rules Applicable Specifically to the Watershed Overlay Districts (WSII-CA, WSII-BW, WSIV-CA, AND WSIV-PA
Several departures from traditional zoning were incorporated when the Water Supply Watershed Classification and Protection Act was ratified in 1989. A thorough understanding of this section forms the foundation for understanding some of the complexities of the watershed protection overlay districts. This amendment to the existing zoning ordinance is adopted under the authority of Section 143.214.4 (Chapter 143, Article 21) of the North Carolina Statutes. Any land use determined by the Town of Elkin to be detrimental to the quality of water in the Big Elkin Creek watershed by posing a threat of runoff, leaching or other types of pollution shall be a prohibited use in the Watershed Protection Overlay District (WS-II Surface Waters in the jurisdiction of the Town). The Town of Elkin has defined "High Quality Water Zones" as areas that are within one mile and drain to high quality waters which are classified as such in Title 15A of the North Carolina Administrative Code subchapter 02B[15A NCAC 2B.0101(e)(5)]. This designation in the Code includes all water supply watersheds which are either classified WS-I or WS-II. In High Quality Water Zones (HQW) the following design standards shall apply: a. Limit on Uncovered Areas: Uncovered areas in HQW zones shall be limited at any time to a maximum of twenty acres within the boundaries of the tract. Only the portion of the land disturbing activity within the HQW zone shall be governed by this section. Larger areas may be uncovered within the boundaries of the tract with the written approval of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. b. Maximum Peak Rate of Runoff Protection: Erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures and devices within the HQW zones shall be planned, designed and constructed to provide protection from the runoff of the 25 year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of runoff as calculated according to the procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices" or according to procedures adopted by any other agency of the State or the United States or any generally recognized organization or association. c. Settling Efficiency: Sediment basins within HQW zones shall be designed and constructed so that the basin will have a settling efficiency of at least 70% for the 40 micron size soil particle transported into the basin by the runoff of the two-year storm that produces a maximum peak runoff calculated according to the procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture and Soil Conservation Services "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices" or according to procedures adopted by any other agency of the State or the United States. d. Grade: Newly constructed open channels in HQW zones shall be planned, designed and constructed with side slopes no steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical if a vegetative cover is used for stabilization unless soil conditions permit steeper side slopes or where the side slopes are stabilized by using mechanical devices, structural devices or other ditch liners sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion. The angle for side slopes shall be sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion. A. Exceptions to Applicability, Existing development, as defined in this ordinance, is not subject to the requirement of this ordinance. Expansion to structures classified as existing development must meet the requirements of this ordinance; however, the built-upon area of the
66
existing development is not required to be included in the density calculations. If a nonconforming lot of record is not contiguous to any other lot owned by the same party, then that lot of record shall not be subject to the development restrictions of this ordinance if it is developed for single-family residential purposes.
B. Cluster Development, Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single family cluster development projects; however, the total number of lots shall not exceed the number of lots allowed for single family detached developments in Section 105 J, K, L, or M. The overall residential density or non-residential built-upon area shall not exceed that allowed for the critical area, the balance of the watershed, or the protected area, whichever is applicable. All built-upon areas shall be designed and located to minimize storm water runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated storm water flow.
The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural state. The title to the open space area shall be conveyed to an incorporated homeowners association for management; to a local government for preservation as a park or open space; or to a conservation organization for preservation in a permanent easement. Where a property association is not incorporated, a maintenance agreement shall be filed with the property deeds. C. Buffer Area Required. No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water dependent structures, other structures such as flag poles, signs and security lights, public projects such as road crossings and greenways where no practical alternative exists. These activities should minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff away from the surface waters and maximize the utilization of storm water Best Management Practices. A minimum thirty (30) foot vegetative buffer for development activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on the recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local government studies. Desirable artificial stream bank or shoreline stabilization is permitted. With a high-density option, a minimum 100 foot vegetative buffer is required. D. Zoning Enforcement Officer and Duties Thereof. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Enforcement Officer to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance as follows: a) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall keep records of all amendments to these overlay provisions and shall provide copies of all amendments upon adoption to the Division of Water Quality. b) The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall keep a record of all minor and major watershed variances to these overlay provisions. The record of all minor watershed variances shall be submitted to the Division of Water Quality on or before January 1st of each year and shall provide a description of each project receiving a variance and the reasons for granting the variance. E. Major Watershed Variances. To hear upon appeal in specific cases such major watershed variances from the terms of this ordinance that exceed the definition contained herein within Subsection G. a) Appeals, hearings, notice, appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the Town of Elkin affected by a decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such appeals shall be taken
67
within not more than sixty days from the date the order, interpretation, decision, or determination is made by filing with the Zoning Enforcement Officer and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matters referred to it, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party in interest may appear in person or by agent or attorney, b) Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment. The Chairman or in his absence, the vice- chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The secretary shall record minutes of the proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each questioner, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Board shall keep records of the proceedings, prepare a report containing findings of fact, conclusions of law and recommended decision and forward such record to the Environmental Management Commission (which must approve all major watershed variances) A denial of a major watershed variance by the Board of Adjustment need not go to the EMC for review. One copy of any report forwarded to the EMC shall be kept on file by the clerk. The preliminary record shall be sent to the Environmental Management Commission for its review as follows: (a) If the Commission concludes from the preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that (1) the property owner can secure no reasonable return from or make any practical use of the property unless the proposed variance is granted, and (2) the variance, if granted, will not result in a serious threat to the water supply, then the Commission shall approve the variance with conditions and stipulations. The Commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it to the Board of Adjustment. If the Commission approves the variance as proposed, the Board shall prepare a final decision granting the proposed variance. If the Commission approves the variance with conditions and stipulations, the Board shall prepare a final decision, including such conditions and stipulations granting the proposed variance. (b) If the Commission concludes from the preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major watershed variance and that (1) the property owner can secure a reasonable return from or make a practical use of the property without the variance or (2) the variance, if granted, will result in a serious threat to the water supply, then the commission shall deny approval of the variance as proposed. The Commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it to the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall prepare a final decision denying the variance as proposed. F. Bona Fide Farms. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 31, the provisions of Section 105 where specified shall apply to bona fide farms. Normally uses permitted in all districts as "a matter of right" include "bona fide farms", but some normally permitted uses need to be managed as "Special Uses" and require a "Special Use Permit" because of their inherent nature, extent and external effects. They require special care in the control of their location and methods of operation. They are subject to review in relation to general and specific requirements, rather than being a "use permitted by right". G. Definitions of Specific Terms and Words.
a) *Agricultural Use. The use of waters for stock watering, irrigation, and other farm purposes.
68
b) *Animal Unit. A unit of measurement developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency that is used to compare different types of animal operations. c) *Best Management Practices (BMP). A structural or nonstructural management-based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce nonpoint source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection goals. d) *Buffer. An area of natural or planted vegetation through which storm water runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the normal pool elevation of impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or rivers. e) *Built-upon Area (BUA). Built-upon areas shall include that portion of development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover including buildings, pavement, gravel road, recreation facilities (e.g. tennis courts), etc. (Note: Wooden slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool are considered pervious.)
f) *Cluster Development. The grouping of buildings in order to conserve land resources and provide for innovation in the design of the project. This term includes non-residential development as well as single-family residential subdivisions and multi-family developments that do not involve the subdivision of land.
g) *Composting Facility. A facility in which only stumps, limbs, leaves, grass and untreated wood collected from land clearing or landscaping operations is deposited.
h) *Critical Area. The area adjacent to a water supply intake where risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as the land area in Elkin's jurisdiction within 1/2 mile on each side of Big Elkin Creek for a creek upstream distance of 1.5 miles (straight line distance) from the Elkin Reservoir intake, or the ridgeline of the watershed, whichever is less. Major landmarks such as highways or property lines may be used to delineate the outer boundary of the critical area if these landmarks are immediately adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary of one-half mile.
i) *Development. Any land disturbing activity which adds to or changes the amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on a land area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil.
j) *Discharging Landfill. A landfill which discharges treated leachate and which requires a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit.
k) *Dwelling Unit. A building, or portion thereof, providing complete and permanent living facilities for one family.
l) *Existing Development. These projects that are built or those projects that at a minimum have met one of the following criteria under North Carolina zoning law as of the effective date of this ordinance based on:
(1) substantial expenditures of resources (time, labor, money) based on a good faith reliance upon having received valid local government approval to proceed with the project, or
(2) having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by the General Statutes (G.S. 160A-385.1), or
69
(3) having an approved site specific or phased development plan as authorized by the General Statutes (G>S> 160A-385.1)
m) *Existing Lot (Lot of Record). A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
n) *Hazardous Material. Any substance listed as such in SARA section 302, Extremely Hazardous Substances, CERCLA Hazardous Substances, Section 311 of CWA (oil and hazardous substances). o) *High Quality Water (HQW). A supplemental classification of surface waters intended to protect waters which are rated excellent based on biological and physical/chemical characteristics through the NC Department of Environmental Quality monitoring or special studies, primary nursery areas designated by the Marine Fisheries Commission, and other functional nursery areas designated by the Marine Fisheries Commission. WS-II waters are High Quality Water by definition. p) *Industrial Development. Any non-residential development that requires an NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or requires the use of storage of any hazardous material for the purpose of manufacturing, assembling, finishing, cleaning, or developing any product or commodity. q) *Landfill. A facility for the disposal of solid waste on land in a sanitary manner in accordance with Chapter 130A, Article 9 of the N.C. General Statutes. For the purpose of this ordinance this term does not include composting facilities. r) *Major Watershed Variance. A variance from the minimum statewide water supply watershed protection rules that results in the relaxation, by a factor greater than ten (10) percent, of any standard under the low-density option.
s) *Minor Watershed Variance. A variance from the minimum statewide watershed protection rules that results in a relaxation, by a factor of up to ten (10) percent, of any management requirement under the low-density option.
t) *Nonconforming Lot of Record. A lot described by plat or deed that was recorded prior to the effective date of this ordinance (or its amendments) that does not meet the minimum lot size or other development requirements of this ordinance.
u) *Non-residential Development. All development other than residential development, agriculture and Silviculture.
v) *Plat. A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be or has been subdivided.
w) *Protected Area. The area adjoining and upstream of the critical area of WS-II (which includes WS-II Balance of the Watershed) and the area adjoining and upstream of the critical area of WS-IV. The boundaries of the protected area are defined as within five miles of and draining to the normal pool elevation of the reservoir or to the ridgeline of the watershed; or within 10 miles upstream; and draining to the intake located directly in the stream or river or to the ridgeline of the watershed.
x) *Residential Development. Buildings for residence such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums, town houses, cottages, etc., and their associated outbuildings such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos, etc. and customary home occupations. y) *Special Use. Any "new" use which has the potential to adversely impact the water quality of the water supply of Elkin, either through (a) storm water runoff which discharges pollutants from point sources to the Big Elkin Creek or its tributaries proximate to the Elkin Reservoir, or by (b) air pollution in significant
70
quantities to lead to pollution of the waters of Big Elkin Creek or the Elkin Reservoir. This "new" use requires a "Special Use Permit".
z) *Toxic Substances. Any substance or combination of substances (including disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, has the potential to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer genetic mutations, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression in reproduction or growth) or physical deformities in such organisms or their off spring or other adverse health effects.
aa) *Water Dependent Structure. Any structure for which the use requires access to or proximity to or citing within surface waters to fulfill its basic purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, dock and bulkheads. Ancillary facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots and commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures.
bb) *Watershed. The entire land area contributing surface drainage to a specific point (ie. the water supply intake).
*Particularly applicable to the watershed overlay district.
H. Use District Names For the purposes of this section, four overlay districts are hereby created: a) WSII-CA(O) Watershed II - Critical Area (Overlay) b) WSII-BW(O) Watershed II - Balance of Watershed (Overlay) c) WSIV-CA(O) Watershed IV - Critical Area (Overlay) d) WSIV-PA(O) Watershed IV - Protected Area (Overlay) I. Rules Governing Interpretation of District Boundaries Where conflict exists as to whether a tract is inside or outside a watershed area, it shall be the responsibility of the petitioner to present topographical data supporting his/her case.
J. WSII-CA(O) Watershed II Critical Area (Overlay)
The WS II CA(O) is established as an overlay district to impose higher standards in the critical area because the risk of water quality degradation from pollution is greater than in the balance of the watershed, which lies beyond the extraterritorial boundary of the Town. The regulations of this district are intended to promote higher developmental standards and not limit unnecessarily developmental options. In order to maintain a predominantly undeveloped land use intensity pattern, residential and non-residential uses shall be allowed at a maximum of one dwelling unit per two acres and six percent (6%) built-upon area, respectively. a) Permitted Uses Uses permitted in this overlay district are indicated in Section 82 (R-20), as well as: Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990 and provided that all agricultural activities will be encouraged to participate in the Agricultural Cost Share Program for Nonpoint Source Pollution Control. Poultry agriculture, when in compliance with this Section 105 and subject to the "Operating Guidelines and Standards for Poultry Production Operations in North Carolina effective April 1,2016. Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (02 NCAC 60C .0101-.0209).
71
b) Limitations:
Agricultural activities conducted after January 1, 1993, shall maintain a minimum 10 feet vegetative buffer, or equivalent control as determined by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission, along all perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local government studies. Animal operations greater than 100 animal units shall employ Best management Practices (BMP's) by July 1, 1994 recommended by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
Residential Development at one dwelling unit per two acres on a project by project basis. For purposes of density calculations, total project acreage shall not include area within the designated right-of-way of any public or private street within the project, nor shall it include any area within the project donated or dedicated to the public except for stormwater control structures approved under the high density option. No residential lot shall be less than two acres, except within an approved cluster development.
Development of any nature will require:
1) Five copies of the site plan on 18" x24" sheets, 2) Site plan scale of 1" = 100';
a) Property lines with total acreage; b) North arrow; c) Location map;
d) Proposed buildings and other impervious improvements;
e) Total impervious area; f) Easements - location, purpose, and width; g) Location of perennial streams; h) Septic tank drainage field; i) Sedimentation and erosion controls; and j) Front, side, and rear yard setbacks.
c) Prohibited Uses: The following uses are prohibited in the Watershed Protection Overlay District:
1. Processing of mineral products; 2. Lumber mills and saw mills; 3. Processing of animal and vegetable products; 4. The storage of toxic and hazardous
materials unless a spill containment plan is implemented; 5. Landfills and discharging landfills; 6. Sites for land application of sludge/residuals or petroleum contaminated soils; 7. Discharges of sewage, domestic wastewater, industrial wastes, non-process industrial wastes, or other wastes except as permitted by the Division of Environmental Health, N.C. Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources or successor authority; 8. Any use determined by the Town of Elkin to be detrimental to the quality of water in the water supply watershed by posing a threat of run- off, leaching or other types of pollution.
d) Dimensional Requirements
72
Lot area. Eighty-seven thousand, one hundred twenty (87,120) square feet: (or two acres) minimum lot area per dwelling unit. Because of the high likelihood of a septic tank, a potential buyer should first check with the Surry County Health Department to determine adequacy of the lot, as a larger lot could be required.
K. WSII-BW(O) WSII-Balance of Watershed (Overlay)
The WSII-BW(O) is established as an overlay district to impose lower standards in the balance of the watershed area because the risk of water quality degradation from pollution is less than in the critical area of the watershed. The regulations of this district will allow residential uses at a maximum of one dwelling unit per acre and non-residential development at twelve percent built-upon area. Projects must minimize built-upon surface area, direct stormwater away from surface waters and incorporate Best Management Practices to minimize water quality impacts. Non-discharging landfills and sludge application sites are allowed.
a) Permitted Uses Uses permitted in this overlay district are indicated in Section 82 (R-20),85(B-2) and 87(M-1), as well as: Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990 and provided that all agricultural activities will be encouraged to participate in the agricultural Agricultural Cost Share Program for Nonpoint Source Pollution Control. Poultry agriculture, when in compliance with this Section 105 and subject to the "Operating Guidelines and Standards for Poultry Production Operations in North Carolina effective April 1,2016.
Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (02 NCAC 60C .0101-.0209).
b) Limitations
Residential development at one dwelling unit per acre on a project by project basis. For purposes of density calculations, total project acreage shall not include area within the designated right-of-way of any public or private street within the project, not shall it include any area within the project donated or dedicated to the public except for stormwater control structures approved under the high density option. No residential lot shall be less than 1 acre, except within an approved cluster development
Development of any nature will require:
1) Five copies of the site plan on 18" x 24" sheets, 2) Site plan scale of 1" = 100'; a) Property lines with total acreage; b) North arrow;
c) Location map; d) Proposed buildings and other impervious improvements;
H. Use District Names
For the purposes of this section, four overlay districts are hereby created:
a) WSII-CA(O) Watershed II - Critical Area (Overlay)
b) WSII-BW(O) Watershed II - Balance of Watershed (Overlay)
c) WSIV-CA(O) Watershed IV - Critical Area (Overlay)
d) WSIV-PA(O) Watershed IV - Protected Area (Overlay)
e) Total impervious area;
73
f) Easements - location, purpose, and width; g) Location of perennial streams; h) Septic tank drainage field; i) Sedimentation and erosion controls; and j) Front, side, and rear yard setbacks. c) Prohibited Uses: The following uses are prohibited in the Watershed Protection Overlay District:
1. Processing of mineral products;
2. Lumber mills and saw mills; 3. Processing of animal and vegetable products; 4. The storage of toxic and hazardous
materials unless a spill containment plan is implemented; 5. Landfills and discharging landfills; 6. Sites for land application of sludge/residuals or petroleum contaminated soils; 7. Discharges of sewage, domestic wastewater, industrial wastes, non-process industrial wastes, or other wastes except as permitted by the Division of Environmental Health, N.C. Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources or successor authority; 8. Any use determined by the Town of Elkin to be detrimental to the quality of water in the water supply watershed by posing a threat of run- off, leaching or other types of pollution.
d) Density and Built-upon Areas
Single Family Residential - No residential lot shall be less than one acre, except within an approved cluster development.
All other Residential and Non-residential - Development may exceed the twelve percent (12%) built-upon area on a project by project basis in that up to ten percent (10%) or (137acres) of the balance of the watershed may be developed for non-residential uses to seventy percent (70%) built-upon area on a project by project basis. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed.
L. WSIV-CA(O) Critical Area (Overlay)
The WSIV-CA(O) is designed to impose higher standards in the critical area than in the balance of the watershed because the risk of water quality degradation from pollution is greater in the critical area than in the protected area. Only new development activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control plan under State law or approved local program are required to meet the provisions of this ordinances when located in the WS-IV watershed. In order to address a moderate to high land use intensity pattern, residential and non-residential uses are allowed at a maximum of two (2) dwelling units per acre and twenty-four percent (24%) built-upon area, respectively.
a) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in this overlay district are indicated in Section 80 (R-12), as well as:
Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990 and provided that all agricultural activities will be encouraged to participate in the agricultural Agricultural Cost Share Program for Nonpoint Source Pollution Control.
74
Poultry agriculture, when in compliance with this Section 105 and subject to the "Operating Guidelines and Standards for Poultry Production Operations in North Carolina effective April 1,2016. Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (02 NCAC 60C .0101-.0209).
b) Limitations
Agricultural activities conducted after January 1, 1993, shall maintain a minimum 10 feet vegetative buffer, or equivalent control as determined by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission, along all perennial waters indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local government studies. Animal operations greater than 100 animal units shall employ Best management Practices (BMP's) by July 1, 1994 recommended by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
Non-residential development shall not exceed twenty-four percent (24%) built upon area on a project by project basis.
Residential Development at two dwelling unit per acre on a project by project basis. For purposes of density calculations, total project acreage shall not include area within the designated right-of-way of any public or private street within the project, nor shall it include any area within the project donated or dedicated to the except for stormwater control structures approved under the high density option. No residential lot shall be less than one-half (1/2 )acre except within an approved cluster development.
The Department of Transportation must use BMP's as described in their document "Water Supply Watershed Best Management Practices."
c) Prohibited Uses: The following uses are prohibited in the Watershed Protection Overlay District:
1. Processing of mineral products;
2. Lumber mills and saw mills; 3. Processing of animal and vegetable products; 4. The storage of toxic and hazardous
materials unless a spill containment plan is implemented; 5. Landfills and discharging landfills; 6. Sites for land application of sludge/residuals or petroleum contaminated soils; 7. Discharges of sewage, domestic wastewater, industrial wastes, non-process industrial wastes, or other wastes except as permitted by the Division of Environmental Health, N.C. Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources or successor authority; 8. Any use determined by the Town of Elkin to be detrimental to the quality of water in the water supply watershed by posing a threat of run- off, leaching or other types of pollution.
d) Dimensional Requirements
Lot area. Twenty-one thousand seven hundred eight (21,780) square feet minimum lot area per dwelling.
M. WAIV-PA(O) - Protected Area (Overlay)
The WSIV-PA(O) is intended to allow development with fewer restrictions because the risk of water quality degradation is less in the protected area than in the critical area. Only new development activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control plan under State law or approved local
75
government program are required to meet the provisions of this ordinance when located in a WS-IV watershed. In order to address a moderate to land use intensity pattern, residential and non-residential uses shall develop at a maximum of two (2) dwelling units per acre and twenty-four percent (24%) built-upon area, respectively. A maximum of three (3) dwelling units per acre or thirty-six (36%) percent built-upon area is allowed for projects without a curb and gutter street system.
a) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in this overlay district are indicated in Section 80 (R-12), as well as:
Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990 and provided that all agricultural activities will be encouraged to participate in the Agricultural Cost Share Program for Nonpoint Source Pollution Control.
Poultry agriculture, when in compliance with this Section 105 and subject to the "Operating Guidelines and Standards for Poultry Production Operations in North Carolina effective April 1,2016. Silviculture, subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (02 NCAC 60C .0101-.0209).
b) Limitations
Residential development, not to exceed two dwelling units per acre, on a project by project basis. The projects without a curb and gutter street system residential density shall not exceed three dwelling units per acre. For purposes of density calculations, total project acreage shall not include area within the designated right-of-way of any public ore private street within the project, nor shall it include any area within the project donated or dedicated to the public, except for stormwater control structures approved under or dedicated to the public, except for stormwater control structures approved under the high density option. No residential lot shall be less than on-half (1/2) acre for projects without a curb and gutter system, except within an approved cluster development.
Non-residential development, shall not exceed twenty-four percent (24%) built-upon area on a project by project basis. For projects without a curb and gutter street system, development shall not exceed thirty-six percent(36%) built-upon area on a project by project basis.
The Department of Transportation must use BMP's as described in their document, "Water Supply Watershed Best Management Practices."
c) Prohibited Uses: The following uses are prohibited in the Watershed Protection Overlay District:
1. Processing of mineral products;
2. Lumber mills and saw mills; 3. Processing of animal and vegetable products; 4. The storage of toxic and hazardous
materials unless a spill containment plan is implemented; 5. Landfills and discharging landfills; 6. Sites for land application of sludge/residuals or petroleum contaminated soils; 7. Discharges of sewage, domestic wastewater, industrial wastes, non-process industrial wastes, or other wastes except as permitted by the Division of Environmental Health, N.C. Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources or successor authority;
76
8. Any use determined by the Town of Elkin to be detrimental to the quality of water in the water supply watershed by posing a threat of run- off, leaching or other types of pollution.
d) Dimensional Requirements
Lot Area. Twenty-one thousand, seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit (with curb and gutter); fourteen thousand, five hundred twenty (14,520) square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit (without curb and gutter).
N. Development Plan. Any submitted development plan, in addition to the requirements of Section 121, shall also depict the BUA calculations.
O. Shopping Centers. Development shopping center shall be bound by the BUA limitations of Section 122.
Q. Planned Unit Development (PUD). PUD's within watershed areas shall not exceed the overall residential density or non-residential BUA allowed in the critical area or balance of the watershed or protected area (whichever applies).
R. Remedies Available. In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of the ordinance, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or any other appropriate town authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violation. In addition, the N.C. Environment Management Commission may assess civil penalties in accordance with G.S. 143.215(6)(a), whenever watershed violations occur. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
S. Record of Amendments
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall keep records of all amendments to this ordinance and when such amendments apply to the watershed overlay district Watershed Protection Overlay District, copies of such upon adoption, shall be sent to the N.C. Environmental Management Commission and the N.C. Department of Environmental Quality.
T. Records for the 10/70 Watershed Provisions Within the WSII-BW(O)
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall keep records of the Town's utilization of the provisions that a maximum ten percent (10%) of the balance of the watershed area may be developed with non-residential and residential development to a maximum of seventy percent (70%) built-upon area. Records shall include the total acres of non-critical watershed area, total acres eligible to be developed under this option, total acres approved for this development option, and individual records for each project with the following information: location, acres, site plan, use, stormwater management plan as applicable and inventory of hazardous materials as applicable.
U. Minor or Major Watershed Variances.
a) A minor watershed variance shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until the provisions of Section 143.3 have been met.
b) A major watershed variance shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until the provisions of Section 143.3 and 105 E have been met.
77
c) When considering minor or major watershed variances, the Town of Elkin shall notify and allow a reasonable comment period for all other local governments having jurisdiction in the designated watershed where the watershed variance is being considered. Local governments receiving such notification shall submit comments to the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to a Board of Adjustment decision. Such comments shall become a part of the public record.
d) The Board of Adjustment shall refuse to hear an appeal or an application for a minor or major watershed variance previously denied if it finds there have been no substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the appeal or application.
e) A map or plot shall accompany any written application and shall remain as a permanent part of the variance application. The map of plot shall be drawn to scale and show the following information:
1. size of lots;
2. size and location of the building or buildings on the lot; 3. size and location of any proposed building or additions to an existing buildings on the lot; 4. location, or proposed location, of any outdoor sign on the lot;
5. location and number of parking space, and/or proposed parking spaces on the lot;
6. surface water drainage.
V. Conflict. Where this section of the ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the lot size than are imposed by other sections, the provisions of this section shall govern.
W. Effective Date
This amendment was adopted on September 13, 1993, and shall take effect on October 1, 1993. Amended April 1997. Amended _September 11_ 2017.
Section 106 Commercial Corridor Overlay
Intent – The Commercial Corridor Overlay is established as an overlay district whose geographic coverage shall encompass the NC 268 By-pass from Interstate 77 west to the limited access portion of the highway. The corridor covers all lands within 400 feet of the right-of-way along both sides of the road. It is intended to supplement, rather than replace the underlying zoning in this area. It does not address elements such as use or intensity (which are still controlled by the underlying zone), rather, it addresses design elements such as lighting and access. Single-family residences are specifically exempted from the requirements of the overlay.
Design Standards – Developments shall comply with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance. In addition, the following design standards shall be followed. In the event of inconsistencies, the standards contained in this section shall govern.
78
1. Exterior Lighting Standards
a. Standards
The following standards are required of all exterior lighting except the outdoor recreational uses specifically exempted below. Many uses have the option of providing a lower light post with a non-cutoff type of luminaire or a higher pole, up to forty (40) feet, with a luminaire that totally cuts off light spillover at a cutoff angle smaller than ninety (90) degrees.
The maximum height light post permitted is dependent on amount of cutoff provided. This is designed as a protection against excessive glare and light spilling over to neighboring properties. The exceptions which are permitted provide adequate protection for highway corridors and neighboring residential property.
Exterior lighting shall meet one (1) of the following standards:
1. When lighting source or luminaire has no cutoff:
Standard Maximum Permitted Maintained Illumination7 Maximum Permitted Mounting Height of Illumination8
Residential Districts
0.20 foot-candles9
16 feet
Commercial Districts
0.20 foot-candles
16 feet
Industrial Districts
0.30 foot-candles
20 feet
7 Measured at the property line and any public right-of-way line.
8 Measured from the ground to the light source.
9 Foot –candles (F) are to be calculated by dividing the lumens (L) by the distance to the property line squared (D2) (i.e. F = L / D2).
An illustration of this type of luminaire is provided below.
79
2. When a luminaire has total cutoff at ninety (90) degrees:
The maximum illumination and the maximum permitted luminaire height shall be:
Standard Maximum Permitted Maintained Illumination7 Maximum Permitted Mounting Height of Illumination8
Agricultural &
Residential Districts
1.00 foot-candles9
25 ft.
Commercial and Industrial
Districts
2.00 foot-candles
3.00 foot-candles
30 ft.
40 ft.
7 Measured at the property line and any public right-of-way line.
8 Measured from the ground to the light source.
9 Foot –candles (F) are to be calculated by dividing the lumens (L) by the distance to the property line squared (D2) (i.e. F = L / D2).
An illustration of this type of luminaire is provided below.
3. Exemption for specified outdoor recreational uses.
80
a) These standards shall not apply to properties subject to State or Federal safe lighting standards.
b) Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation, ball fields and tennis courts are exempt from the exterior lighting standards provided above. These outdoor recreation uses must meet all other requirements of this Section and of this Ordinance.
c) The outdoor recreational uses specified above shall not exceed a maximum permitted post height of eighty (80) feet.
d) The outdoor recreational uses specified above may exceed a total cutoff angle of ninety (90) degrees, provided that the luminaire is shielded to prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent roadway corridor or residential property. The maximum permitted illumination at the interior bufferyard line shall not exceed two (2) foot-candles.
b. Additional Regulations
Not withstanding any other provision of this Section to the contrary:
1. This Section does not apply to public street lighting.
2. No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
3. Light sources or luminaires shall not be located within buffer yard areas except on pedestrian walkways.
4. Adequate lighting must be provided for the public safety in parking and similar areas.
c. Exterior Lighting Plan.
At the time any exterior lighting is installed or substantially modified, and whenever a zoning certificate is sought, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department in order to determine whether the requirements of this Section have been met.
2. Access Management & Parking Areas
81
a. Standards
1. Access points to the development (such as curb cuts or driveways) shall be minimized for each separately owned property. The following chart lists the number of access points allowed based on road frontage:
0-500 Feet - 1 Vehicle Access Point Allowed
501-1,000 Feet - 2 Vehicle Access Points Allowed
More than 1,001 Feet - 3 Vehicle Access Points Allowed
Corner Lots - 2 Vehicle Access Points Allowed
2. Joint driveways are permitted and recommended (see Figure 2).
Figure 2
82
3. Interior access between adjoing lots is mandatory. Location and specifications for the interior lot access points shall be determined during site-plan review (see Figure 3).
Figure 3
4. This Section encourages the placement of parking in the side or rear of the lot (see Figure 4). The suggested maximum coverage of a front yard for driveway and parking is 20%. Amended 07/16/07
Figure 4
83
5. Normal Landscaping requirements will still apply to parking areas. In
addition, landscaped areas shall be surrounded by a concrete curb or other
material, such as landscape timbers, in order to protect the landscaped area
and to define its borders.
6. Any land use generating more than 60 trips per peak hour, estimated by using
the NC Department of Transportation guidelines, may be required to provide a
deceleration lane (to be determined by the Site Plan Review Committee).
7. It is the intent of these regulations to exempt from this requirement any
subdivision of lots clearly intended for single-family residential development.
8. No access point is allowed within one hundred (100) feet of the centerline of
any intersecting street. Corner lots are allowed to have access points within
fifty (50) feet of the centerline of any intersecting street.
9. No access point shall be allowed within thirty (30) feet of the side property
line of any property or development except where a mutual access agreement
exists between adjoining owners.
10. Any parcel of record on the effective date of this Section which has prohibited
all vehicular access based on the provisions herein shall be allowed one (1)
access point.
3. Utility Wiring
a. Standards
1. All wiring must be placed underground on the entire lot or lots being
developed. Wiring for utilities such as telephone, electrical, cable television,
etc. or related functions shall be included.
4. Building Orientation
a. Standards
1. All principal buildings within the overlay district shall be placed no closer than
the twenty (20) feet from the right-of way line. (see Figure 5)
Figure 5
Build-to-Line
Road
Right-of-Way
Building
2. The primary entrance shall be designed for the pedistrian, and be distiguishable
84
from the rest of the building. Such entrances shall provide a sense of entry and add variety to the streetscapae. Secondary entrances shall be for shipping and receiving shall be oriented away from the public street.
5. Screening
a. Standards
1. Dumpsters or trash handling areas shall always be screened from adjacent properties and public view from ground level, with a minimum six-foot high solid wooden fence or solid (and finished) masonry wall, with a solid closeable gate. Dumpsters shall not be allowed in any required setback or yard space.
2. Mechanical equipment at ground level shall be placed on the parking lot side of the building and away from buildings on adjacent sides. It shall be screened from the public street by walls, fencing and/or landscaping. Mechanical equipment on rooftops shall be screened from the view of the public street. No chain link fencing may be used to comply with any part of this Section.
3. A developer may choose to substantially screen from public view a parking area by utilizing an earthen berm, masonry wall or other suitable means of screening as determined by the Site Plan Review Committee.
6. Design Elements
b. Standards
1. Type of Construction – Manufactured and mobile units shall be prohibited, except for temporary use during construction or for storage of materials during construction.
2. The use of vinyl siding or unpainted cinder-block walls shall be prohibited, but the use of decorative, split-faced masonry products is permissible.
3. Metal, modular, and vertical sided buildings which include but are not limited to buildings sided with vinyl and masonite, and which are located with this overlay are prohibited unless architectural building plans and elevations are submitted to the Board of Commissioners for review and approval based on the following criteria:
 A minimum of 50 percent of each wall elevation mass shall be a nonmetal or vertical siding material; and horizontal runs shall have a vertical break in building materials.
 The color(s) of the metal or vertical siding shall be complementary with the color of nonmetal or vertical siding materials used on the building.
 Metal or vertical siding shall be used in a manner which maintains the architectural unity and integrity of the entire building.
 In a multi-building development, metal or vertical sided building(s) shall utilize a uniform architectural theme with other buildings on the site, and shall be designed to create a harmonious style through consideration of scale, proportion, detail, materials, color and site planning.
 Corrugated and/or sheet metal are prohibited.
4. Recognizing topographical and other physical features of a site, decorative screening and/or landscaping shall be installed so as to obscure as much as reasonably possible from view from public-rights-of-way all trash rooms, trash holding receptacles, loading or service areas,
85
mechanical or electrical equipment, storage facilities or bins, or other unsightly building appurtenances. Appropriate screening shall also be provided to obscure as much as reasonably possible all roof-mounted equipment, appurtenances, and roof vents from view from public rights-of –way.
5. Design guidelines for multi-tenant commercial developments and/or nonresidential group developments shall be required for the purpose of facilitating unified developments with compatible architecture, scale, proportion, and building elements that provide visual unity and are harmonious with other buildings in the surrounding area. Prior to the development of any phase of a commercial multi-tenant and/or nonresidential group development, design guidelines governing the appearance of all buildings within the property shall be submitted by the developer for the review of the Architectural Review Committee and the approval of the Director of Planning prior to the approval of any final development plan or the issuance of any permits. Said guidelines shall address and include the following criteria:
a. Common signage plan requirements and criteria, including locations, area(s), copy, illumination proposed, height(s), material(s), proposed color schemes, and provisions for shared use of signage.
b. Exterior building materials and colors, including examples of materials and colors to be consistent throughout the development.
c. Façade design, mass, and rhythm.
d. Common landscaping scheme, including street yard(s) and peripheral plantings, parking area plantings, and tree preservation.
In addition, at the discretion of the developer, the design guidelines shall address at least two (2) of the following criteria, which shall be unified throughout the development:
e. Building heights.
f. Roof shapes.
g. Pedestrian circulation, sidewalks.
7. Landscaping
Section 78 of the Town of Elkin Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
8. Signs
Section 71 of the Town of Elkin Zoning Ordinance shall apply.
Not withstanding the above sign requirement, Big Box Stores shall prepare and submit to the Planning Board a proposed sign design plan for their property which shall include size,location, color scheme and lighting of all signs. The Planning Board, working with the developer, owner or tenants on a “ case by case basis”, shall make a recommendation to the Town Board for a final approval and permitting of signs.
86
Section 107. DOWNTOWN DESIGN
A – Introduction
1. Purpose
The Downtown Design Overlay District for Elkin is intended to promote a high level of future development and redevelopment that will:
a. Contribute to Downtown Elkin
b. Stimulate investment in and strengthen the economic vitality of Downtown Elkin; and
c. Build upon the positive physical image and identity of Downtown Elkin.
This overlay acknowledges the prevailing architectural character and development patterns within Downtown. The overlay does seek to assist in promoting and building upon the positive design features and architectural character that exists in Downtown today.
Additionally it is not the intent of this overlay to eliminate freedom or discourage innovative design. The purpose of this overlay is to complement the Town of Elkin’s existing zoning ordinance and development guidelines for Downtown. This overlay is less quantitative than the mandatory development standards found within the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Elkin or Elkin’s Subdivision Standards and this allows some inherent flexibility in application to specific projects.
2. Organization
The overlay District is organized into the following sections:
A. Introduction provides an overview of the purpose, organization, applicability and other aspects of the overlay.
B. Context and compatibility establishes basic “rule of thumb” for integrating new development into the existing urban fabric of Downtown Elkin, and emphasizes the proper treatment of the “edge condition” of existing and proposed development.
C. Downtown Guidelines provides standards of design and development, within an historic architectural context, for use in the Overlay. This section is divided into two categories: 1) infill and 2) storefront design.
D. Signs set forth general and specific guidelines, which tend to enhance the image of Downtown and improve the effectiveness of signs for businesses.
E. Landscaping provides a basic landscape design framework, which is to be used in conjunction with new development, and as a helpful tool for property owners interested in upgrading the landscaping of existing development.
F. Secretary of the Interior Guidelines for the rehabilitation of older buildings that are eligible for Historic Tax Credits.
3. Understanding the Terminology
To aid in the understanding of this Overlay District, a development applicant should differentiate the meaning of “should,” encouraged,” and “discouraged.”
Overlay District guidelines, which employ the word “should”, are intended to be applied as stated. An alternative measure may be considered, if it meets or exceeds the intent of the guideline.
Guidelines using the words “encouraged” or discouraged” are not mandatory, but express a more or less desirable design solution.
4. Applicability
The provisions of this section are applicable to all development within the B-1, Central Business District.
87
Any new building, additions, exterior alterations, or landscaping, and any modification to an approved landscaping plan or parking lot design, should adhere to the Downtown Design Overlay District as applicable. It is important to note, however, that these guidelines do not affect existing buildings that are not proposed for new construction, exterior alterations, landscaping or changes in the parking lot layout.
The Overlay District requirements will be utilized during the Town’s Development Approval process (and should be provided to applicants during pre-application conferences) to encourage the highest level of design quality, and concurrently provide the flexibility necessary to encourage creativity on the part of project designers in response to existing site conditions.
5. Exemptions
When in compliance with all other Town ordinances, the following projects are exempted from all provisions of the Downtown Design Overlay District:
a. Construction underground, which will not leave any significant, permanent marks on the surface after completion: utility boxes, pipes, and poles shall be considered “significant, permanent marks;”
b. Maintenance work on buildings, landscaping, or grounds, (including parking lots), which does not significantly alter the appearance or function of the building, landscaping or grounds;
c. Interior remodeling work;
d. Landscape maintenance and upkeep, including relatively minor replacement of plants other than trees;
e. Temporary uses and structures as defined by the Elkin Zoning Ordinance;
f. Routine roof maintenance and repair. Overall roof reconstruction is subject to this overlay.
B — Context & Compatibility
Existing buildings, streetscape, and landscaping establish the frame of reference for new development. This is particularly true throughout Downtown Elkin where an historic urban fabric is well represented by commercial structures.
Generally, to create harmony between the existing urban fabric and new elements introduced into the Downtown, all new structures, additions and uses should be compatible with the prevailing historic architectural character of the surrounding area. Site amenities, such as large mature trees, should be preserved and should become part of any new project or addition, and structures and activities should be located and designed to avoid creating nuisances and hazards for adjoining properties, particularly residential properties.
The concept of “compatible” design is one of the most important concepts to be aware of when using these design guidelines. Compatible designs do not seek to imitate the historic architecture found in Downtown, but do reflect their surroundings in terms of design concepts — mass, scale, rhythm, color, materials, and building arrangement. Compatible designs will be in harmony with the best designs of surrounding developments.
“Rules of Thumb” pertaining to context and compatibility include:
1. All new construction and development should incorporate those characteristics of the Downtown that exhibit a positive distinctive architectural style and/or established functional or landscape patterns.
2. New buildings and additions should be sited in a manner that will complement rather than conflict with existing adjacent buildings, landscape, streetscape, parking, and access.
3. Transitions between existing and new buildings or additions should be gradual. The height and mass of new projects or construction should not create abrupt changes from those of existing buildings
4. Natural amenities, such as mature trees and views, should be preserved and incorporated in the design of Downtown projects where applicable. Buildings shall front the street and should not turn their backs to existing or potential amenities.
5. Buildings should be oriented to connect with high activity areas, such as restaurant dining areas or major pedestrian areas, in order to create connections and linkages.
88
6. Noise or odor generating activities in general, and loading areas, trash and storage areas, and rooftop equipment in particular should be located as far as possible from adjacent residences and shall never be located next to residential properties without fully mitigating their negative effects. They should also be screened from view of either Bridge Street, Market Street or Main Street.
7. Commercial and other nonresidential buildings and associated activity areas should be oriented to avoid significant shading of adjacent residences and compromising residents’ privacy.
8. Where Downtown buildings are adjacent to residential neighborhoods, Downtown buildings should maintain low profiles and heights should be stepped down to the height of adjacent residential zones, utilizing architectural elements such as gables or hip roofs to reduce building mass.
9. Windows in commercial and other nonresidential buildings should be oriented to preclude a direct line of sight into adjacent residential buildings, or property.
C — Downtown Guidelines
The construction of new buildings and rehabilitation of existing buildings within the Central Business District (B-1) in Downtown Elkin is important for continued economic growth and diversity in the Town. It is extremely important that new buildings erected in the Downtown are compatible with existing buildings, which generally reflect the architectural styles of the early to mid-twentieth century. It is the desire of the Town to have buildings in the Central Business District represent architectural styles of this era rather than some contemporary franchise architectural dictate from some other place.
1. Infill
Since these buildings will be constructed on vacant or underutilized lots, thus filling a “hole” in the street frontage, they are called “infill” construction.
The design of an infill building, particularly its front facade, should be influenced by the other facades on the street but should not attempt to create an exact replica. The infill structure should be sympathetic and compatible with surrounding buildings in terms of mass, scale, height, façade rhythm, placement of doors and windows, storefront design, color and use of materials.
Since good infill design responds directly to its surroundings, it is not possible to develop specific guidelines, which apply in every case. There are, however, several general design principles, which should govern the visual ties between a new infill building, and its neighboring historic structures found in Downtown Elkin.
a. Façade Proportion
1. The characteristic proportion (relationship of height to width) of existing facades should be respected in relation to new infill development.
89
2. Whenever an infill building is proposed, that is much “wider” than the existing characteristic facades on the street, the infill facades should be broken down into a series of appropriately proportioned “structural bays,” storefronts, or components typically segmented by a series of columns or masonry piers which frame window, door and bulkhead components.
3. An infill building should not be much higher than the height of surrounding historic structures in Downtown. In no case shall any new buildings exceed fifty (50) feet in height.
b. Proportion of Openings
1. Maintain the predominant difference between upper story openings and street level storefront openings (windows and doors). Usually, there is a much greater window area at the storefront level for pedestrians to have a better view of the merchandise displayed behind, as opposed to upper stories that have smaller window openings.
2. Whenever an infill building is proposed which has two adjacent commercial structures, attempt to maintain the characteristic rhythm, proportion and spacing of existing door and window openings.
2. Whenever an infill building is proposed which has two adjacent commercial structures, attempt to maintain the characteristic rhythm, proportion and spacing of existing door and window openings.
90
c. Horizontal Rhythms
1. Whenever an infill building is proposed, identify the common horizontal elements
(e.g. cornice line, window height/width, and spacing) found among local historic structures
and develop the infill design utilizing a similar rhythm or alignment.
2. If maintaining a horizontal rhythm or alignment in an infill building is very difficult or otherwise impossible, the use of fabric canopies or awnings is strongly encouraged to establish a shared horizontal storefront rhythm.
d. Wall Articulation
1. Long, blank, unarticulated street wall facades without window or door openings are strongly discouraged and should be divided into a series of structural bays (e.g. characterized by masonry piers which frame window and door elements).
2. Monolithic street wall facades should be “broken” by vertical and horizontal articulation (e.g. sculpted, carved or penetrated wall surface defined by recesses and reveals) characterized by: (a) breaks (reveals, recesses ) in the surface of the wall itself; (b) placement of window and door openings; or (c) the placement of balconies, awnings, and canopies.
3. Avoid large unbroken façade surfaces at the storefront level. This can be achieved in a number of ways including; (a) dividing the façade into a series of display windows with smaller panes of glass; (b) constructing the façade with small human scale materials such as brick or decorative tile along bulkheads; (c) providing traditional recessed entries; (d) careful sizing, placement, and overall design of signage; and (e) providing consistent door and window reveals.
e. Roofs
1. Roofs may be flat or sloped consistent with surrounding buildings. Older twentieth century, commercial vernacular buildings used flat roofs with decorative parapets and heavy cornice lines.
2. Cornice lines of new buildings (horizontal rhythm element) should be aligned with buildings on adjacent properties to avoid divergent clashes in building height.
3. Radical roof pitches, which create overly prominent or out-of-character buildings, such as A-frames, massive mansards, geodesic domes, quonset hut roofs, or chalet style buildings are strongly discouraged.
4. The use of decorative parapets is encouraged if they have substantial visual interest, which incorporates vertical articulation.
f. Building Material Palette
Building materials to be used on infill buildings are to be consistent with the materials used on adjacent buildings. The following tables present recommended and discouraged building materials for infill construction.
91
Recommended materials for infill structures
(Not Including Existing Buildings)
Building Walls:
 Clear glass, glass block (storefront only)
 Glass block (transom)
 New or used face-brick
 Cut stone, rusticated block (cast stone)
 Ceramic tiles (bulkhead)
 Stucco
 Horizontal clapboard, lap, wood siding ( not allowed in the fire district)
Roofs (where visible):
 Standing seam metal roof or other metal roofing
 Class “A” composition shingles (limited to
refurbishment of residential structures
 Tile of neutral color
 Rolled rubber roofing
92
Discouraged Materials
 Imitation masonry (e.g. imitation, rusticated block) of any kind
 Reflective or opaque glass
 Imitation stone or flagstone parquet
 Rough sawn or “natural (unfinished) wood
 “pecky” cedar
 used brick with no fired face (salvaged from interior walls)
 vertical wood siding (Board & Batten)
 coarsely finished “rough-saw” on rustic materials (e.g. wood shakes, barnwood, board and batten or T-111 siding
 plastic panels/vinyl siding
 steel or metal siding
Discouraged Roofs (where visible):
 crushed stone
 shake
 brightly colored tile (orange, blue, etc.)
 corrugated fiberglass
 asphalt sheeting
93
g. Mechanical Equipment Screening
It is strongly encouraged that any mechanical or utility equipment, whether on the roof, beside of the building, or on the ground, be screened. The method of screening shall be architecturally integrated with the structure in terms of materials color, shape and size. Where freestanding mechanical equipment is provided, a continuous solid screen is desirable. On-roof mechanical equipment should be screened by solid building elements (e.g. parapet wall or roof well) instead of after-the-fact add-on-screening (e.g. wood or metal slats).
h. Setbacks and “Build To” lines
 The first floor of any new infill building shall be built at the front property line. If a building proposes to have a plaza area located between its front and the front property line, this may be allowed on a case-by-case basis. In no event will surface parking be allowed between the building and front property line.
 Canopies, trellises and other accessory structures, which are relatively open and do not restrict pedestrian or vehicular movement may project over the right-of-way with a Town or NCDOT encroachment approval.
i. Street Orientation
 It is strongly encouraged that the front building façade be oriented parallel to the street.
 Storefronts should be designed to orient to the major street frontage. While side or rear entries may be desirable, the predominant major building entry shall be oriented toward the major street.
j. Parking Lot Orientation
 Parking lots shall be located to the rear or sides of buildings.
 Locating parking lots between the front property line and the building storefront is prohibited anywhere in the overlay.
 Rear parking lots shall be designed and located contiguous to each other so that vehicles can travel from one private parking lot to the other (reciprocal access) without having to enter the street.
 Private parking lots with side street frontage should be attractively landscaped with trees and shrubs in order to continue the linear street frontage created by the existing flanking buildings and to screen parked vehicles. Low masonry garden walls or landscaping (3 feet maximum height) at the setback line are also encouraged to screen parking from the side street.
 Common reciprocal access driveways, which provide vehicular access to adjacent parcels, are
required. Shared parking and circulation
aisles coordinated between adjacent
businesses and/ or developments are also
encouraged.
 Whenever possible locate parking lot
entries on side streets in order to
minimize pedestrian/vehicular conflicts
along the primary street frontage. (Main
Street)
2. Storefront design
94
Building facades, including the storefront, are the most important visual elements of commercial structures. Facades also experience significant change during a building’s life and hold the most potential for creative alterations affecting both the characters of the building and the streetscape. In an effort to promote quality design for new infill building, and the rehabilitation of existing buildings, the following specific storefront and façade guidelines are presented.
a. Entries/Doorways
Commercial storefront entries are typically recessed and/or sheltered by a covered arcade structure, canopy or awning. This provides more area for display space, a sheltered transition area to the interior of the store and emphasizes the entrance. Recessed entries should be retained and are strongly encouraged.
b. Façade Color
 The use of light, subdued or neutral (earth tone) colors and natural building materials, such as brick, or stone are encouraged.
 Adjacent buildings should be painted different, but complementary colors. (no strikingly contrasting colors)
 One base color should be used for the entire façade. Different trim colors are encouraged, but should not exceed three different colors
 Different window frame and sash colors are encouraged but should complement the main color of the building.
 Primary colors are prohibited on façade exteriors.
 Stripes, polka dots, checkerboard patterns and other distracting paint combinations are prohibited.
c. Awnings and Canopies
 Awnings are encouraged and should have a single color or two-color stripes. Lettering and trim, utilizing other colors is allowed but will be considered as sign area.
 Awning shape should relate to the window or door opening. Barrel shaped awnings should be use to complement arched windows.
WINDOW REPLACEMENT
95
 All awnings should be well maintained, washed regularly and replaced when faded or torn.
 When there are several businesses in one building awnings of the same color should be used with simple
signs on the valance flap that may vary in type and style and color to differentiate the individual businesses within the building.
d. Door and Window Design
 Accentuate the door with simple details such as a handsome brass door pull, brass kick plate or an attractive painted sign.
 Doors to retail shops should contain a high percentage of glass in order to view the retail contents.
 When considering new window fenestration (window size, size of windowpanes, mullion type, window materials), it is important that the new design be sympathetic and compatible with the façade theme of the whole block. (streetscape).
 Use of clear glass (88% light transmission) on the first floor is highly recommended.
 Storefront windows should be as large as possible and no closer that 18” from the ground (bulkhead height). By limiting the bulkhead heights, the visibility to the storefront displays and retail interior is maximized. Maximum bulkhead heights for new construction shall be 36”.
 Discourage introducing or changing the location or size of windows or other openings that alter the architectural rhythm, alignment or character of the original building.
e. Rear Entry Design
 Design the rear entry to fit the casual visual character of the alley or rear entrance and provide a pleasant protected space
 The rear entry door should be wood and glass similar to the front door. Special security glass is permitted.
 Security lighting should be modest and should focus on the rear entry door.
 Selective use of tree plantings, potted plants and other landscaping can subtly
ORIGINAL
Windows and
tile bulkhead
NOT ACCEPTABLE
Aluminum frame
w/framed bulkhead
NOT ACCEPTABLE
Blocked-up with
Stone veneer
ORIGINAL
NOT ACCEPTABLE
Aluminum casement
NOT ACCEPTABLE
Blocked-up
96
improve a rear façade.
 Refuse containers and service facilities should be screened from view by solid masonry walls with metal doors or metal fence. Use landscaping (shrubs and vines) to screen walls and help deter graffiti.
Window Replacement
 If a window has deteriorated beyond repair or is missing, the replacement should match the original window in terms of design and materials. Replacement windows should fill the existing opening and duplicate the original window pattern. For example, a double-hung sash window should not be replaced by a single fixed pane of glass.
 Avoid the use of windows and shutters that are not in keeping with the original style of the building.
g. Door Replacement
Every effort should be made to maintain and/or repair an original door, if possible.
h. Removal of Existing Canopies and Metal Awnings
Metal aluminum canopies have a thin, unsubstantial and “tacked on” appearance which is inconsistent with the desirable design concept for Downtown Elkin. Existing metal canopies should be removed and if appropriate, replaced with fabric awnings, consistent with the architectural style of the building.
i. Removal of Elements Inconsistent with Original Façade
Building owners contemplating renovation, will be encouraged to remove building elements incompatible with the original façade design. These include: overdone exterior embellishments and “modernized” elements such as board and batten or “themed” materials.
j. Preserve Traditional Decoration
Many times in the remodeling of storefronts, original decorative details are intact as visual “leftovers” or simply covered up with new construction. If the building is to be refurbished, these forgotten details should not be wasted. If enough of them remain, they can be restored as part of the original design. If only a few remain, they can be incorporated as design features in a new storefront. In either case, the design of any improvements should grow out of the remaining traditional details and create a harmonious background that emphasizes them.
k. Selection of Building Materials
Some contemporary materials are often used to apply “shopping mall” style facades over the rich character of traditional downtown buildings. Materials such as cedar shakes, textured plywood, stone veneer, stucco veneer and plastic are not appropriate for use on traditional facades in Downtown Elkin.
97
D—Signs
Signs in Downtown Elkin should advertise a place of business or provide directions and information. An effective sign and graphics system functions not as a separate entity but as an integral part of the built environment. Carefully planned, signs communicate essential information, while also ordering and enhancing the architectural character of Downtown. A sign’s use of color, size, shape placement, and selection of lettering can attract or detract from its effectiveness. An effectively designed sign should:
 Be compatible with the surrounding physical and visual character of the area;
 Promote the “individuality” of establishments;
 Identify the business clearly and attractively;
 Enhance the building on which it is located; and
 Reduce the amount of visual clutter caused by excessive and poorly placed signage.
The Town’s Sign Ordinance has regulations to control the size, location, and number of signs, but code restrictions alone may not be enough. Design criteria are needed to encourage and coordinate well-designed signs.
The following sign guidelines are intended to assure the local merchant that all other Downtown commercial establishments are similarly regulated.
1. Preferred Sign Types
While many sign types are permitted in Downtown, the following sign types are preferred.
 Under canopy signs
 Business wall-mounted ID signs in sign board area at upper portion of first story;
 Awning signs;
 Projecting signs;
 Murals and supergrahics not advertising a business (painted on a wall surface);
 Permanent painted window signs, first floor limited to 25% of the window area;
 Building signs containing the name of the business at rear entrances used by customers; and
 Signs made of carved or sandblasted wood or metal.
2. General Design Guidelines
98
a. Clear Sign Message
 Use a brief message. The fewer the words, the more effective the sign. A sign with brief, succinct message is simpler and faster to read, looks cleaner and is more attractive.
 Avoid hard-to-read, overly intricate typefaces. These typefaces are difficult to read and reduce the sign’s ability to
communicate.
 Lettering should be in proportion to the size of the sign. As a rule of thumb, the recommended size of letters is between one-third (1/3) to one-half (1/2) the height of the sign.
 Avoid signs with strange shapes. Signs that are unnecessarily narrow, oddly shaped, or unrelated to the product or services being provided on the site can restrict the legibility of the message. If an unusual shape is not symbolic, it is probably confusing.
 Use widely recognized logos rather than print/test whenever possible.
 Make signs smaller if they are oriented to pedestrians. The pedestrian-oriented sign is usually read from a distance of fifteen to twenty feet; the vehicle-oriented sign is viewed from a much greater distance. The closer a sign’s viewing distance, the smaller the sign needs to be.
b. Sign Color
 Colors should be selected to contribute to legibility and design integrity of signage. Even the most carefully thought out sign may be unattractive and a poor communicator because of poor color selection.
 A substantial contrast should be provided between the color and material of the background and the letters or symbols to make the sign easier to read in both day and night.
 Limit colors to three on a single sign. Color is most effective when used simply. Too many colors, particularly accent colors, may distract the reader, reduce legibility, and make the sign less effective.
 Vertical or horizontal wooden signs can be effectively utilized in a variety of ways on windows, building surfaces or as accent bands. A wooden wall sign can be painted or stained and sealed for a more natural look, depending upon the appearance of the surrounding structures. Lettering can consist of metal or raised wood and when placed within a sign band, will serve to unify the building façade. Carved or sandblasted wood signs are also appropriate.
 Metal sign panels can utilize raised lettering on metal bands. Printing and lettering can also be applied directly to a flat metal sign band with letters consisting of wood, acrylic or metal.
c. Sign Architectural Compatibility
 Signs should make a positive contribution to the general appearance of the street and neighborhood in which they are located.
99
 Sign size should be proportionate. The size and shape of a sign should be proportionate with the scale of the structure.
 Signs should be an appropriate scale with the building on which they are placed and should not overwhelm the architecture of the building and the character of the neighborhood.
 Place wall signs to establish façade rhythm, scale, and proportion where façade rhythm doesn’t exist. In many buildings that have a monolithic or plain façade, signs can establish or continue appropriate design rhythm, scale, and proportion.
 As an alternative to an attached sign, lettering may be attached directly on the building façade.
3. Wall Mounted Signs
 The identification of each building or store’s address in six-inch high numbers over the main entry doorway or within ten feet of the main entry is recommended.
 Sign lettering for storefront wall mounted signs should meet the following recommendations:
 For storefronts 30’ wide or less, a maximum letter height of 8” is recommended;
 For storefronts 30’ – 60’ wide, a maximum letter height of 12’ is recommended; or
 For storefronts 60’ wide or greater, a maximum letter height of 16” is recommended.
4. Awning Signs
An awning is a roof-like covering or shelter, which is usually constructed of canvas or other fabric extending over a pedestrian walkway. Awnings provide shelter from weather, provide scale to the building architecture, and add color and liveliness to the pedestrian path and street.
 An awning is permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. An awning sign is message painted, printed, sewn, or stained onto the awning or awning flap.
 The sign on awnings
may be allowed on the
shed portion of the
awning, but is preferred
on the valance flap.
The flap should be at
least eight (8) inches in
height so that the letters
and symbols are big
enough to read easily.
 The color of an awning
sign should be
compatible with and
complementary to the
color and material of
the building to which it
is attached.
Signs should
Not be placed on top of awning
100
5. Hanging Sign
A hanging sign is a sign suspended from a support and projects from the building wall. Similar to awning signs, a hanging sign can add interest and vitality to a street. Hanging signs can include pictorial images, logos, and symbols.
A hanging sign is generally intended to be read by pedestrians along a sidewalk or arcade, and motorists in slow-moving vehicles.
 The size of a hanging sign should be proportional to the building façade to which it is attached and typically, should not exceed ten (ten) square feet.
 A hanging sign should be hung perpendicular to and should not project more than four (4) feet from the face of the building.
 To minimize visual clutter, hanging signs should not be located within close proximity to other hanging signs or projecting signs, preferably at least twenty-five (25) feet from each other.
 The placement of a hanging sign should not impede the safe movement of people or vehicles within a public right-of-way and shall be properly secured to a building using a structurally sound method.
6. Window Signs
A window sign is a permanent sign painted on or attached to the inside of a window and is designed to be viewed principally from outside the business by pedestrians and motorists.
 To minimize clutter, window signs should not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the window in which they are displayed.
 The sign copy of window signs should be proportional to the glass surface area.
 Signs should be restricted to ground floor windows facing the primary street frontage or adjoining parking lot.
 Temporary window signs should be allowed to identify special events and sales provided they are removed immediately following the event.
7. A-Frame, Portable Signs and Merchandise
A portable sign is any sign or advertising device, which rests one the ground and is not designed to be permanently attached to a building or permanently anchored to the ground. A-frame signs in Downtown are for attracting pedestrians, not passing motorists. Publicly placed benches, trash receptacles, planters, etc. are excluded.
 Merchandise or signage (sandwich board/A-frame sign) must be within 3’ space abutting the building, leaving 5’ clear sidewalk space as allowed by regulations spelled out in the Downtown Design Overlay District Guidelines. No existing business shall be allowed to have more than one A-frame sign.
101
 A-frame signs shall have a maximum sign area of six (6) square feet. The maximum height, from ground level, should be three (3) feet, and the maximum width should be two (2) feet.
 A-Frame signs should only be located on private property or within the public right-of-way, provided they do not interfere with vehicle access, pedestrian movement or wheelchair access to, through, and around the site. A minimum access width of five (5) feet should be maintained along all sidewalks and building entrances accessible to the public.
 A-Frame signs shall not encroach into required off-street parking areas, public roadways or alley, and may not be arranged so as to create site distance conflicts or other traffic hazards. Portable signs shall not be placed within the corner curb return areas of intersections.
 A-Frame sign should be utilized only during regular business hours and should be removed during non-business hours.
 Materials for portable signs should be of a permanent nature and not be subject to fading or damage from weather. The use of paper or cloth is not permitted unless located within a glass or plastic enclosure.
 Portable signs should be designed in an attractive manner and present an image of quality and creativity for Downtown Elkin.
 Portable signs should be maintained in a neat, orderly fashion so as not to constitute an unsightly appearance or a public nuisance in downtown.
E – Landscaping
1. Introduction
Landscaping in Downtown Elkin shall achieve three specific ends: 1) to beautify Downtown 2) to soften commercial development; and 3) to unify the area as a pleasant environment for residents and visitors alike. These three ends will be accomplished by a recognizable use of repeated planting treatments. Consistency and continuity within the street right-of-way and building setback areas is extremely important.
2. General Design Guidelines
All development is encouraged to follow these general landscape guidelines:
 Save existing mature trees.
 Use specimen trees (boxed trees) for immediate effect and accent.
 Give consideration to rapidly growing trees.
 Emphasize use of varieties, which require low maintenance in public and commercial areas, especially in large landscaped areas.
 Use boxed and potted plants in clay or similar type containers, especially for enhancement of sidewalk shops. The color of the containers shall be subject to approval by the Town.
 The use of materials such as crushed rock, redwood bark chips, pebbles, and stone or masonry slabs should not be used in place of live plant materials in landscaped areas.
 Use color plantings at the base of a building, in planter boxes, and focal points.
102
 Trees should not obstruct the sight lines of motorists or pedestrians, especially at pedestrian crosswalks.
 Trees and shrubbery should not be located so that they interfere with the effectiveness of parking lot and street lighting.
 Landscaping material, so long as it is properly maintained, is the preferred method used to buffer the view of any parking or storage area adjacent from a public street or pedestrian area.
 Landscape screen plant materials should be large enough at planting to provide effective screening and be capable of growing to the height and density desired within a reasonable period of time.
 All commercial projects should provide complete automatic sprinkler or drip irrigation systems.
 Keep all plants healthy and growing with all planting areas free of weeds and debris.
F—Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation
Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property, which requires minimal alteration of the building, structure, or site and its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose. These additional guidelines are especially applicable when a developer is interested in receiving tax credits for the rehabilitation project from either the State and/or Federal Government.
The following standards are to be applied to specific rehabilitation projects in a reasonable manner, taking into consideration economic and technical feasibility.
 A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
 The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
 Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
 Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance n their own right shall be retained and preserved.
 Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples or craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.
 Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
 Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
 Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
 New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
103
 New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
Adopted: August 9, 2004
Section 108 Wireless Communication Towers
(ARTICLE 10. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS of the Surry County Zoning Ordinance0
(Amendment #2, 03/17/03)
Section 1. Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by regulating existing and proposed wireless communication towers. This Article is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, and to enhance and protect the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas.
Section 2. Development Application
Before developing a tower, the tower owner must apply and receive a Conditional Use Permit, unless otherwise stated in this Article. The tower owner shall prepare an application for review by the Planning Board and other applicable government agencies.
Section 2.1 Area Map
The application shall contain an area map prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor on a full sheet or full sheets of the Surry County Tax Maps showing property to be developed. The area map shall show the following:
A. The boundary of the property to be developed;
B. The names and addresses of adjoining property owners;
C. The location of existing streets, buildings, railroads, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, culverts, drainpipes, and easements, to the extent that these may be ascertained from a field inspection by the County;
D. Municipal boundaries and extraterritorial jurisdictions, township lines, zoning district classifications;
E. Name of the applicable fire district;
F. Topography, proximity to streams, susceptibility to flooding as determined from available flood maps, soil characteristics, and other natural features which may impose restrictions on the development of the site;
G. Distance to airports in Elkin and Mount Airy.
Section 2.2 Detailed Development Plan
104
The application shall contain a detailed development plan showing the following information on a sheet or sheet not less than 18”x 24” drawn at a scale of sufficient size to accurately and clearly show all required information including additional information as required with the Area Map. The Detailed Development Plan shall be recorded, with, or part of, the boundary survey in the Office of Register of Deeds. Approved Detailed Development Plans shall be recorded before issuance of a Zoning Permit. The Detailed Development Plan shall include:
A. Name and address of owner and surveyor, engineer, and land planner;
B. Scaled vicinity map inset showing the location of the tower in relationship to near by towns, communities, and roads;
C. Boundaries of tract to be developed shown with bearings and distances as established by the boundary survey;
D. Site Data Table, including total square footage of lease or purchase site, impervious surfaces calculations, and total acreage;
E. Proposed rights of ways or easements, location, widths, and purposes;
F. Proposed setback lines from property boundaries;
G. Title, date, north arrow, and graphic scale;
H. Watershed designation, if applicable;
I. A letter from the N.C. Division of Highway Engineers indicating that his office has reviewed the area map and site plan and specifying any problems such as highway access or right-of-way encroachments, which need to be resolved prior to approval of the application;
J. A letter stating approval of a Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan from NCDENR;
K. Identification of the intended wireless user(s) of the tower. A statement indicating the owner’s intent to allow shared use of the tower and how many other users can be accommodated;
L. Documentation provided by a registered engineer that the tower that the tower has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate more than one user;
M. Documentation by the applicant that no suitable existing facilities within the coverage area are available to the applicant;
N. Proof of ownership of the proposed site or authorization to utilize it;
O. Landscape and lighting plan;
P. FAA certification that the tower is not a hazard to air navigation.
Section 2.3 Additional Requirements
The application shall also be accompanied by the following items:
A. Written indemnity document from the property owner and the applicant; and
B. Certificate of insurance to the County showing applicant’s liability arrangements.
Section 3. Planning Board Action
The applicant shall file fourteen (14) copies of the complete application thirty (30) days before the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. The Zoning Administrator shall set and advertise a date and time for a public hearing before the Planning Board. Notice of
105
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least fifteen (15) days before the date set for the public hearing. At the public hearing all interested parties shall be permitted to testify in sworn testimony. Prior to the hearing all adjacent property owners shall be mailed a notice of the hearing, via certified mail. The person mailing notices shall certify that such notices have been mailed. Cost of postage shall be reimbursed by the applicant through fees set by the Board of County Commissioners. In addition, the property for which the wireless communication tower is proposed shall be posted at least one (1) week before the public hearing.
The Planning Board shall consider the application and comments at the public hearing and may grant or deny the Conditional Use Permit. If the Conditional Use Permit is granted, the Planning Board shall use as a guide, the specific conditions outlined in this Article for each use proposed. In addition, the Planning Board shall find:
A. That the use will not materially endanger the public health or safety, if located according to the plan submitted and approved;
B. That the use meets all required conditions and specifications;
C. That the use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property, or that the use is a public necessity; and
D. That the location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the Surry County Land Use Plan.
In granting the Conditional Use Permit the Planning Board may designate only those conditions, in addition to those stated herein, which, in its opinion, assure that the use and it’s proposed location will be harmonious with the area and with the spirit of this Ordinance and clearly in keeping with the public welfare. All such additional conditions shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting at which the Conditional Use Permit is granted, on the Conditional Use Permit itself, and on the approved plans submitted therewith. All specific conditions shall run with the land and shall be binding on the original applications for the Conditional Use Permit, their heirs, successors, and assigns.
Section 4. Denial and Appeal
If the Planning Board denies the Conditional Use Permit for a Wireless Communication Tower, it shall enter the reason for its action in the minutes of the meeting at which the action is taken.
No appeal may be taken from the action of the Planning Board in granting or denying a Conditional Use Permit for the Wireless Communication Tower except through the Surry County Superior Court within thirty (30) days of the decision or forever be barred.
Section 5. Compliance with District Regulations
106
In addition to the conditions specifically imposed in this paragraph and such further conditions as the Planning Board may deem reasonable and appropriate, Wireless Communication Towers shall comply with all other regulations for the zoning district in which they are located unless the provisions for the conditional use provide to the contrary.
Section 6. Failure to Comply with Plans/Notifications of Adjacent Property Owners
In the event of failure to comply with the plans approved by the Planning Board, or with any other conditions imposed upon the Conditional Use Permit, the permit shall thereupon immediately become void and of no effect. No building permits for further construction or Certificates of Occupancy under this Conditional Use Permit shall be issued, and all completed structures shall be regarded as nonconforming uses subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. In such cases, owners of adjoining property shall be notified that the Conditional Use Permit is no longer in effect.
Section 7. Development Standards
Towers and associated equipment shall be subject to the following development standards:
A. Towers shall not interfere with normal radio and television reception in the vicinity. Commercial messages or signage shall not be displayed on any tower. Violations shall be corrected under the enforcement provisions of this Ordinance.
B. All towers regardless of height must be registered with the FAA to ensure that such towers are appropriately constructed, marked, painted, and lighted so that they do not create a hazard to air navigation. Lighting shall meet the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) minimum lighting requirements. The lights shall be oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding residential property, consistent with FAA requirements.
C. Towers shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all applicable building code requirements.
D. In order to protect the public from unnecessary exposure to radio frequency emissions, the tower owner shall provide accurate documentation certifying that the power output levels do not exceed FCC federally approved levels.
E. Towers may be constructed to a height of 199 feet. If the Board of Adjustment grants a variance, it shall not permit a tower to exceed a height of 300 feet.
F. All towers shall be self-supporting, of either monopole or lattice construction.
G. No new tower shall be located within two (2) miles of an existing tower. The Planning Board may allow a tower to be placed within two (2) miles of an existing tower upon being presented written documentation that supports one of the following: (1) appropriate space on the tower is not available; or (2) the new
107
sponsor has made good faith efforts to negotiate an agreement with the owner of the current tower and submit documents outlining those negotiations; or (3) equipment currently on the tower is not compatible with the proposed equipment; or (4) the coverage objective cannot be met at that location with the provisions set forth herein.
H. All new towers shall be engineered and constructed in such a manner as to be able to accommodate at least two (2) or more antennas so that future co-location may be possible. In addition, reasonable accommodation for public service uses such as, but not limited to, local or state government wireless communications systems, is suggested.
I. No outdoor storage yards shall be permitted on tower sites.
J. Towers must comply with the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) which addresses such things as wilderness areas, wildfire preserves, endangered species, historical sites, Indian religious sites, floodplain, wetlands, high intensity white lights in residential neighborhoods, and excess radio frequency emissions. Prior to final application, the applicant shall be required to submit documentation that all of the requirements of the NEPA have been met.
K. Towers must meet the ANSI/EIA/TIA-222.E standards and the North Carolina Department of Insurance, Building Code Standards.
L. Towers, with the exception of stealth towers, are prohibited within a radius of three (3) nautical miles around conservation areas, designated as Pilot Mountain State Park, Cumberland Knob State Park/Blue Ridge Parkway National Park, and the Raven Knob Scout Reservation. Towers, with the exception of stealth towers, are also prohibited within the entire viewshed of Pilot Mountain along United States Highway 52. Stealth towers shall only exceed 20% above the treeline or vegetative cover in the area of the towers proposed location. In addition, the communications tower provider will be required to present, to scale, a 360-degree visual analysis or simulation, graphic illustrations, and elevation analysis to establish what the tower will look like in its surroundings to determine potential visual impact. To ensure compliance, all proposed sites will be inspected on-site by the planning staff, to verify compliance with this requirement. This general requirement is not subject to a variance request, with the exception of EMS, sheriff’s department, or fire department requirements and/or needs in these areas. The communication provider shall not use EMS, sheriff’s department, or fire department’s potential co-location as reasoning for a variance from this general requirement.
Section 8. Dimensional Requirements
Towers shall conform to the following dimensional requirements:
A. Towers shall be setback 2.5 times the height of the tower from any residential or non-residential structure on the same parcel or on parcels in the vicinity of the tower site.
108
B. Towers shall be setback the height of the tower from all property lines.
Section 9. Buffers
To prevent a clear view of the base of the tower, the setback area shall contain an established-forested area with a depth of at least 100 feet. When the 100 foot forested area requirement cannot be met because of the lack of the sufficient natural vegetation, a planted buffer shall be planted as required below:
A. The base of the tower, and any associated structures, walls, or fences shall be surrounded by a landscaped buffer. The developer shall: a) provide the landscape buffer around the tower base, or b) provide a buffer around the perimeter of the entire site.
B. For safety purposes all towers shall be screened in the form of a wall or fence, such wall or fence shall be opaque and shall be composed materials such as wood, brick, or metal with a height of no less than eight (8) feet.
C. The planting shall consist of deciduous or evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs. Trees shall be planted along the full length of the buffer strip in a triangular pattern with a maximum spacing of 25 feet on centers. The minimum height at planting for trees shall be six (6) feet, and they shall have an expected minimum maturity height of 35 feet under normal growing conditions. There shall also be one row of dense shrubs, spaced not more than eight (8) feet on centers. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height at planting and shall have a minimum expected maturity height of eight (8) feet under normal growing conditions. It is the intent of this section to encourage the use of existing vegetation in whole or in part to substantially meet this requirement. The tower owner is responsible for maintaining the buffer at all times.
Section 10. Road Requirements
Access to the tower site shall be provided by a deeded easement of no less than thirty (30) feet in width. The road base shall be no less than eight (8) feet in width with a three (3) inch gravel base. Unless the easement is a common use easement it shall be gated for security purposes. Each site shall have two (2) signs composed of night reflective material, 2”x 2”, which state the name of the owner and an emergency contact number. Each sign shall be located in a conspicuous place.
109
Section 11. Co-location
To further encourage co-location, additional users and associated equipment, which do not add to the tower height, may be added without additional approval from the respective County Boards. However, additional building code regulations may apply, and a site plan in accordance with this Article, must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or disapprove the application based on the provisions provided herein.
Section 12. Removal of Towers
Towers which are not used for transmission or relay for a period of six (6) months or more shall be removed by the owner within one hundred eighty (180) days after receiving notice from the County to remove said tower. The tower users shall notify the Zoning Administrator within thirty (30) days after discontinuing the tower use, and submit its removal plans. To assure the removal of towers which do not meet the requirements of use or maintenance, this section serves as notice that the County may remove said tower and may file a lien collectable as taxes against the property, pursuant to G.S. 153A-123.
Section 13. Modification of Plans
Where plans are required to be submitted and approved as part of the application for a Conditional Use Permit, modifications of the original plans may be authorized by the Planning Board.
Section 14. Low Coverage Stealth Wireless Systems (Amendment #20, 05/17/04)
This provision is designed to assist the development of wireless coverage in rural areas that will not benefit from the construction of a wireless communication tower. Wireless communication antennae and supporting equipment that are developed in a small-scale, stealth manner to be located on existing structures (i.e. utility poles or rooftops) that were constructed for purposes other than supporting wireless communication equipment, shall be permitted administratively. Application should be made to the Zoning Administrator meeting the following requirements:
A. Maximum height of the wireless antennae shall be determined by the height of the existing structure, not to exceed 100 feet above ground level. The existing structure shall only be replaced if the structural integrity will not support the proposed wireless system. The height of the new structure shall not exceed the height of the existing structure. If the wireless antenna is placed on a rooftop, the height of the antennae shall not exceed six (6) feet above the rooftop.
B. Minimum distance between two structures with antennas shall be 2,000 feet;
C. Antennae size shall be no greater than six (6) square feet; no more than 3 antennae per structure;
110
D. Equipment cabinet/shelter shall be no larger than 12 square feet and shall be guarded from tampering by the public;
E. Application shall comply with Article 10, Section 2, and Section 7, A-D only, as well as other sections of this Ordinance as the Zoning Administrator deems necessary. However, the following sections in Article 10 shall not apply to this Section: Sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, and 11.
Section 108 Wireless Communication Towers
(ARTICLE 10. WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS of the Surry County Zoning Ordinance0
(Amendment #2, 03/17/03)
Section 1. Purpose
The purpose of this Article is to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by regulating existing and proposed wireless communication towers. This Article is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, and to enhance and protect the scenic and natural beauty of designated areas.
Section 2. Development Application
Before developing a tower, the tower owner must apply and receive a Conditional Use Permit, unless otherwise stated in this Article. The tower owner shall prepare an application for review by the Planning Board and other applicable government agencies.
Section 2.1 Area Map
The application shall contain an area map prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor on a full sheet or full sheets of the Surry County Tax Maps showing property to be developed. The area map shall show the following:
H. The boundary of the property to be developed;
I. The names and addresses of adjoining property owners;
J. The location of existing streets, buildings, railroads, transmission lines, sewers, bridges, culverts, drainpipes, and easements, to the extent that these may be ascertained from a field inspection by the County;
K. Municipal boundaries and extraterritorial jurisdictions, township lines, zoning district classifications;
L. Name of the applicable fire district;
M. Topography, proximity to streams, susceptibility to flooding as determined from available flood maps, soil characteristics, and other natural features which may impose restrictions on the development of the site;
N. Distance to airports in Elkin and Mount Airy.
Section 2.2 Detailed Development Plan
111
The application shall contain a detailed development plan showing the following information on a sheet or sheet not less than 18”x 24” drawn at a scale of sufficient size to accurately and clearly show all required information including additional information as required with the Area Map. The Detailed Development Plan shall be recorded, with, or part of, the boundary survey in the Office of Register of Deeds. Approved Detailed Development Plans shall be recorded before issuance of a Zoning Permit. The Detailed Development Plan shall include:
Q. Name and address of owner and surveyor, engineer, and land planner;
R. Scaled vicinity map inset showing the location of the tower in relationship to near by towns, communities, and roads;
S. Boundaries of tract to be developed shown with bearings and distances as established by the boundary survey;
T. Site Data Table, including total square footage of lease or purchase site, impervious surfaces calculations, and total acreage;
U. Proposed rights of ways or easements, location, widths, and purposes;
V. Proposed setback lines from property boundaries;
W. Title, date, north arrow, and graphic scale;
X. Watershed designation, if applicable;
Y. A letter from the N.C. Division of Highway Engineers indicating that his office has reviewed the area map and site plan and specifying any problems such as highway access or right-of-way encroachments, which need to be resolved prior to approval of the application;
Z. A letter stating approval of a Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan from NCDENR;
AA. Identification of the intended wireless user(s) of the tower. A statement indicating the owner’s intent to allow shared use of the tower and how many other users can be accommodated;
BB. Documentation provided by a registered engineer that the tower that the tower has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate more than one user;
CC. Documentation by the applicant that no suitable existing facilities within the coverage area are available to the applicant;
DD. Proof of ownership of the proposed site or authorization to utilize it;
EE. Landscape and lighting plan;
FF. FAA certification that the tower is not a hazard to air navigation.
Section 2.3 Additional Requirements
The application shall also be accompanied by the following items:
C. Written indemnity document from the property owner and the applicant; and
D. Certificate of insurance to the County showing applicant’s liability arrangements.
Section 3. Planning Board Action
The applicant shall file fourteen (14) copies of the complete application thirty (30) days before the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. The Zoning Administrator shall set and advertise a date and time for a public hearing before the Planning Board. Notice of
112
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least fifteen (15) days before the date set for the public hearing. At the public hearing all interested parties shall be permitted to testify in sworn testimony. Prior to the hearing all adjacent property owners shall be mailed a notice of the hearing, via certified mail. The person mailing notices shall certify that such notices have been mailed. Cost of postage shall be reimbursed by the applicant through fees set by the Board of County Commissioners. In addition, the property for which the wireless communication tower is proposed shall be posted at least one (1) week before the public hearing.
The Planning Board shall consider the application and comments at the public hearing and may grant or deny the Conditional Use Permit. If the Conditional Use Permit is granted, the Planning Board shall use as a guide, the specific conditions outlined in this Article for each use proposed. In addition, the Planning Board shall find:
E. That the use will not materially endanger the public health or safety, if located according to the plan submitted and approved;
F. That the use meets all required conditions and specifications;
G. That the use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property, or that the use is a public necessity; and
H. That the location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the Surry County Land Use Plan.
In granting the Conditional Use Permit the Planning Board may designate only those conditions, in addition to those stated herein, which, in its opinion, assure that the use and it’s proposed location will be harmonious with the area and with the spirit of this Ordinance and clearly in keeping with the public welfare. All such additional conditions shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting at which the Conditional Use Permit is granted, on the Conditional Use Permit itself, and on the approved plans submitted therewith. All specific conditions shall run with the land and shall be binding on the original applications for the Conditional Use Permit, their heirs, successors, and assigns.
Section 4. Denial and Appeal
If the Planning Board denies the Conditional Use Permit for a Wireless Communication Tower, it shall enter the reason for its action in the minutes of the meeting at which the action is taken.
No appeal may be taken from the action of the Planning Board in granting or denying a Conditional Use Permit for the Wireless Communication Tower except through the Surry County Superior Court within thirty (30) days of the decision or forever be barred.
Section 5. Compliance with District Regulations
113
In addition to the conditions specifically imposed in this paragraph and such further conditions as the Planning Board may deem reasonable and appropriate, Wireless Communication Towers shall comply with all other regulations for the zoning district in which they are located unless the provisions for the conditional use provide to the contrary.
Section 6. Failure to Comply with Plans/Notifications of Adjacent Property Owners
In the event of failure to comply with the plans approved by the Planning Board, or with any other conditions imposed upon the Conditional Use Permit, the permit shall thereupon immediately become void and of no effect. No building permits for further construction or Certificates of Occupancy under this Conditional Use Permit shall be issued, and all completed structures shall be regarded as nonconforming uses subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. In such cases, owners of adjoining property shall be notified that the Conditional Use Permit is no longer in effect.
Section 7. Development Standards
Towers and associated equipment shall be subject to the following development standards:
M. Towers shall not interfere with normal radio and television reception in the vicinity. Commercial messages or signage shall not be displayed on any tower. Violations shall be corrected under the enforcement provisions of this Ordinance.
N. All towers regardless of height must be registered with the FAA to ensure that such towers are appropriately constructed, marked, painted, and lighted so that they do not create a hazard to air navigation. Lighting shall meet the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) minimum lighting requirements. The lights shall be oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding residential property, consistent with FAA requirements.
O. Towers shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all applicable building code requirements.
P. In order to protect the public from unnecessary exposure to radio frequency emissions, the tower owner shall provide accurate documentation certifying that the power output levels do not exceed FCC federally approved levels.
Q. Towers may be constructed to a height of 199 feet. If the Board of Adjustment grants a variance, it shall not permit a tower to exceed a height of 300 feet.
R. All towers shall be self-supporting, of either monopole or lattice construction.
S. No new tower shall be located within two (2) miles of an existing tower. The Planning Board may allow a tower to be placed within two (2) miles of an existing tower upon being presented written documentation that supports one of the following: (1) appropriate space on the tower is not available; or (2) the new
114
sponsor has made good faith efforts to negotiate an agreement with the owner of the current tower and submit documents outlining those negotiations; or (3) equipment currently on the tower is not compatible with the proposed equipment; or (4) the coverage objective cannot be met at that location with the provisions set forth herein.
T. All new towers shall be engineered and constructed in such a manner as to be able to accommodate at least two (2) or more antennas so that future co-location may be possible. In addition, reasonable accommodation for public service uses such as, but not limited to, local or state government wireless communications systems, is suggested.
U. No outdoor storage yards shall be permitted on tower sites.
V. Towers must comply with the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) which addresses such things as wilderness areas, wildfire preserves, endangered species, historical sites, Indian religious sites, floodplain, wetlands, high intensity white lights in residential neighborhoods, and excess radio frequency emissions. Prior to final application, the applicant shall be required to submit documentation that all of the requirements of the NEPA have been met.
W. Towers must meet the ANSI/EIA/TIA-222.E standards and the North Carolina Department of Insurance, Building Code Standards.
X. Towers, with the exception of stealth towers, are prohibited within a radius of three (3) nautical miles around conservation areas, designated as Pilot Mountain State Park, Cumberland Knob State Park/Blue Ridge Parkway National Park, and the Raven Knob Scout Reservation. Towers, with the exception of stealth towers, are also prohibited within the entire viewshed of Pilot Mountain along United States Highway 52. Stealth towers shall only exceed 20% above the treeline or vegetative cover in the area of the towers proposed location. In addition, the communications tower provider will be required to present, to scale, a 360-degree visual analysis or simulation, graphic illustrations, and elevation analysis to establish what the tower will look like in its surroundings to determine potential visual impact. To ensure compliance, all proposed sites will be inspected on-site by the planning staff, to verify compliance with this requirement. This general requirement is not subject to a variance request, with the exception of EMS, sheriff’s department, or fire department requirements and/or needs in these areas. The communication provider shall not use EMS, sheriff’s department, or fire department’s potential co-location as reasoning for a variance from this general requirement.
Section 8. Dimensional Requirements
Towers shall conform to the following dimensional requirements:
C. Towers shall be setback 2.5 times the height of the tower from any residential or non-residential structure on the same parcel or on parcels in the vicinity of the tower site.
115
D. Towers shall be setback the height of the tower from all property lines.
Section 9. Buffers
To prevent a clear view of the base of the tower, the setback area shall contain an established-forested area with a depth of at least 100 feet. When the 100 foot forested area requirement cannot be met because of the lack of the sufficient natural vegetation, a planted buffer shall be planted as required below:
D. The base of the tower, and any associated structures, walls, or fences shall be surrounded by a landscaped buffer. The developer shall: a) provide the landscape buffer around the tower base, or b) provide a buffer around the perimeter of the entire site.
E. For safety purposes all towers shall be screened in the form of a wall or fence, such wall or fence shall be opaque and shall be composed materials such as wood, brick, or metal with a height of no less than eight (8) feet.
F. The planting shall consist of deciduous or evergreen trees and evergreen shrubs. Trees shall be planted along the full length of the buffer strip in a triangular pattern with a maximum spacing of 25 feet on centers. The minimum height at planting for trees shall be six (6) feet, and they shall have an expected minimum maturity height of 35 feet under normal growing conditions. There shall also be one row of dense shrubs, spaced not more than eight (8) feet on centers. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height at planting and shall have a minimum expected maturity height of eight (8) feet under normal growing conditions. It is the intent of this section to encourage the use of existing vegetation in whole or in part to substantially meet this requirement. The tower owner is responsible for maintaining the buffer at all times.
Section 10. Road Requirements
Access to the tower site shall be provided by a deeded easement of no less than thirty (30) feet in width. The road base shall be no less than eight (8) feet in width with a three (3) inch gravel base. Unless the easement is a common use easement it shall be gated for security purposes. Each site shall have two (2) signs composed of night reflective material, 2”x 2”, which state the name of the owner and an emergency contact number. Each sign shall be located in a conspicuous place.
116
Section 11. Co-location
To further encourage co-location, additional users and associated equipment, which do not add to the tower height, may be added without additional approval from the respective County Boards. However, additional building code regulations may apply, and a site plan in accordance with this Article, must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or disapprove the application based on the provisions provided herein.
Section 12. Removal of Towers
Towers which are not used for transmission or relay for a period of six (6) months or more shall be removed by the owner within one hundred eighty (180) days after receiving notice from the County to remove said tower. The tower users shall notify the Zoning Administrator within thirty (30) days after discontinuing the tower use, and submit its removal plans. To assure the removal of towers which do not meet the requirements of use or maintenance, this section serves as notice that the County may remove said tower and may file a lien collectable as taxes against the property, pursuant to G.S. 153A-123.
Section 13. Modification of Plans
Where plans are required to be submitted and approved as part of the application for a Conditional Use Permit, modifications of the original plans may be authorized by the Planning Board.
Section 14. Low Coverage Stealth Wireless Systems (Amendment #20, 05/17/04)
This provision is designed to assist the development of wireless coverage in rural areas that will not benefit from the construction of a wireless communication tower. Wireless communication antennae and supporting equipment that are developed in a small-scale, stealth manner to be located on existing structures (i.e. utility poles or rooftops) that were constructed for purposes other than supporting wireless communication equipment, shall be permitted administratively. Application should be made to the Zoning Administrator meeting the following requirements:
F. Maximum height of the wireless antennae shall be determined by the height of the existing structure, not to exceed 100 feet above ground level. The existing structure shall only be replaced if the structural integrity will not support the proposed wireless system. The height of the new structure shall not exceed the height of the existing structure. If the wireless antenna is placed on a rooftop, the height of the antennae shall not exceed six (6) feet above the rooftop.
G. Minimum distance between two structures with antennas shall be 2,000 feet;
H. Antennae size shall be no greater than six (6) square feet; no more than 3 antennae per structure;
117
I. Equipment cabinet/shelter shall be no larger than 12 square feet and shall be guarded from tampering by the public;
J. Application shall comply with Article 10, Section 2, and Section 7, A-D only, as well as other sections of this Ordinance as the Zoning Administrator deems necessary. However, the following sections in Article 10 shall not apply to this Section: Sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, and 11. Adopted 8/9/04
Section 109. SOLAR FARMS REGULATED
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow and encourage solar energy systems in locations where impacts on adjoining properties can be mitigated by buffers and setbacks.
(B) Definition. A solar energy system is defined as the components and subsystems required to convert solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for public use. For the purposes of this chapter, this term applies only to solar photovoltaic systems, and excludes private solar thermal systems and solar hot water systems. A system fits into one of the two system types: Level 1 SES or Level 2 SES.
(1) Level 1 Solar Energy Systems includes the following:
a. Roof mounted on any code-compliant structure.
b. Ground-mounted on an area of up to 50% of the footprint of the primary structure on the parcel but no more than one acre.
c. Covering permanent parking lot and other hardscape areas.
d. Building integrated solar (i.e., shingle, hanging solar, canopy, etc.).
(2) Level 2 Solar Energy Systems are ground-mounted solar collection systems not included in the definition of Level 1 Solar Energy Systems located on sites twelve acres or larger.
(C) Where Allowed.
(1) Level 1 systems shall be allowed in all zoning districts by right.
(2) Level 2 systems shall be allowed by right in the B-2, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts and as a conditional use in R-20 zoning districts, subject to the development standards in Subsection (D).
(D) Development Standards. All Level 2 systems shall meet the following development standards.
(1) The minimum lot size of the host parcel or parcels shall be twelve acres at the time of application and the maximum lot usage shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of the total acreage of the proposed site.
(2) The minimum size of the Solar Energy System facility, as measured by the acreage within the boundary fence, shall be 8 acres.
(3) All solar energy systems shall have a boundary fence that (a) is no less than 6 feet in height; (b) encloses the solar arrays and inverters; and (c) is setback 50 feet from abutting property lines and public rights-of-way. If the facility sits on more than one side of adjoining parcels, then setbacks shall not be required within the facility but measured only from the perimeter boundary fence.
(4) Solar arrays shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
(5) All electric components must have a UL listing.
(6) All solar collection systems shall meet N.C. State Building Code and National Electric Code requirements and shall be inspected by a county.
(7) If the proposed solar energy system is to be located within one mile of an existing public airport, the FAA shall be properly notified at the time of permit application using FAA Form 7460-1.
(E) Screening. All facilities shall be screened by a solid row of evergreen shrubs no less than 6 feet in height at time of planting to shield solar arrays from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.
118
Evergreens shall be selected from the planting list in Ordinance Section 78.12. Planted vegetative screening shall be required only if there is not sufficient natural vegetation to provide a reasonable buffer between the Solar Energy System and adjoining uses.
(F) Lighting. Night-time security lights or other mounted lighting shall be prohibited.
(G) Decommissioning.
(1) The owner of the solar energy system shall be responsible for removing all solar arrays, inverters, equipment, structures, foundations, fencing, and other parts of the system upon the earlier of (a) the end of the lease term, or (b) the passing of 6 months after the system has ceased generating energy.
(2) The property shall be restored to its condition prior to the installation of the solar energy system within 3 months of the occurrence that triggered the need for decommissioning.
(3) A decommissioning plan shall be filed with the County Manager or his or her designee prior to the issuance of building permits. The plan shall be updated every 5 years and upon the change in ownership of the solar energy system. The plan shall address (a) who is responsible for decommissioning; (b) whether the solar energy system owner is lessee or fee owner of the property; and (c) demonstrate that the net value of recyclable materials is greater than the cost of decommissioning. If the cost of decommissioning is higher than the net value of recyclable materials, then the solar energy system owner shall be required to provide a bond or other form of surety equal to the cost of decommissioning not covered by net value of recyclable materials.
Section 2.
Article VIII, Section 82.3, is hereby amended to add Solar Energy Systems to the list of conditional uses approved by the Board of Commissioners.
Section 3.
Article VIII, Section 85.1 is hereby amended to add Solar Energy Systems as an allowed principal use.
Section 4.
Article VIII, Section 87.1 is hereby amended to add Solar Energy Systems as an allowed principal use.
Section 5.
Article VIII, Section 88.1 is hereby amended to add Solar Energy Systems as an allowed principal use.
ARTICLE XI
CONDITIONAL USES
Section 110. PURPOSES
119
The development and execution of this ordinance is based upon the division of the planning area into districts where the use of land and buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use in the particular location.
Section 111. JURISDICTION
The responsibility of evaluating conditional uses may be handled by the Governing Body or the Board of Adjustment or both bodies may share the responsibility. Conditional uses that involve broad policy considerations affecting the entire community may be handled by the governing body. Uses involving only local impact may be handled by the Board of Adjustment. Specific responsibility shall be indicated under each use district.
Section 112. PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING A CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL
112.1 Initiation of Conditional Use. Any person having freehold interest in land, or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable, may file an application to use such land for one or more of the conditional uses provided in this ordinance in the district where the land is located.
112.2 Application for Conditional Use. Applications for Conditional Use approval shall be addressed to the responsible body (either the Governing Body or the Board of Adjustment) and presented to the Zoning Officer. A fee of $150.00 shall be paid to the local government for each application to cover the cost of administrative costs. Each application shall contain or be accompanied by such legal descriptions, maps, plans and other information to completely describe the proposed use and existing conditions. Copies of the application are forwarded to the Elkin Planning Board for review and to the responsible body (either the Governing Body or the Board of Adjustment) for action.
112.3 Public Hearing. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall schedule a public hearing on the application for a conditional use to be held within sixty (60) days after the application is filed. Public notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the community at least once each week for two successive weeks prior to the public hearing. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall also post notice on the property involved for a period of two weeks prior to the hearing.
112.4 Action by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall review the application prior to the public hearing and shall present its recommendations to the responsible body prior to or at the public hearing. The Planning Board may revise its recommendations following the public hearing and present such recommendations to the responsible body before final action is taken.
112.5 Action by the Responsible Body. (Either Governing Body or Board of Adjustment). Following quasi-judicial procedures the responsible body shall approve, modify, or deny the application for conditional use following the public hearing.
No vote greater than a majority vote shall be required for the town council to issue Conditional Use permits. For the purposes of this section, vacant positions on the board and members who are disqualified from voting on the quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered ‘members of the board’ for calculation of the requisite majority. §160A-381 Amended 2/13/06
In granting a conditional use the responsible body shall insure:
120
a. The request is listed among the conditional uses in the district for which application is made
b. The requested use is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare;
c. The requested use will not impair the integrity or character of the surrounding or adjoining districts, nor be detrimental to the health, morals or welfare;
d. Due consideration has been given to the suitability of the property for the use applied for with respect to trends of growth or change; the effect of the proposed use upon the community; requirements for transportation, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, conservation of natural resources, preservation of floodplains, and encouraging the most appropriate use of the land;
e. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, sanitation and/or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
f. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
Additional finding required for multi-family developments in any district.
g. The viability and character of the surrounding neighborhoods will not be adversely affected.
h. The proposed use will serve the Town’s long-term best interests and shall substantially add to the equality and diversity of the Town’s housing stock.
i. The streets and driveways as proposed provide adequate circulation for on-site and off-site vehicular movement.
j. The existing and/or proposed public infrastructure, including but not limited to streets, water and sewer, is adequate to serve the site.
Section 113. CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES
Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the Planning Board may recommend, and the responsible body (either the Governing Body or the Board of Adjustment) may stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of the conditional use as it deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Subsection 112.5 above. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the responsible body shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated are being met. Conditions may include but not be limited to the following:
113.1 Conditions may be imposed to abate or restrict noise, smoke, dust, or other elements that may affect surrounding properties;
113.2 Establish setback, side front, and rear yard requirements necessary for orderly expansion and to prevent traffic congestion.
113.3 Provide adjoining property with a buffer or shield from view of the proposed use if necessary;
113.4 Establish time limit at expiration of which the permit or approval shall no longer be valid, or shall require renewal.
121
Section 114. GENERAL PROVISIONS IN GRANTING CONDITIONAL USE
114.1 Compliance with Other Codes. Granting a conditional use does not exempt applicant from complying with all of the requirements of other ordinances.
114.2 Revocation. In any case where the conditions of a conditional use have not been met or are not being met, the enforcement officer shall give the grantee notice of intention to revoke approval. Said notice shall be at least ten (10) days prior to action by the responsible body considering conditional uses.
114.3 Expiration. In any case where a conditional use has not been exercised within the time limit set by the responsible body, or within one (1) year if no specific time limit has been set, then without further action, the approval shall be null and void. "Exercised" as set forth in this section shall mean that binding contracts for the construction of the main building have been let; or in the absence of contracts that the main building is under construction to a substantial degree; or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investment are constructed in a substantial stage of development, or completed (sewerage, drainage, etc.). When construction is not part of the use, "exercised" shall mean that the use in operation is in compliance with the conditions which are set forth in the approval.
115. WINERY
Zoning District –R-20
Site Standards:
1. Facility must be operated in association with an existing vineyard (bona fide farm) located on the same property, or multiple adjoining properties in the same ownership.
2. Facility must be located in such a manner that visual impact to adjoining properties used or zoned for residential or agricultural purposes is minimal.
3. All structures, buildings storage areas, etc. (except fences or walls associated with the winery ;must be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from all property lines or street right-of-way. The Board of Adjustment may require greater setbacks on a case-by-case basis for large-scale wineries.
4. Gift shops, wine tasting/sampling, and other related activities are permitted within or in conjunction with the Winery itself.
Lighting: Outdoor lights shall be so designed as to minimize light from directly hitting adjacent property or any public right-of-way.
Screening and Fencing: All parking and storage areas, as well as the winery itself, shall be screened from adjoining properties used or zoned for residential or agricultural purposes. If existing topography and natural vegetation does not provide an existing visual barrier, selective screening may be required. Section 78 Landscaping, Buffers and Screening.
Additional Requirement:
1. Associated small-scale processing or catering facilities (i.e. cheese making, restaurant) that are incidental to the winery, but may enhance the overall property in relation to tourism, may be permitted on a case-by-case basis. Associated uses are subject to the above requirements as well.
ARTICLE XII
GROUP DEVELOPMENTS
122
Section 120. PROCEDURE
Two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground not subdivided into the customary blocks and which will not be subdivided are group developments. When allowed, either as a permitted use or a conditional use, a site plan as specified in Section 121 shall accompany the request. Additionally, all group development shall comply with the appropriate development standards specified in Sections 122 through 125. When a group development is a permitted use it shall be reviewed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for compliance. When a group development is a conditional use it shall comply with all requirements specified in Article XI.
Section 121. DEVELOPMENT PLAN
A development plan shall be submitted with the application. The site plan shall show the following information:
a. Location, arrangement and dimensions of automobile parking spaces, width of aisles, width of bays and angle parking;
b. Location, arrangement, and dimensions of truck loading and unloading spaces and docks;
c. Location and dimensions of vehicular entrances, exits, and drives;
d. General drainage systems;
e. Location and materials of walls and fences;
f. Ground cover, topography, slopes, banks and ditches;
g. The location and general exterior dimensions of main and accessory buildings;
h, Architectural plans for proposed buildings;
i. The location, dimensions, and arrangements of areas to be devoted to planting, lawns, trees and other plants;
j. The plans for proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and electric service.
k. An analysis of anticipated traffic volume;
l.. Sediment control plan;
m. Evidence that the North Carolina Department of Transportation has been made aware of the proposed development and that the developer will coordinate for the development with this agency;
n. Plans for refuse disposal equipment and method of refuse disposal such as compactors, or dumpsters;
o. Delineation of areas to constructed in phases and sequential order.
Section 122. SHOPPING CENTERS
122.1 Site Area. No shopping center site shall contain less than two (2) acres.
123
122.2 Perimeter Yards. No building shall be less than thirty-five (35) feet from any street line or twenty-five (25) feet from any side or rear lot lines. Where a site is bordered by three or more street, only the primary arterial road may be required to meet the 35-foot perimeter yard requirement. The planning Board in their review process, will make the final determination based on street width, traffic counts and topography. Amended 4/10/06
122.3 Buffering. A buffer approved by the Planning Board shall be provided on all exterior property lines which abut residential property.
122.4 Solid Waste Disposal. A plan for solid waste storage, collection and disposal shall be submitted to the town clerk and approval obtained prior to issuance of a conditional use permit.
122.5 Utilities. Shopping centers should be located where public water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage utilities are available.
122.6 Lot Coverage. The total ground area covered by the principal buildings and all accessory buildings including any roofed area shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total site.
Section 123. MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS
123.1 Open Space. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross acreage shall be reserved as open space.
123.2 Recreation Space. Family oriented multi-family projects shall have: one (1) tot lot consisting of a minimum of 50' x 50' defined area containing pre-school child-oriented play items for each fifty (50) units or less.
123.4 Parking. Automobile parking spaces and drives shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the front or ten (10) feet to the side or rear of any building.
123.5 Building Relationships. (1) Building walls that have both window and door openings shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet to another building. (2) Building walls that have only window opening or only door openings shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet to another building.
123.6 Court Yard. Any group of buildings forming a court yard shall have at least twenty-five (25) percent of the perimeter of such a court yard open for access by emergency vehicles.
123.7 Landscaping. Adequate landscaping (as determined by the Planning Board) may be included to buffer the development from its neighbors.
123.8 Perimeter Requirement. No building shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or moved neared the exterior project property lines twenty-five (25) feet or the applicable district yard requirements whichever is greater. Yard space for one (1) building shall not overlap yard space for another building.
123.9 Solid Waste Disposal. A plan for solid waste storage collection and disposal shall be approved by the town clerk.
Section 124. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
124
124.1 Definition. When a tract of land is under unified control and contains at least five (5) acres with an allowable deviation of ten percent (10%), the developer may be allowed to deviate from the strict application of use, setback, height and minimum lot size requirements of zoning districts in order to permit a creative approach to the development of residential land. In exchange for the flexibility, the developer must have a site plan approved by the planning Board and comply with the other requirements of a conditional use. This approach is a voluntary alternative, it is not mandatory for the development of any parcel of land.
124.2 Location. Planned Unit Developments are conditional uses in any residential zone.
124.3 Permitted Uses. All the permitted and conditional uses in the zoning district where the PUD is located are allowed. In addition, two-family and multi-family residential uses may be permitted. Commercial and office space will be permitted if they are primarily for the convenience and service of the residents of the development and represent no more than ten (10) percent of the total development.
124.4 Dimensional Requirements. Yard, setback, lot size, type of dwelling unit, frontage requirements are waived, provided that the spirit and intent of this subsection are met in the total development plan. The Planning Board may determine that certain setbacks be required within all or a portion of the perimeter of the site.
124.5 Density. Density (dwelling units per acre) may be increased, if normally required by district, over the character of the development and/or amenities incorporated in the development warrant such increases, provided that in no case shall the density increase cause the density of the Planned Unit Development to be more than six units per acre. If the Planning Board finds that any of the following conditions would be created by an increase in density, it may either deny any application for increase in density, or limit the increase by an amount sufficient to avoid the creation of any of the following conditions:
a. inconvenient or unsafe access to the development; traffic congestion in streets adjoining the development;
b. an excessive burden imposed on parks, recreational area, schools and other public facilities which serve or are proposed to serve the development.
124.6 Conveyance and Maintenance of Common Open Space. All common open space, shown on the final development plan and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Town Board of Commissioners must be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:
a. by dedication to the Town of Elkin and maintained as common open space;
b. by leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, association or other legal entity.
The developer must file in the County Register of Deed's Office legal documents which prove a method for restricting the use of common open space for the designated purposes.
124.7 Circulation Facilities. The arrangement of public and common ways for pedestrians and vehicular circulation in relation to other existing or planned streets in the area, together with provisions for street improvements, shall be in compliance with standards set forth in the municipal subdivisions regulations. The Planning Board may deviate from these standards if the proposed changes or alterations are consistent with the spirit and intent of this section.
124.8 Utilities. Whenever reasonably possible, all planned residential developments shall provide for underground installation of utilities (except transmission lines and enclosures containing electrical apparatus may be above ground). All installation of utilities and maintenance of utilities shall be in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the governing body. Public or quasi public water and sanitary sewer service shall be required, unless the developer can show good cause that
125
these requirements should be waived, without being inconsistent with the spirit and intent of this section.
124.9 PUD Review. It is the intent of this regulation that review under applicable codes and ordinance be carried out as an integral part of the review of a Planned Unit Development. The plans required under this subsection must be submitted in a form which satisfies requirements of the codes and ordinances for the preliminary and final plat approvals.
Section 125. MOBILE HOME PARKS
125.1 Lot Area. The lot area for a mobile home park shall be at least two (2) acres. All areas to be included in a mobile home park shall be clearly shown on the plans required by Subsection 125.9.
125.2 Parking Space. Each mobile home in a mobile home park shall occupy a designated space having at least five thousand (5,000) square feet with a width of at least fifty (50) feet, exclusive of common driveways.
125.3 Driveway. Each mobile home space shall abut a driveway within the park. Said driveways shall be graded and surfaced with not less than four (4) inches of crushed stone or other suitable material on a well compacted sub-base to a continuous width of twenty-five (25) feet, exclusive of required parking spaces.
125.4 Parking Spaces. Two (2) off-driveway parking spaces with not less than four (4) inches of crushed stone or other suitable material on a well compacted sub-base shall be provided for each mobile home space. Required parking spaces may be included with the five thousand (5,000) square feet required for each mobile home space.
125.5 Recreation Space. At least two hundred (200) square feet of recreation space for each mobile home space shall be reserved within each mobile home park as common recreation space for the residents of the park. Such areas shall, along with driveways and walkways, be adequately lighted for safety.
125.6 Separation. No mobile homes or other structures within a mobile home park shall be closer to each other than twenty (20) feet, except that storage or other auxiliary structures for the exclusive use of the mobile home may be closer to that mobile home than twenty (20) feet.
125.7 Exterior Boundary. No mobile home shall be located closer than thirty (30) feet to the exterior boundary of the park or a bounding street right-of-way. Buildings used for laundry or recreation purposes shall be located no closer than forty (40) feet to the exterior boundary or the right-of-way of a bounding street.
125.8 Utilities. Proposed water supply and waste disposal facilities for the mobile home park shall be approved in writing by the County Health Officer or his representative.
125.9 Plans. Plans clearly indicating the developer's intention to comply with the provisions of this section shall be approved before any construction activities begin. Such plans must show the area
126
to be used for the proposed mobile home park; the ownership and use of neighboring properties; all proposed entrances, exits, driveways, walkways, and off-street parking spaces; the location of mobile home spaces, recreation areas and service buildings; the location of sanitary conveniences including toilets, laundries, and refuse receptacles; the proposed plan of water supply, sewage disposal and electric lighting.
125.10 Expansion. Any expansion of mobile home parks in existence on the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with the provisions of this section.
ARTICLE XIII
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 130. ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Town Board of Commissioners shall appoint an administrative officer to enforce this ordinance.
If the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that any of he provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and order the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take other lawful action to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of this ordinance.
If a ruling of the Zoning Enforcement Officer is questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to he Board of Adjustment.
Section 131. ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED
No building, sign or other structures shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered until a zoning permit shall have been issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer. No zoning permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance except after written order from the Board of Commissioners or Board of Adjustment.
Section 132. APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT
All applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of plans showing the dimensions and shape of the parcel to be built upon; the exact sizes, uses and locations on the parcel of buildings already existing, if any, and the location and dimension of the proposed building or alterations. The application shall include such other information as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. A fee not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be determined by the Board of Commissioners for the processing of each such application.
Section 133. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED
A certificate of occupancy issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer is required in advance of:
133.1 Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered or moved.
127
133.2 Change of Use of Any Building of Land. A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building shall be applied for coincident with the application for a zoning permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alteration of such building, or part, shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this ordinance. If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall state in writing the reasons for refusal and the applicant shall be notified of the refusal. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
Section 134. REMEDIES AVAILABLE
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this ordinance the Zoning Enforcement Officer or any other appropriate town authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition or other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violation.
ARTICLE XIV
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Section 140. CREATION OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
There shall be and is hereby created a Board of Adjustment and a Planning Board, whose members shall be the same for each Board, consisting of seven (7) members. Five (5) members shall be citizens and residents of the Town of Elkin and these five (5) members shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Elkin and two (2) members, who shall be citizens and residents of Surry County but outside the Town of Elkin and within the extraterritorial area within the zoning Jurisdiction of the Town of Elkin, shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Surry County.
Members shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while representing the Board of Adjustment and/or Planning Board.
Section 141. LENGTH OF TERM
141.1 The terms of the office of the members of the Board of Adjustment which is also the Planning Board shall be overlapping terms of three (3) years. Initial appointment of the town and extraterritorial area members shall in each case be as follows: three (3) members for a term of three (3) years and two (2) members for a term of (2) years and two members for a term of One (1) year.
141.2 Nothing herein contained shall be so interpreted as to forbid any member from being appointed to succeed himself or herself.
141.3 All part of the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Elkin, North Carolina", now in effect and all amendments thereto now in effect not herein specifically changed by this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
141,4 All Ordinances of the Town of Elkin now in effect and amendments thereto now in effect dealing with the Planning Board and not herein specifically changed by this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
128
141.5 This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after the seven member Board of Adjustment and Planning Board are appointed or January 1993, whichever first occurs.
Section 142 PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
142.1 The Board shall appoint a secretary and such other officers as may be necessary. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such Chairman, or in his absence the Action Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and also keep records of its examinations and other official action. A competent stenographer shall take minutes and transcribe them in a manner prescribed by the secretary. (The stenographer shall be provided by the Town Board).
142.2 The concurring vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter on which it is required to pass under the Zoning Ordinances or to affect any variation in such ordinance.
142.3 An appeal to the Board may be taken by any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved, or by any town officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer based in whole or in part upon the provisions of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board by general rule by filing with the Zoning Enforcement Officer a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed.
Section 142.4
A member of the board or any other body exercising the functions of a board of adjustment shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial manner that would violate affected persons’ constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible conflicts include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational relationship with an effected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. If an objection is raised to a member’s participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on the objection. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the board and members who are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial shall not be considered ‘members of the board’ for calculation of the requisite supermajority if there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members. §160A-388. Amended 2/13/06
Section 143. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
143.1 Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in the enforcement of the ordinance.
143.2 Conditional Uses. To hear and decide conditional uses to the terms of this ordinance upon which the Board of Adjustment is required to pass under this ordinance.
129
143.3 Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardships. The board of adjustment shall have the power to vary or modify any of the regulations or provisions of the ordinance so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. No change in permitted uses may be authorized by variance. §160A-388(d), 160A-381(fl) 2/13/06
A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of Adjustment unless and until:
143.31 A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
a. that special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
b. that a literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance;
c. that said circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;
d. that granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district;
e. that no non-conforming use of neighboring land, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted use of land, structures or buildings in other districts will be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
143.32 A map or plot shall accompany any written application and shall remain as a permanent part of the variance application. The map or plot shall be drawn to scale and show the following information:
a. size of lot;
b. size and location of the building or buildings on the lot;
c. size and location of any proposed building or additions to an existing building on the lot.
d. location, or proposed location, of any outdoor signs on the lot;
e. location and number of parking spaces, and/or proposed parking spaces on the lot.
143.33 Notice of public hearing shall be given as set forth in Subsection 112.3. At the public hearing which is held, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
143.34 The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that the requirements of Subsection 143.31 have been met for a variance.
143.35 The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance and that the variance is the minimum one that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure.
143.35 The Board of Adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
143.37 In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when
130
made part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and punishable under Section 142 of this ordinance.
143.39 Any variance granted by the Board of Adjustment shall be null and void if construction is not started within 180 days from the date the variance was granted. This expiration date may be extended by the Board of Adjustment without a formal request.
Section 144. DECISION OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
In exercising the abovementioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify any order, requirement decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
Section 145. DUTIES OF THE ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT, COURTS AND TOWN BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL
It is the intention of this ordinance that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of this ordinance shall be presented first to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the Zoning Enforcement Officer and that from the decision of the Board of Adjustment recourse shall be had to courts as provided by law. It is further the intention of this ordinance that the duties of the Town Board of Commissioners in connection with the ordinance shall not include the hearing and passing upon disputed questions that may arise in connection with the enforcement thereof. The duties of the Town Board of Commissioners in connection with this ordinance shall be only the duty of considering and passing upon any proposed amendments or repeal of this ordinance.
ARTICLE XV
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES
Section 150. MOTION TO AMEND
The Town Board of Commissioners may, on its own motion or upon recommendation of the Planning Board, or upon petition by any person within the zoning jurisdiction, after public notice and hearing, amend, or repeal the regulations or the maps which are a part of this ordinance. If no written report is received from the planning board within 30 days of referral of the amendment to that board, the governing board may proceed in its consideration of the amendment without the planning board report. The governing board is not bound by the recommendations, if any, of the planning board. No regulation or maps shall be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which all parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Whenever there is a map amendment, the owner of that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing, and the owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing, shall be mailed a notice of a pubic hearing on the proposed amendment by first class mail at the last addresses listed for such owners on the county abstracts. This notice must be deposited in the mail at least 10 but not more than 25 days prior to the date of the public hearing. A notice of such public hearing shall be given once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, said notice to be published the first time not less than ten (10) days prior to or more than twenty-five (25) days prior to the date fixed for such public hearing. Additionally, the zoning enforcement officer shall post the property with a sign notifying the public of the hearing, at least two successive weeks prior to the meeting.
The first class mail notice required above shall not be required if the zoning map amendment directly affects more that 50 properties, owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners and the
131
town elects to use the expanded published notice provided for in this section. In this instance, a town may elect to either make the mailed notice provided for or may as an alternative elect to publish notice of the hearing as required by G.S. 160-364, but provided that each advertisement shall not be less than one-half of a newspaper page in size and comply with the requirements of published notices described above. The advertisement shall only be effective for property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the newspaper which published the notice. Property owners who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area, according to the address listed on the most recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified according to the provisions of this section. §160A-384
Upon adoption of this ordinance by the Town Board of Commissioners the zoning ordinance adopted January 6, 1969 and any subsequent amendments are hereby repealed. However, all suits at law or in equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from violations of any zoning ordinance presently in effect, which are now pending in any of the Courts of the United States or of this State shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of this ordinance but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this ordinance had not been adopted; and any violations of the existing ordinance, prosecutions for which have not yet been instituted, may be hereafter filed and prosecuted, and nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as to abandon, abate, or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now pending, and/or which heretofore have been instituted or prosecuted. And nothing is this ordinance shall be construed as to abandon, abate, or dismiss any litigation now pending, and /or which heretofore have been instituted or prosecuted.
Section 151. PROTEST AGAINST AMENDMENT
In case of the protest against such proposal, a petition must be signed by the owners of either twenty percent (20%) or more of the area included in the proposed change or five percent (5%) of a 100-foot wide buffer extending along the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be zoned. A street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the 100-foot buffer area as long as that street right-of-way is 100 feet wide or less. When less than an entire parcel of land is subject to the proposed zoning map amendment, the 100-foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of that parcel. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the city may rely on the county tax listing to determine the ‘owners’ potentially qualifying areas. The zoning map amendment shall not become effective except by a favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the Board of Commissioners. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the council and members who are excused from voting shall not be considered ‘members of the council’ for calculation of the requisite supermajority. A person who has signed a protest petition may withdraw his or her name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on the proposed amendment. Only those protest petitions that meet the qualifying standards set forth in §160A-385 at the time of the vote on the zoning amendment shall trigger the supermajority voting requirement. See §160A-386 for regulations regarding petition; form; requirements; and time for filing.
Section 152. PLANNING BOARD ACTION
Every proposed amendment or repeal to this ordinance shall be referred to the Planning Board for its recommendation and report, provided that no proposal shall be considered by the Planning Board within five days from filing of the proposal with the Zoning Enforcement Officer. . The planning board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and any other officially adopted plan that is applicable. The planning board shall provide a written recommendation to the governing board that addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed appropriate by the planning board, but a comment by the planning board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall not preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the governing board. §160A-387 Members of appointed boards providing advice to the town council shall not vote on recommendations regarding any zoning map or text
132
amendment where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member.
All petitions for a change in the zoning map shall include a legal description of the property involved and the names and addresses of current abutting property owners, and shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00 ) at the time of filing the application and must thereafter pay the advertising cost to process the application, and that applicants for voluntary annexation of property into the city limits of Elkin must pay to the Town of Elkin the sum of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) at the time of filing the application, pay the advertising costs, and provide the Town with an accurate survey of the property on paper 8 1/2 x 14 inches.
Section 153. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ACTION
No member shall be excused from voting except upon matters involving the consideration of the member’s own financial interest or official conduct or on matters on which the member is prohibited from voting. In all cases, a failure to vote by a member who is physically present in the council chamber, or who has withdrawn without being excused by a majority vote of the remaining members present shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.
A council member shall not vote on any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member.
Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the governing board shall adopt a statement describing whether its action is consistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and explaining why the board considers the action taken to be reasonable and in the public interest. This statement is not subject to judicial review. 2/13/06
ARTICLE XVI
LEGAL PROVISIONS
Section 160. INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern, provided that nothing is in the ordinance shall be construed to amend or repeal any other existing ordinance of the town, except as provided in this zoning ordinance.
Section 161. VALIDITY
Should any section or provisions of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 162. PENALTIES
133
“General Penalty Continuing Violations. “Unless otherwise provided herein, each violation of this Code shall constitute a misdemeanor, except as otherwise provided by statute, and violations of such provisions of this Code shall be punished by fine or imprisonment as by law provided. Each day any violation of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except as may be specifically provided.
Violations of this Code shall constitute either a misdemeanor or, at the election of the Town, shall subject the offender to a civil penalty upon the issuance of a citation for said violation as hereinafter provided. The civil penalty, if not paid to the Town of Elkin within fifteen days of the issuance of a citation, maybe recovered by the Town in a civil action in the nature of debt. Unless otherwise provided by a specific provision of this Code of Ordinances, said civil penalties shall be in the amount of $100.00 for each violation and each day any single violation continues shall be a separate violation.
In addition to the civil penalties set out above, any provision of this Code or any other ordinance may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a competent jurisdiction. In such case the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate and it shall not be a defense to the application of the Town for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.
In addition to the civil penalties set out above, any provision of this Code or any other Town ordinance that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement by General Court of Justice. When a violation of such a provision occurs, the Town may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and or order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws arid rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.
An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that abandoned or junked vehicles be removed; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this code or such ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt, and the Town may execute the order of abatement. The Town shall have a
lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic’s and material man’s lien The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and, posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the Clerk of Superior Court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant’s full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by judicial order. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith,
The provision of this Code and any other Town ordinances may be enforced by one, all or combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this section.
Any ordinances hereafter adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Elkin, the violation of which shall incur a penalty shall specify whether the enforcement shall be pursuant to the civil penalty and/or criminal penal provisions of this section.
Upon determination of a violation of any section of the Code of Ordinances. The penalty for which is a civil penalty, the enforcement official of the Town of Elkin shall cause a warning citation to be issued to the violator. Such citation shall set out the nature of the violation, the section violated, the date of the violation, and shall contain an order to immediately cease the violation. If the violation is in the nature of an infraction for which an order of abatement would be appropriate in a civil proceeding, a reasonable period of time must be stated during which the violation must be abated. The warning citation shall, specify that a second citation shall incur a civil penalty, together with costs, and attorney fees.
134
An appeal from a warning citation shall be taken within ten (10) days from the date of said warning citation to the Board of Adjustment. Except in any case where the ordinance violated, which is the subject of the warning citation, specifically grants to the Board of Adjustment other powers in considering appeals and such appeal is applied for, the Board of Adjustment in considering appeals of warning citations shall have power only in the manner of administrative review and interpretation where it is alleged that the enforcement official has made an error in the application of an ordinance, in the factual situation as it relates to the application of an ordinance or both.
Where the enforcement official of the Town determines that the period of time stated in the original warning citation is not sufficient for abatement based upon the work required or consent agreement, the enforcement official may amend the warning citation to provide for additional time.
Upon failure of the violator to obey the warning citation a civil citation shall be issued by the appropriate official of the Town of Elkin, and either served directly on the violator, his duly designated agent, or registered agent if a corporation, either in person or posted in the United States mail service by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the violator as contained in the records of the Town or obtained from the violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation. The violator shall be deemed to have been served upon the mailing of said citation. The citation shall direct the violator to appear before the Town Manager, of the Town of Elkin, or his designee, within fifteen days of the date of the citation, or alternatively to pay the citation by mail. The violation for which the citation is issued must have been corrected by the time the citation is paid; otherwise thither citations shall be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the offense continues until the prohibited activity is ceased or abated.
Within fifteen days from the date the first civil citation is sewed, the Town Manager shall have the authority, upon written request by the violator, to void the civil citation(s) issued to date and relieve the violator of any civil penalties due. The written request shall state the reasons why the violator believes that the civil citation(s) should be voided. Prior to any civil citations being voided, the violation for which the citation(s) were issued must be fully corrected. The Town Manager shall use extreme discretion in voiding civil citations and such action shall be taken only under extraordinary circumstances. Such circumstances may include, but not be limited to, an error by a, official of the Town, civil citations not reaching the violator due to mail delivery difficulties and extreme weather constraints. After fifteen days from the first civil citation being served, the Town Manager may only exercise said authority when correcting an error, an official of the Town. In those circumstances involving an error by an official of the Town, the Town Manager may exercise said authority without a written request by the violator but must consider the recommendation of the official making the error.
If the violator fails to respond to a citation within fifteen days of its issuance,
prescribed therein or receive relief from the Town Manager as described above, the Town of Elkin may institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the appropriate division of the North Carolina General Court of Justice for the collection of the penalty, costs, attorney fees, and such other relief as permitted by law.
The existing provisions of the Elkin Code of Ordinances, a violation of which shall subject the offender to civil penalties and/or criminal penal provisions of law are as follows:
Fire Prevention and Protection
Garbage and Refuse
Housing
Abandoned, nuisance and Junked Motor Vehicles
Unlawful Conditions on Private Property
Subdivisions
Water and Sewers
Section 163. EFFECTIVE DATE
135
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the fifth day of February, 1979.
Duly adopted by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Elkin, State of North Carolina, this the eighth day of January, 1979.
ATTEST:
Joe C. Layell, Town Clerk Henry Dillon, Mayor
R. Lewis Alexander, Town Attorney
 
 
.. :)
0
LAND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
OF THE
TOWN OF ELKIN
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION OF REAL ESTATE
AND FOR THE SURVEYING AND PLATTING THEREOF; DEFINING
CERTAIN TERMS USED HEREIN; PROVIDING FOR THE METHOD
OF ADMINISTRATION AND AMENDMENT; REQUIRING THE
INSTALLATION OF CERTAIN IMPROVEMENTS; PROVIDING
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION; REPEALING CONFLICTING
ORDINANCES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
Revised 09/28/09
CJ
ARTICLE 1 GENERAL
Section 1 Title
This ordinance shall be known as the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Elkin,
North Carolina.
Section 2 Authority
This ordinance is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of the General
Statutes of the State ofNorth Carolina. Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 2.
Section 3 Jurisdiction
These regulations shall govern all subdivisions ofland within the corporate limits of the
Town of Elkin, North Carolina and in its one-mile extraterritorial planning jurisdiction, as now
or hereafter established.
Section 4 Purpose
The purpose of this regulation is to establish procedures and standards for the
development and subdivision ofreal estate within the corporate limits of the Town of Elkin and
its one-mile extraterritorial planning jurisdiction in an effort to insure proper legal description,
identification, monumentation, and recordation ofreal estate boundaries. Further, this ordinance
will promote the orderly layout and economic circulation of vehicular traffic; provide suitable
building sites which are readily accessible to emergency vehicles; assure the proper installation
of streets and utilities; promote the eventual elimination of unsafe or unsanitary conditions
arising from undue concentration of population; and help conserve and protect the physical and
economic resources of the Town of Elkin.
Section 5 Application of Ordinance
This ordinance is applicable to all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, building sites, or other divisions when any one or more of those divisions is created for the
purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future l and shall include all
divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. Amended
518106
5.1 Exemptions
The following shall not be included nor be subject to the regulations prescribed by this
ordinance:
A. The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and
recorded lots where the total number oflots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or
exceed the standards of the Town as shown in the subdivision regulations and Zoning Ordinance:
B. The division ofland into parcels greater than ten (10) acres if no street right-ofway
dedication is involved, and if the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the
Town as shown in its subdivision regulations and Zoning Ordinances;
2
0
:_)
C. The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening
of streets;
D. The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than (2)
acres into not more than three (3) lots, if no street right-of-way dedication is involved, and ifthe
resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the Town as shown in its subdivision
regulations and Zoning Ordinance;
E. Division ofland ordered by a court oflaw, to include division of property in a
divorce decree, in condemnation proceedings, or in the settlement of a decedent's estate.
Section 6 Prerequisite to Plat Recordation
. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not prohibit any owner or its agent from
entering into contracts to sell or lease by reference to an approved preliminary plat tor which a
final plat has not yet been properly approved under the subdivision ordinance or recorded with
the register of deeds. provided the contract does all of the to/lowing: 0) Incorporates as an
attachment a copy of the preliminary plat referenced in the contract and obligates the owner to
deliver to the buver a copy of the recorded plat prior to closing and conveyance. (2) Plainly and
conspicuously notifies the prospective buyer or lessee that a final subdivision plat has not been
approved or recorded at the time of the contract. that no governmental body with incur any
obligation to the prospective buyer lessee with respect to the approval of the final subdivision
plan. that changes between the preliminary and final plats are possible. and that the contract or
lease may be terminated without breach by the buyer or lessee if the final recorded plat differs in
any material respect trom the preliminary plat. (3)Provides that if the approved and recorded
final plat does not differ in any material respect from the plat referred to in the contract. the
buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any earlier than five days
after the delivery ofa copy of the final recorded plat. (4)Provides that ifthe approved and
recorded final plat differs in any material respect trom the preliminary plat referred to in the
contract. the buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any earlier than
15 days after the delivery of the final recorded plat. during which 15-day period the buyer or
lessee may terminate the contract without breach or any fitrther obligation and may received a
refund of all earnest money or prepaid purchase price. Amended 518106
Section 7 Permits Not Issued
No administrative agent of the Town of Elkin or the County of Surry shall issue any
permit for the construction of any building, approval of electrical installation or other
improvement requiring a permit, for any part of a subdivision, until the requirements of this
ordinance have been met and a final plat approved in accordance with this ordinance.
Section 8 Certificate of Exemption
Before any plat exempt from the provisions of this ordinance as specified in 5.1 above
may be recorded, a Certificate of Exemption shall be obtained from the subdivision administrator
and presented to the Register of Deeds Office certifying that exemption conditions have been
satisfied.
3
0
0
()
I. The Certificate of Exemption shall read as follows:
Certificate of Exemption
I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner (s) of the property shown and described
hereon, which was conveyed to me (us) by deed recorded in Book_____, Page ,and that
the subdivision of the property shown on this plat is an exemption to the Subdivision Regulations
of Elkin, North Carolina under Article 1. Subsection 5.1.
Owner(s) Date
Subdivision Administrator Date
Section 9 Certificate of Automatic Approval
9 .1 The following plats shall be approved automatically by the Subdivision Administrator
without following the review procedures specified for major or minor subdivision plats:
A. The division of an existing tract or parcel of land into not more than two lots
within a two-year period, if said tract or parcel fronts on an existing municipal or state
maintained street and if no new right-of-way dedication is involved and the resultant lots are
equal to or exceed the standards specified in this Ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Elkin.
B. The division of a tract or parcel ofland in a cemetery into grave sites.
9 .2 Before any plat approved by the automatic approval process is recorded, a Certificate of
Automatic Approval shall be obtained from the Subdivision Administrator and presented to the
Register of Deeds Office certifying that the automatic approval conditions have been satisfied.
9 .3 The Certificate of Automatic Approval shall read:
Certificate of Automatic Approval
The Plat of survey shown hereon falls within Section 9.1 A or B of the Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the Town of Elkin, North Carolina and is hereby approved for recording in the
office of the Register of Deeds, Surry County.
Owner(s) Date
Subdivision Administrator Date
ARTICLE II
4
'._)
REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISION PLATS
Section 1 Sketch plan Review
Prior to or concurrent with submission of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit to the
Subdivision Administrator two copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. Such sketch
plan shall be drawn to approximate scale on the appropriate sheet or sheets of Surry County's tax
map series and shall show: tentative street layout, approximate right -of-way widths, lot
arrangements, drainage and utility easements, sites for schools, parks, churches, and other nonresidential
uses, existing structures, water courses, wooded areas, number of acres devoted to
each use, total acreage, approximate number oflots, the name, address, and telephone number of
the owner; the name, if any of the proposed subdivision; and existing zoning of the land to be
subdivided and the land immediately adjacent to the proposed development. After review, one
copy is returned to the developer and one (1) copy retained for the file. The review shall not in
any way be construed as constituting an official action of approval.
Section 2 Preliminary Plat
A. Administrative review: The subdivider or his authorized agent shall submit
copies of the preliminary plat to the Administrator at least fourteen (14) days prior to a regular
meeting of the Planning Board. The Administrator shall determine whether or not the plat meets
the requirements of Article IV of the Ordinance. The Administrator shall also seek comments
from various agencies or departments that may include, but is not limited to municipal police.
Fire, public works, and recreation departments, as well as the Surry County Board of Health and
Board of Education, and the NC. Department of Transportation.
B. Planning Board Review: The Planning Board shall approve, approve
conditionally, or disapprove the preliminary plat within forty-five (45) days of first
consideration. If approved, or approved conditionally, their approval shall be indicated on the
plat as specified in Subsection 3.06, Certificates Required. If the Planning Board disapproves,
the Board shall state in writing its reason, specifying the provisions of this Ordinance with which
the plat does not comply. One copy shall be sent to the subdivider; and one copy maintained in
the minutes of the Planning Board. A corrected copy can be resubmitted to the Planning Board
for their consideration. If the Planning Board fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat
within forty-five ( 45) days after first consideration, such failure shall be deemed approval and
shall constitute grounds for the subdivider to apply for approval from the Town Board.
C. Town Board Review: The Town Board shall review the preliminary plat with
recommendations from the Planning Board and shall approve, approve conditionally, or
disapprove the preliminary plat within forty-five ( 45) days after first consideration. If the Town
Board approves, or approves conditionally, such approval shall be shown on the plat as specified
in Subsection 2.06, Certificates Required. If the Town Board disapproves the preliminary plat,
the reasons shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of the Ordinance with which the
plat does not comply. One copy shall be sent to the subdivider; and one copy retained in the
official minutes of the Town Board. The plat can be corrected and resubmitted to the Planning
Board for their consideration.
2.02 Number of Copies and Graphic Media
Twelve (12) black or blue line prints of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted.
2.03 Scale and Size of Sheets
5
CJ
The preliminary plat shall be at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch to one hundred (100)
feet and be drawn on a sheet with outside dimensions of not more than twenty-four (24) inches x
thirty-six (36) inches. (Forrecording map needs to be i8" x 24';) (i.e. 1 :50 is permitted, but
1 :200 is not.)
2.04 Authorized Preparer of Plats
The preliminary plat shall he prepared by a surveyor, licensed and registered to practice
in the State of North Carolina.
2.05 Administrative Fees
At the time of submission of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall pay the Town of
Elkin's filing fee as established by the Town Board.
2.06 Certificates Required
The following certificates shall appear on the preliminary plat:
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAT
The preliminary plat of the-------------- Subdivision is hereby
approved or approved conditionally. If approved conditionally, the specific conditions
shall be listed and attached to the plat.
Date Chairman, Elkin Planning Board
Date Subdivision Administrator
2.07 Contents Required
The preliminary plat shall depict or contain the information specified in Article IV of this
Ordinance. (Plats not illustrating or containing the information required in Article IV shall he
returned to the subdivider or his authorized agent for completion and resubmission.)
Section 3 Plat Submittal Time Limit
The final plat shall be submitted not more than twelve (12) months alter the preliminary
plat has been approved or it shall he null and void, In that case, the preliminary plat shall he
resubmitted as if it were a new subdivision plat. However, the Town Board, upon good
sufficient cause may extend the period for one (I) year. The subdivider shall submit a written
request stating the specific reasons for the extension to the Town Board.
Sect ion 4 Construction Plan Review
All site improvement plans including grading, drainage calculations, sidewalks, utilities
(water and sewer), and streets shall be inspected and approved prior to installation. These
improvements shall be in accordance with the Town ofElkin's standards. All plans and
6
drawings shall be reviewed by the town and other appropriate review agencies before approval
by the Town.
Section 5 Performance Guarantees
In lieu of prior constriction of the improvements required by this ordinance, the Town of Elkin
may for the purpose of approving a final plat, accept a guarantee from the subdivider that such
improvements will be carried out according to the Town ofElkin's specifications at his expense.
Types of Guarantees include:
a. An irrevocable Letter of Credit, or
b. Cash deposited with the Town of Elkin, or
c. A performance bond, or
c. A certified check drawn in favor of the Town of Elkin.
Such a guarantee shall equal one hundred and ten ( 110) percent of the estimated cost of the
required improvements. Performance guarantees shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and
approved by the Town Board. Any renewal shall also he reviewed by the Planning Board and
approved by the Town Board. (Guarantees shall run for eighteen (18) months. As 25%, 50%,
75% and 100% of the project is completed, a corresponding percentage of the guarantee can he
released. If a subdivider elects to exercise this performance guarantee provision, the same shall
be noted on the final plat. The type of guarantee selected shall be left to the developer's
preference. Amended 518106
Section 6. Final Plat
6.01 Plat Required
Pursuant to GS. l 60A-372, a final plat shall be prepared, approved and recorded pursuant
to the provisions of this ordinance whenever any subdivision ofland takes place (applies to both
major and minor subdivisions).
6.02 Review procedure
A. Administrative Review: At least fourteen (14) days prior to the regular meeting of
the Elkin Planning Board, a final plat can he submitted by the subdivider or his authorized agent.
During this period, the Administrator, with assistance from appropriate technical agencies such
as the Public Works Department, and NC Department of Transportation, shall review the plat. If
substantial differences exist between the final and preliminary plat, the plat shall he resubmitted.
B. Planning Board Review: shall approve or disapprove the final plat within fortyfive
( 45) days of first consideration. If the Planning Board approves the final plat, their approval
shall he indicated on each copy as specified in 6.07 Certificates Required, with the exception of
the Certificate of Approval for Recording. If the Planning Board disapproves the final plat, the
Board shall state in writing its reasons, specifying the provisions of this Ordinance with which
the plat does not comply. One copy shall be sent to the subdivider; another copy shall he retained
in the minutes of the Planning Board for their consideration. If the Planning Board fails to
approve or disapproves the final plat within forty-five (45) days after first consideration, such
failure shall be deemed approval and shall constitute grounds for the subdivider to apply for final
approval from the Town Board.
7
r)
\_/
()
'.)
C. Town Board Review :The Town Board shall review the final plat with the
recommendations of the P 1 anning Board and shall approve or disapprove the plat within fortyfive
( 45) days after first consideration. If the Town Board approves the final plat, such approval
shall be shown on each copy as specified in Subsection 6.07 Certificates Required. If the Town
Board disapproves the final plat, the reasons shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions
of this Ordinance which do not comply. One copy shall be sent to the subdivider; and one copy
retained in the official minutes of the Town Board. This plat can be corrected and resubmitted to
the Planning Board for their consideration.
6.03 Number of Copies and Graphic Media
Fourteen (14) copies of the Final Plat shall be submitted; two (2) original in Mylar copies
and twelve (12) blueline paper prints.
6.04 Scale and Size of Sheets
The final plat shall be at a scale not smaller than one (1) inch to one hundred (I 00) feet
and be drawn on a sheet with outside dimensions of not more than eighteen (18) inches x twentyfour
(24) inches.
6.05 Authorized Preparer of Plats
The final plat shall be prepared by a surveyor licensed and registered to practice in the
State of North Carolina. The final plat shall substantially conform to the provisions of plats,
subdivisions, and mapping requirements as set forth in G.S. 47-30, as amended, and the
"Standard of Practice of Land Surveying in North Carolina."
6.06 Administrative Fees
At the time of submission of the final plat, the subdivider or his authorized agent shall
pay Elkin a filing fee as established by the Town Board.
6.07 Certificates required
The following certifications shall appear on the final plat: the Certificate of Survey and
Accuracy, Certificate of Approval by the authorized representative of the Town of Elkin and the
Certificate of the County Review Officer.
6.08 Infrastructure Guarantees
The Town Board shall require a defect guarantee, guaranteeing utility taps, curbs, gutters,
street pavement, sidewalks, drainage facilities, water and sewer lines, and other improvements
against defects for (I) year, This guarantee shall be in the form of a written contract between the
Town of Elkin and the Subdivision developer.
6.09 Disposition of Final Plats
8
0
One (1) inked Mylar original, or a medium that is approved by the Register of Deeds,
shall be signed, unless however said subdivision falls within both Surry and Wilkes Counties, in
which case two (2) inked Mylars will be required.
6.10 Recording of Final Plat
Within fourteen (14) working days after approval by the Board of commissioners, the
final plat shall be recorded in the Surry (Wilkes) County Register of Deeds Office. The
subdivider shall be responsible for recording the final plat and the cost incurred in so doing.
6.11 Resubdivision Procedure
For any replatting or resubdivision ofland, the same procedures. rules, and regulations shall
apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision.
FORMS
6.12 Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
I, certify that this plat was drawn under my supervision from (an
actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book _____ _
Page etc.) (other); that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from
information found in Book Page ; and that this plat was prepared in
accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended. Witness my original signature, registration number and
seal this day of .A.D.20
Surveyor
Seal or Stamp
Registration Number
6.13 Certificate of Approval for Recording
I hereby certify that the Subdivision has been found to
comply with the Subdivision Regulations of Elkin, North Carolina and that the Plat has been
approved by the Planning Board and the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Elkin and can
be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of County.
North Carolina.
Date Mayor.
Town of Elkin. North Carolina
9
C)
rj··
'·
6. 14 Review Officer's Certificate
State of North Carolina, County of ______ ~ 1, _________ _
Review Officer of- -------County, Certify that the map or plat to which this
certification is affixed meets all statutory requirements for recording.
Review Officer
Date
Section 7 Watershed Review Procedures
7.01 Basic Rules
All proposed subdivisions shall he reviewed prior to recording with the Register of Deeds
by submitting a vicinity map to the Subdivision Administrator to determine whether or not the
property is located within the designated Public Water Supply Watershed. Subdivisions that are
not within the designated watershed area shall not be subject to the provisions of this section and
may be recorded provided the Subdivision Administrator initials the vicinity map. In addition,
subdivisions with a WS-IV watershed are subject to the provisions of this ordinance only when
an erosion and sedimentation plan is required under the provisions of State law, or approved
local program. Subdivisions within the designated watershed area shall comply it the provisions
of this Article and all other state and local requirements that may apply
7.02 Subdivision Application
Subdivision applications shall be filed with the Subdivision Administrator. The
application shall include a completed application form, two (2) copies of the plat and supporting
documentation deemed necessary by the Subdivision Administrator.
7.03 Planning Board Approval
The Subdivision Administrator shall review the completed application and submit
recommendations to the Planning Board for further review and final action. The Planning Board
shall either approve, approve conditionally or disapprove each application by majority vote of
the members present and voting. First consideration of the Application shall be at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of Board after the application is submitted. The Board shall take
final action within forty-five ( 45) days of its first consideration. The Subdivision Administrator
may provide public agencies an opportunity to review and make recommendations. However,
failure of the agencies to submit their comments and recommendations shall not delay the Boards
action within the prescribed time limit.
If the Planning Board approves the application, such approval shall he indicated on both
copies of the plat by the following certificate and signed by the chairman or other authorized
member of the Board:
10
()
Certificate of Approval for Recording
I certify that the plat shown hereon complies with the Watershed Provisions and is
approved by the Elkin Planning Board for recording in the Register of Deeds Office.
Review Date Chairman, Planning Board
NOTICE: This property is located within a Public Water Supply Watershed - development
restrictions may apply.
If the Planning Board disapproves or approves conditionally the application, the reasons for such
action shall be stated in writing for the applicant and entered in the minutes. The Subdivider may
make changes and submit a revised plan which shall constitute a separate request for the purpose
ofreview.
7.04 Register of Deeds Requirements
All subdivision plats shall comply with the requirements for recording of the County Register of
Deeds.
7.05 Recording of Plat
The developer shall file the approved plat with the Register of Deeds for recording within
() fourteen (14) working days of approval.
CJ
7.06 Subdivision Standards and Required Improvements
All lots shall provide adequate building space in accordance with the residential and/or nonresidential
development standards contained in the Town of Elkin Zoning Ordinance. Nonresidential
lots which are smaller than the minimum required for residential lots shall be
identified on the plat as. "NOT FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES"
7.07 Determining Right-of-Ways
Any area of a lot within the right-of-way of a street or road shall he excluded in
determining compliance with the minimum requirements of this ordinance. In the event a rightof-
way is not defined among the public records, the lot line shall he located twenty-five (25) feet
from the center of the road.
7.08 Storm Water Drainage Facilities
The application shall be accompanied by a description of the proposed method of
providing storm water drainage. The subdivider shall provide a drainage system that diverts
storm water runoff away from surface water and incorporates best management practices to
minimize water quality impacts.
7.09 Erosion and Sedimentation Control
11
()
(.~
The application shall, where required, be accompanied by a written statement that a
Sedimentation and Erosion Control Plan has been submitted to and approved by the N.C.
Division of Land Quality.
7 .10 Watershed Construct ion Procedures
No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a proposed
subdivision until a subdivision application has been approved by the Town Board.
7. 11 Inspection Procedures
No building or other permits shall be issued for erection of structures on any lot not of record at -- - --- ·--- _._ -- - . - -
):he time ofthe adoption of this Qrdinance until all requirements of the Ordinance have been met.
The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make arrangements
with the Subdivision Administrator to provide for adequate inspection.
ARTICLE III
REVIEW PROCEDURE FOR MINOR SUBDIVISION PLATS
Section 1 Objective
An abbreviated process shall he permitted to simplify and speed up the review procedure
for handling minor subdivision plats without undermining the objectives of the subdivision
regulations. All subdivisions shall be considered major subdivisions except those defined as
minor subdivisions in this Section. Major subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with
procedures in Article II. However, if the subdivider owns, leases, holds an option on, or holds
any legal or equitable interest in any property adjacent to or located directly across a street,
easement, road or right-of-way from the property to be subdivided, the subdivision shall not
qualify under the abbreviated procedure. Furthermore, the abbreviated procedure may not be
used a second time within three ( 3) years on any property less than fifteen hundred (1500) feet
from the original property boundaries by anyone who owned, had in option on, or any legal
interest in, the original subdivision at the time the subdivision received preliminary or final plat
approval.
Section 2 Minor Subdivision Defined
A minor subdivision is defined as one involving no new public or private streets or roads,
or right-of way dedication, no easements, no utility extension and where six (6) or fewer lots
result after the subdivision is completed.
Section 3 Review Procedure
12
CJ
3. 01 Sketch Plan
The subdivider shall submit three (3) copies of a sketch development plan to the
Subdivision Administrator. At this stage, the Administrator and the subdivider shall informally
review the proposed subdivision to insure it meets the requirements of a minor plat. The sketch
plan shall contain a) a sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to
neighboring tracts, subdivisions, road, and waterways; b) the boundaries of the tract and the
portions of the tract to be subdivided: c) the total acreage to be subdivided; d) the existing and
proposed uses of the land with the subdivision and the existing uses ofland adjoining it; e) the
existing street layout and right-of-way width, lot layout and size oflots; f) the name, address and
telephone number of the owner; g) the name. if any, of the proposed subdivision; h) streets and
lots of adjacent developed or platted properties; i) the zoning classification of the tract and of
adjacent properties; j) a statement from the Surry County Health Department that a copy of the
sketch plan has been submitted to them, if septic tanks or other on site water or waste water
systems are to be used in the subdivision.
3 .02 Planning Board Review
The sketch plan will be submitted to the Planning Board at their next scheduled meeting
by the Subdivision Administrator for its review. The Planning Board shall review the sketch plan
for general compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and the zoning ordinance. One
copy of the sketch plan shall he retained as a part of the minutes of the Planning Board, and one
(I) copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his authorized agent. The Planning Board will
transmit the third copy of the sketch plan to the Board of Commissioners.
3 .03 Sketch Plan Review by Board of Commissioners
The Board of Commissioner shall review the sketch plan at its next regular meeting that
follows the Planning Board review. Upon approval of the sketch plan by the Board of
Commissioners the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat in accordance
with the requirements of this ordinance.
Section 4 Final Plat Requirements
The abbreviated procedure for minor plats does not change the requirements for final
plats as specified in Article II Section 6 and Article IV.
Section 5 Certificates Required
5.01 Review Officers Certification
5.02 A Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
13
(_J
0
~)
5.03 A Certificate of Approval for Recording
Section 6 Submission of Final Plat
The subdivider shall submit the final plat so marked to the Subdivision Administrator not
less than fourteen (14) days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which it will be reviewed.
The review procedures for a minor subdivision's final plat are identical to the procedures
for a major subdivision in Section 6 of Article IL
ARTICLE IV
REQUIREMENTS FOR PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS
Preliminary Final Plats Construction
Plats Drawings
1. Title Block Containing:
-name of subdivision x x
-name + address of owner x x
-name of subdivider x x
-name of engineer, x x
and/or land use planner
-date x x
-scale of drawing in feet/inch x x
2. Vicinity Map x x
14
3. North Arrow (grid North) x x
4. Site Data:
-total acreage x x
-acreage in parks and
other nonresidential areas x x
-total number of parcels x x
-approximate acreage of all
lots in subdivision x x
- lineal feet of streets x x
5. Boundaries of tract shown
with bearings based on grid
North and distances x x
6. The location of any natural
or man-made features
Which may affect the
suitability of the land for
subdivisions such as water
courses, rock out-crops,
electric transmission lines x x
7. Names of the owners of
adjoining properties x x
8. The name of any adjoining
Subdivision of record,
proposed, or under review x x
9. Zoning classification both on
the land to be subdivided and
() \
on adjoining land x
10. Existing property lines on
the tract to be subdivided and
on adjoining properties x x
11. Minimum building setbacks x x
12. Existing buildings or other
structures such as bridges,
culverts, storm drains on
the land to be subdivided
and on land immediately
adjoining x x
13. Proposed lot lines, lot and block
Numbers and approximate
Acreage x x
14. Exact lot lines, with lots
Numbered sequentially x x
15. The following date concerning
Streets:
Types of streets:
-private or public x x
-location and dimension of rights
of ways x x
15
-site lines x x
-pavement widths x xi x
-grades x
-street names x x
-maintenance agreement for x x
private streets
-driveway permit if street
intercepts a DOT road x x
-existing and platted streets
on adjoining properties and in
the proposed subdivision x x
16. The following data concerning
utilities: 2
-location and dimension of
easements x x
-utility layouts including:
sanitary sewer system x xi x
water distribution system x xi x
storm water with hydraulic
calculations utilized for:
-sizing storm drains x xi x
-natural gas x xi x
-telephone x xi x
-electric lines x xi x
-fire hydrants x xi x
-street lights x xi x
-cable TV x xi x
() - I 00 year flood elevation x xi x
17. Profiles based on mean sea level
datum for sanitary sewers and x
storm sewers
18. Other easements showing
locations, widths, and purposes x x
19. Location and dimension of areas
to be used for other than
residential purposes x x
20. Areas to be dedicated or reserved
for public use with plat book & x x
page number
21. Future ownership of recreation
open space lands x x
22. Sufficient engineering data to
reproduce on the ground every
straight or curved line, street line
right of way line, easement line
and setback line, including
dimensions, bearings, radii,
' ) '-· 16
()
central angles, and tangent
distance for curved property lines
and for the center line of curved
streets
23. All dimensions shall be measured
To the nearest one-hundredth
(1/1 OO)of a foot and all angles to
the nearest second
24, The accurate locations and
descriptions of all monuments,
markers and control points
25. A copy of any proposed deed
restrictions or similar covenants.
such restrictions are mandatory
when private recreation areas are
established x
26. A copy of an approved
sedimentation control plan, if
required by DENR
27. A letter from the District Engineer
NC Div. of Highways evaluating
the qualification of the proposed
streets for addition to the
secondary road system
28. A letter from Surry County Health
director regarding the subdividor' s
plans for water and sewer service
29. A letter from the Elkin Fire Chief
or County Fire Marshall regarding
ingress and egress for emergency
vehicles
Section 1 "Subdivision Defined"
ARTICLEV
DEFINITIONS
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
For the purpose of this ordinance, "subdivision" means all divisions of a tract or parcel of
land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building
development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions ofland involving the
dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included
within this definition nor be subject to any regulations enacted pursuant to this ordinance.
a) The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and
recorded lots where the total number lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or
exceed the standards of the Town of Elkin as shown in this ordinance:
17
:')
b) The division ofland into parcels greater than ten (10) acres where no street rightof-
way dedication is involved:
c) The public acquisition by purchase of strips ofland for the widening or opening
of streets, and;
d) The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than
two (2) acres into not more than three (3) lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is
involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the Town of Elkin as
shown in this ordinance, and;
e) Division ofland ordered by a court oflaw, to include divisions of property in a
divorce decree, in condemnation proceedings, or in the settlement of a decedent's estate.
Section 2 Other Definitions
For the purpose of this ordinance. certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as
follows:
2.01 Block A piece of land bounded on one or more sides by streets or roads.
2.02 Buffer Strip A solid fence or wall, or a planted strip at least ten (10) to fifteen (15) feet
in width composed of deciduous and/or evergreen trees spaced not more than ten (! 0) feet apart,
or not less than one (!) row of dense shrubs spaced not more than five (5) feet apart, which shall
be established and maintained in perpetuity by the owner of property whenever required under
the terms and provision of the Ordinance.
(') 2.03 Building Setback Line A line parallel to the front property line in front of which no
'-· structure shall be erected. Set backs shall he figured from the right-of-way.
2.04 Dedication A gift, by the owner, or a right to use land for a specified purpose or
purposes. Because a transfer of property rights is entailed, dedication must be made by written
instruments, and is completed with an acceptance.
2.05 Easement A grant by the property owner of a strip ofland for a specified purpose
and use by the public, a corporation, or persons.
2.06 Half Street . A street whose center line coincides with a subdivision plat boundary, with
one-half (1/2) the street right-of-way width being contained within the subdivision plat. Also,
any existing street to which the parcel ofland to subdivided abuts on only one side.
2.07 Lot A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit of transfer
of ownership or for development or both. The word 'lot' includes the "plot" or "parcel''.
2.08 Lot of Record A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Surry/Wilkes County prior to the adoption of
this ordinance, or a lot described by metes and hounds, the description of which has been so
recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
Lot types:
2.09 Corner lot A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting on a
curved street or streets shall he considered a comer lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost
18
:J
(~)
(-)
'--.........
points of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle ofless than
one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
2.10 Double Frontage Lot A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from both
streets upon which it fronts.
2.11 Interior Lot A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.
2.12 Through Lot or a Double Frontage Lot A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on
more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage
lots.
2.13 Reversed Frontage Lot A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or
approximately right angles (interior angles less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees tot he
general pattern in the area.) A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot, an interior lot or a
through lot.
2.14 Single-Tier Lot A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad, a
physical barrier, or another type ofland use and to which access from the rear is usually
prohibited.
2.15 Official Maps or Plans
Commissioners.
Any maps or plans officially adopted by the Elkin Board of
2.16 Open Space An area (land and/or water) generally lacking in man-made structures
and reserved for enjoyment in its unaltered state.
2.17 Planned Unit Development The planned unit development; is use designed to
provide for development incorporating a single type or a variety ofresidential and related uses
which are planned and developed as a unit. Such development may consist of individual lots or
common building sites. Common land, must be an element of the plan related to effecting the
long-term value of the entire development.
2.18 Plat A map or plan of a parcel ofland which is to be or has been subdivided.
2.19 Private Drive A roadway serving no more than two (2) lots, building site or other
divisions ofland and not intended for public ingress and egress. Private driveways shall he
designated on the final plat of a subdivision.
2.20 Private Street A roadway providing access to three (3) or more lots, building
sites, or other division ofland, and not to be dedicated to the public. Private streets shall be so
designated on the final plat of a subdivision. A written disclosure statement is required in
accordance with G.S.136-102.6.
2.21 Public Sewage Disposal A system serving to (2) or more dwelling units and
approved by the Surry County Health Department and the North Carolina Department of Natural
Resources and Community Development.
2.22 Recreation Area or Park An area ofland or combination ofland and water resources
that is developed for active and/or passive recreation pursuits with various man-made features
that accommodates such activities.
2.23 Reservation A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of property rights. It
simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from development for a stated period of
time.
2.24 Street A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic. The
following classifications shall apply:
19
(J
()
Rural Roads
2.25 Principal Arterial A rural link in a network of continuous routes serving corridor
movements having trip length and travel density characteristics indicative of substantial
statewide or interstate travel and existing solely to serve traffic. This network would consist of
interstate routes and other routes designated as principal arterials.
2.26 Minor Arterial A rural link in a network joining cities and larger towns and
providing intrastate and inter county service at relatively high overall travel speeds with
minimum interference to through movement. This network would primarily serve traffic.
2.27 Major Collector. A road which services major intracounty travel corridors and traffic
generators and provides access to the arterial system.
2.28 Minor Collector A road which provides service to small local communities and
links locally important traffic generators with their rural hinterland.
2.29 Local Road A local road services primarily to provide access to adjacent land and for
travel over relatively short distances.
Urban streets
2.30 Major Thoroughfares Major thoroughfares consist of interstate, other
freeway and expressway links, and major street that provide for the expeditious movement of
volumes of traffic within and through urban areas ..
2.31 Minor Thoroughfares Minor thoroughfares are important streets in the urban
system and perform the function of collecting traffic from local access streets and carrying it to
the Major Thoroughfare system by facilitating a minor through traffic movement and may also
serve abutting property.
2.32 Local Street A local street is any link not part of a higher-order urban system
which serves primarily to provide direct access to abutting land and access to higher
systems.
Specific Type Rural or Urban Streets
2.33 Freeway, expressway, or parkway Divided multi-lane roadway designed to
carry large volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds. A freeway is a divided highway
providing for continuous flow of vehicles with no direct access to abutting property or streets
and with access to selected crossroads provided via connecting ramps. An expressway is a
divided highway with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at
major intersections. A parkway is a highway for non commercial traffic, with full or partial
control of access, and usually located within a park or a ribbon of park like development.
2.34 Residential Collector Street. A local access street which serves as a connector
street between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system. Residential collector streets
typically collect traffic from 1 to 400 dwellings units.
2.35 Local Residential Street Cul-de-sacs, loop streets less that 2.500 feet in length, or
streets less than one mile in length that do no connect thoroughfares, or serve major traffic
generators, and do not collect traffic from more than 100 dwelling units.
2.36 Cul-de-sac A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being
permanently terminated and a vehicular tum-around provided.
20
()
0
()
2.37 Alley A strip ofland, owned publicly or privately, set aside primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
2.38 Subdivider Any person, Firm, or corporation who subdivides or develops any land
deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
2.39 Extraterritorial Jurisdiction That land which may lie as far as one (1) mile in all
directions of the corporate limits of the Town of Elkin and not located in the corporate limits of
any other municipality. (See Zoning Map or exact boundary)
2.40 Group Development. A development comprising two or more buildings such as a
group of apartments, and the land not subdivided into the customary streets and lots.
Section 3. Word Interpretation
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words shall ge interpreted as follows:
3.01 Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
3.02 Words used In the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural
number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
3.03 The word "person" includes a firm, association, corporation, trust, and company as well
as an individual.
3.04 The words 'used for' shall include the meaning "designed for".
3.05 The word ''structure' shall include the word ''building''.
3.06 The word ''lot'' shall include the words ''plot", ''parcel'', or 'tract''.
3.07 The word ''shall" is mandatory and not merely discretionary.
ARTICLE VI
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS
Section 1 General Requirements
1.01 Zoning and Other Laws All subdivisions and lots created under this Ordinance must
comply with all applicable local and state laws, including any zoning ordinance which may apply
to the area to be subdivided.
1.02 Suitability of land for Development Land known to be in a flood plain or subject
to flooding shall be developed only in accordance with the requirements of the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance of Surry County. North Carolina.
1.03 Conformity to Existing Maps or Plans The location and width of all proposed roads
shall be in conformity with official plans or maps of the Town of Elkin, Surry County, and North
Carolina.
21
1.04 Continuation of Existing Roads The proposed road layout shall be coordinated with
the existing road system of the surrounding area and, where possible, existing principal roads
shall be extended.
I.OS Access to the Proposed Subdivision Every subdivision shall have permanent
access to a town-system or a state-system road. Where it is necessary to cross the lands of private
property owners in order to provide access, the subdivider shall provide documentation
satisfactory to the Planning Board that he has obtained from property owners a permanent rightof-
way from the state-system road or the town-system road to his subdivision. The right-of-way
shall be off sufficient width that it could be developed as a state-system or town-system street.
Full disclosure concerning rights-of- way shall be made on the final plat prior to recording.
1.06 Access to Adjacent Properties All property and improvements proposed for
development shall be shown on the sketch plan. If the owner of a proposed subdivision owns
additional land contiguous to the proposed subdivision, he may be required to show a plan for
future road connections to the proposed subdivision. Rights-of-way must have sufficient width
that they can be developed for addition to the state system or the town system. Such proposed
streets and rights-of-way need not be cleared, graded, or improved until the property which they
serve has been subdivided, except that rights-of- way or proposed streets which pass through the
interior of a subdivision shall be kept in a presentable condition by the owner. If the ownerproposed
street or right-of-way intends it to be used for more than occasional access, the
Planning Board may, at its option, reclassify the right-of-way as a platted subdivision street, and
following such reclassification, it shall become subject to the street improvement requirements of
this Ordinance.
Where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, it is desirable to provide street access to an
adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such
property and temporary turn-arounds shall be provided. All proposed rights-of-way or future
streets shall be clearly identified on the plat prior to recording.
(') 1.07 Large Tracts Where land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building
lots, such parcels should he arranged to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further
subdivision.
CJ
1.03 Subdivision Name The name of a subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely
approximate the name of an existing subdivision within the Town or Surry County.
1.09 Street Names Proposed streets which are in alignment with existing streets shall
be given the same name. In assigning new names, duplication of existing names shall he
avoided. Street names shall he subject to approval of the County Planning Department,
1.10 Contour Map If, in the opinion of the Planning Board or other Town officials or
agencies, the topographic or drainage characteristics of the ]and to he subdivided warrant special
consideration, the subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board, upon request, a contour map of
the specified interval.
1.11 Buffer Strips It is recommended that a buffer strip of at least twenty (20) to
thirty (30) feet in addition to the normal lot depth be provided adjacent to a railroad, a limited
access highway, and a commercial or industrial development. Said strip shall he a part of the
platted lots, but shall have the following restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This strip
reserved for the planting of trees or shrubs by the owners; the building of structures
hereon prohibited."
22
()
()
1.12 Natural Features In any subdivision, due consideration will be given to preserving
natural features such as trees, ponds, streams, river, and lakes which are of value not only to the
subdivision but to the Town as a whole.
1.13 Sedimentation Pollution Control In order to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation
pollution of streams, springs, flat water bodies, or other drainage networks. The subdivider shall
comply with all requirements of the North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973
and any locally adopted sediment control ordinances.
1.14 Storm Water Drainage The Subdivider shall provide an adequate drainage system
for the proper drainage of all surface water according to standards found in the North Carolina
Department of Transportation handbook for the Design of Highway Surface Drainage Structures.
1.15 Fire hydrants Fire hydrants shall be within five hundred (500) feet of any
residence with a maximum of one thousand (1,000)) feet between hydrants within the zoning
jurisdiction where town water is available. Where available, eight (8) inch lines will serve these
hydrants. Six (6) inch water lines will be the minimum size permitted.
Section 2 Design Standards for Streets
2.01 Public Streets All streets and related storm drainage facilities intended for public
dedication shall he constructed to "North Carolina Division of Highways Minimum
Construction Standards for Subdivision Roads.'' The subdivider shall provide the Planning
Board with acceptable assurances that he has complied with this provision. It will be subject to
verification by agents of the Town or DOT.
2.02 Private Streets Private streets may be constructed in subdivisions provided that the
subdivider prepares and places on the public record a full disclosure statement in accordance
with CS. 136-102.6, and designates the street as "Private", and further designates that neither
the State nor the town of Elkin has any responsibility for maintaining the street. Private streets
shall he constructed to "North Carolina Division of Highways Minimum Construction Standards
for Subdivision Roads', including pavement installation.
2.03 Alleys Alleys shall be required to serve lots used for commercial and industrial
purposes except that this requirement may be waived where other definite and assured provision
is made for service access. Alleys shall not he allowed in residential blocks, unless approved by
the Planning Board. All alleys shall have a tum-around with a diameter of not less than eighty
(80) feet. All alleys shall have a compacted base of at least two inches of crushed stone, gravel,
or the equivalent.
Section 3 Water and Sewerage Systems
3.01 Each lot in all subdivisions within the corporate limits of the Town of Elkin shall provide
at the subdivider' s expense, an extension of the municipal water and sanitary sewer systems.
3.02 Each subdivision in the extraterritorial area of the Town of Elkin shall meet the
requirements of the North Carolina Division of Health Services and the Surry County Board of
Health. The subdivider shall state on the final plat that each lot shall have a water supply and
sewage disposal system meeting these requirements.
Section 4 Design Standards for Blocks
The maximum and minimum length and width of blocks shall be as follows:
4.01 Length Block lengths shall not exceed fourteen hundred (1400) feet nor be less
than four hundred ( 400) feet. Where deemed necessary, by the Planning Board, a pedestrian
cross-walk of a least eight (8) feet in width may he required.
23
CJ
4.02 Width Blocks shall have sufficient width to allow two tiers oflots of minimum depth
except where single-tier lots are required to separate residential development from through,
vehicular traffic or a non-residential use.
Section 5 Design Standards for Lots
The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines
shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision, for the type of development and use
contemplated and conform to the Elkin Zoning Ordinance,
5.01 Orientation of Lot Lines
Lines.
Side tines shall be substantiality at right angles to street
Section 6 Design Standards for Easements
Easements shall be provided as follows:
6.01 Utility Easements Easements for underground or above ground utilities shall be
provided where necessary across lots or preferably centered on rear or side lot lines and shall he
at least ten (10) feet in width.
6.02 Drainage Easements Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream or drainage
way, an easement shall be provided conforming to the lines of such stream and of sufficient
width as will be adequate for the purpose as determined by official flood insurance maps.
6.03 Buffer Strips A buffer strip at least ten (! 0) to fifteen (15) Feet in width may he
required by the Planning Board adjacent to a major Street or a commercial or industrial
development. This strip shall be in addition to the normally required lot dimensions, shall be part
of the platted plot, and shall be reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs by the owners.
Section 1
ARTICLE VII
INSTALLATION OF REFERENCE POINTS AND SUBDIVISION
IMPROVEMENTS
Permanent Reference Points
Prior to the approval of the final plat permanent reference points shall have been placed
in accordance with the following requirements:
1.01 Subdivision Corner Tie. At least one corner of the subdivision shall be designated
by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference marker. If a corner is within two
thousand (2000) feet of a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Station of the NC. Grid System coordinated
monument, or such other coordinated system, then this corner shall be marked with a monument
so designated by computed X and Y coordinates which shall appear on the map with a statement
identifying this Station or Monument and to an accuracy of I: I 00000. When such Monument or
Station is not available, the tie shall be made to some pertinent and readily recognizable
landmark or identifiable point, physical object or structure.
24
1.02 Monuments With each block of a subdivision at least two (2)) Monuments designated
as Control Comers shall be installed. The Surveyor shall employ additional Monuments when
necessary. Monuments shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at least four (4) inches in
diameter or square and not less than three (3) feet in length. Each monument shall have
imbedded in its top or attached by a suitable means a metal plate of non corrosive materials and
: ~~) marked plainly with the point, the surveyor's registration number, the month and the year it was
'--- installed, and the word 'Monument' or 'Control Comer". A Monument shall be set at least thirty
(30) inches in the ground with at least six (6) inches exposed above the ground unless this
requirement is impractical because of vehicular traffic or other factors.
()
C_)
1.03 Property Markers A steel or wrought iron pipe or equivalent not less than
three/fourths (3/4) inches in diameter and at least thirty (30) inches in length shall be set at all
comers, except those located by Monuments. A marker shall also be set at a point of curve, point
of tangency, point of intersection, property comer or reference point unless a monument has
already been placed at said points. Additional markers shall be placed at other points of
importance.
Section 2 Installation of Streets and Storm Drainage Facilities
All streets and storm drainage facilities intended for public dedication shall be constructed to
"North Carolina Division off Highways Minimum Construction Standards for Subdivision
Roads" and the "Handbook for the Design of Highway Surface Drainage Structures." The
subdivider shall provide the Planning Board with acceptable assurances that he had complied
with this provision. This will be subject to verification by Town Personnel or their designated
representatives.
Private streets (streets which are not dedicated to public use) shall he constructed to "North
Carolina Division of Highways Minimum Construction Standards for Subdivision
Roads", including pavement installation.
Section 3 Installation of Water and Sewerage systems
Private and public water and sewerage systems shall meet the requirements of the North Carolina
Division of Health Services and the Surry County Board of Health. Where county or Town
Public water and or sewer systems are reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with
the public system and shall provide connections to each lot. (See design standards for water and
sewerage systems, Article VI. Section 3.)
Section 01
ARTICLE VIII
MISCELLANEOUS LEGAL PROVISIONS
Prerequisite to Plat Recordation
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no subdivision plat ofland within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Elkin shall he filed or recorded until it has been submitted to and
approved by the Elkin Board of Commissioners on recommendation of the Elkin Planning
Board, and until this approval is entered in writing on the face of the plat by the Mayor of the
Town of Elkin.
25
()
The Register of Deeds shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision of land located within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Town of Elkin that has not been approved in accordance with these
provisions, nor shall the Clerk of Superior Court order or direct the recording of a plat if the
recording would be in conflict with this section.
Section 02 Effect of Plat Approval on Dedications and Public Services
Pursuant to 0. 153A-333, the approval of a plat does not constitute or effect the acceptance by
the Town of Elkin or the public of the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line,
or other public facility shown on the plat and shall not be construed to do so.
No construction permits shall he issued, nor shall water, sewer, or other Town facilities or
services be extended to or connected with any subdivision for which a plat is required to be
approved unless and until such final plat has been approved by the Town of Elkin.
Section 03 Penalties for Violation
After the effective date of this Ordinance, any person who, being the owner or agent of
the owner of any land located within the territorial jurisdiction of this Ordinance, thereafter
subdivides his land in violation of this Ordinance or transfers or sells land by reference to,
exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has
been properly approved under the terms of this Ordinance and recorded in the office of the Surry
County Register of Deeds, or Wilkes County Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Building permits required pursuant to G.S. J 60A-4 I 7 may be denied for lots that
have been illegally subdivided. Amended 518106
The descriptions by metes and bounds in the instruments of transfer or other document used in
the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The
Town of Elkin through its attorney or other official designated by the Board of Commissioners,
may enjoin illegal subdivision, transfer, or sale ofland by action or injunction. Further, violators
of this Ordinance shall he subject, upon conviction to fine and or imprisonment as provided by
G.S.14-4.
Section 04 Severabillty
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be decided by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid.
Section OS Exceptions and Variances
Where because of severe topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site strict
adherence to the provisions of this Ordinance would cause an unnecessary hardship, the Board of
Commissioners may, on recommendation of the Planning Board, authorize a variance to the
terms of this Ordinance only to the extent that is absolutely necessary and not to an extent which
would violate the intent of the Ordinance. Any variance thus authorized shall be entered in the
Minutes of the Board of Commissioners and the reason for the variance shall be specified.
Section 06 Amendments
The Board of Commissioners may from time to time amend the terms of this Ordinance,
but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have
been submitted to the Planning Board for review and recommendation. If the Planning Board
26
fails to submit a report within the specified time it shall he deemed to have approved the
amendment
Section 07 Abrogation
It is not intended that this Ordinance repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any
existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this Ordinance imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
Section 08 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
All ordinances or parts of ordinances other than the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Elkin which are in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. Should the requirements of this
ordinance conflict with those of the Zoning Ordinance, the more stringent requirements shall
prevail.
Section 09 Effective Date
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after 5th day of February
1996.
27
 




 


