
Edenton, NC Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF EDENTON, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance, passed 11-14-2017; and
State legislation current through North Carolina Legislative Service, 2017
Regular Session Laws, Pamphlet No. 5



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CHARTER



Section



Article I. Incorporation, Corporate Powers and Boundaries



   1.1.   Incorporation



   1.2.   Powers



   1.3.   Corporate limits



Article II. Governing Body



   2.1.   Mayor and Council



   2.2.   Council; composition; terms of office



   2.3.   Mayor; term of office; duties



   2.4.   Mayor Pro Tempore



   2.5.   Meetings



   2.6.   Ordinances and resolutions



   2.7.   Voting requirements; quorum



   2.8.   Compensation; qualifications for office; vacancies



Article III. Elections



   3.1.   Regular municipal elections



   3.2.   Wards; revision



   3.3.   Election of Council members



   3.4.   Election of the Mayor



   3.5.   Special elections and referendums



Article IV. Organization and Administration



   4.1.   Form of government



   4.2.   Town Manager



   4.3.   Town Clerk



   4.4.   Tax Collector



   4.5.   Town Attorney



   4.6.   Other administrative officers and employees



Article V. Special Assessment Provisions



Part 1. Streets and Sidewalks



   5.1.   Authority to assess for street improvements



   5.2.   Authority to assess for sidewalk improvements and repairs



   5.3.   Assessment procedure



   5.4.   Effect of assessment



   5.5.   Exemption of corner lots



Part 2. Water and Sewer



   5.6.   Authority to levy by alternate methods



   5.7.   Average costs



   5.8.   Subdivisions



   5.9.   Exemption of corner lots



Editor’s note:



   No stylistic or grammatical changes have been made to this document,
other than to systemize and make consistent the format of the charter
analysis above and the section headers below.



Statutory reference:



   The Charter of the Town of Edenton was revised and consolidated in
1986, per North Carolina House Bill 1461, Chapter 815.



ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS AND BOUNDARIES



§ 1.1  INCORPORATION.



   The Town of Edenton, North Carolina, in Chowan County, and the
inhabitants thereof, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name of the ‘Town of Edenton’, hereinafter at times
referred to as the ‘Town’.



§ 1.2  POWERS.



   The Town shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights,
privileges and immunities conferred upon the Town of Edenton specifically by
this Charter or upon municipal corporations by general law. The term
‘general law’ is employed herein as defined in G.S. 160A-1.



§ 1.3  CORPORATE LIMITS.



   The corporate limits shall be those existing at the time of
ratification of this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the Town,
and as they may be altered from time to time in accordance with law. An
official map of the Town, showing the current boundaries, shall be maintained
permanently in the office of the Town Clerk and shall be available for public
inspection. Immediately upon alteration of the corporate limits made pursuant
to law, the appropriate changes to the official map shall be made, and copies
shall be filed in the offices of the Secretary of State, the Chowan County
Register of Deeds and the appropriate board of elections.



ARTICLE II. GOVERNING BODY



§ 2.1  MAYOR AND COUNCIL.



   The Mayor and Council shall be the governing body of the Town.



§ 2.2  COUNCIL; COMPOSITION; TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The Council shall be composed of six members elected for staggered
terms of four years. One Council Member shall be elected by the qualified
voters of each of the four wards. Each person so elected shall have resided
in the respective ward for a period of not less than 30 days next preceding
the date of the election. Two Council members shall be elected by all the
qualified voters of the Town.



§ 2.3  MAYOR; TERM OF OFFICE; DUTIES.



   The Mayor shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the Town for
a term of four years; shall be the official head of the Town government and
preside at meetings of the Council; shall have the right to vote only when
there is an equal division on any question or matter before the Council; and
shall exercise the powers and duties conferred by law or as directed by the
Council.



§ 2.4  MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.



   The Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore to
perform the duties of the Mayor during his or her absence or disability, in
accordance with general law. The Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve in such
capacity at the pleasure of the other members of the Council.



§ 2.5  MEETINGS.



   In accordance with general law, the Council shall establish a suitable
time and place for its regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings ma y
be held as provided by general law.



§ 2.6  ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.



   The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading and proving of Town
ordinances and resolutions shall be in accordance with general law. All
ordinances and resolutions shall be effective upon adoption unless otherwise
provided.



§ 2.7  VOTING REQUIREMENTS; QUORUM.



   Official actions of the Council and all votes shall be taken in
accordance with applicable provisions of general law, particularly G.S.
160A-75. A majority of the members of the Council, excluding vacancies, shall
constitute a quorum.



§ 2.8  COMPENSATION; QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICE; VACANCIES.



   The compensation and qualifications of the Mayor and Council members
shall be in accordance with general law. Vacancies that occur in any elective
office of the Town shall be filled by appointment of the Council for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



ARTICLE III. ELECTIONS



§ 3.1  REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.



   Regular municipal elections shall be held in each odd-numbered year in
accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina.
Elections shall be conducted and the results determined on a nonpartisan
plurality basis as provided in G.S. 163-292.



§ 3.2  WARDS; REVISION.



   The four wards established for the purpose of elections and their
respective boundaries shall be those existing at the time of ratification of
this Charter and set forth on the official map of the Town, as required by
G.S. 16GA-23. The Council may revise ward boundaries as provided in G.S.
160A-23 by adoption of an appropriate ordinance. The Counci1 may make other
revisions, including changing the number of wards, by following the procedure
set out in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 5, Part 4, and applicable provisions of
State and federal law.



§ 3.3  ELECTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   The Council members serving on the date of ratification of this Charter
shall serve until the expiration of their terms. In the municipal election in
1987 and every four years thereafter, one Council member shall be elected at
large, one Council member shall be elected by and from the First Ward and one
Council member shall be elected by and from the Second Ward. In the municipal
election in 1989 and every four years thereafter, one Council member shall be
elected at large, one Council member shall be elected by and from the Third
Ward and one Council member shall be elected by and from the Fourth ward.



§ 3.4  ELECTION OF THE MAYOR.



   The Mayor serving on the date of ratification of this Charter shall
serve until the expiration of his or her term. At the municipal election in
1987 and every four years thereafter, there shall be elected a Mayor to serve
as provided in Article II.



§ 3.5  SPECIAL ELECTIONS AND REFERENDUMS.



   Special elections and referendums may be held only as provided by
general law or applicable local acts of the General Assembly.



ARTICLE IV. ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION



§ 4.1  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The Town shall operate under the council-manager form of government, in
accordance with G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 7, Part 2.



§ 4.2  TOWN MANAGER.



   The Council shall appoint a Town Manager who shall be responsible for
the administration of all departments of the Town government. The Town
Manager shall have all the powers and duties conferred by general law, except
as expressly limited by the provisions of  this Charter.



§ 4.3  TOWN CLERK.



   The Council shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the Council; to maintain official records and documents; to
give notice of meetings; and to perform such other duties required by law or
as the Council may direct.



§ 4.4  TAX COLLECTOR.



   The Council shall appoint a Tax Collector to collect all taxes owed to
the Town, subject to general law, this Charter and Town ordinances.



§ 4.5  TOWN ATTORNEY.



   The Council shall appoint a Town Attorney licensed to practice law in
North Carolina. It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to represent the
Town, advise Town officials and perform other duties required by law or as
the Council may direct.



§ 4.6  OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   The Council may provide for appointment of other officers and
employees, and may organize the Town government as deemed appropriate,
subject to the requirements of general law.



ARTICLE V. SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROVISIONS



Part 1. Streets and Sidewalks



§ 5.1  AUTHORITY TO ASSESS FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   In addition to the authority granted by general law, the Council is
authorized to order street improvements and to assess fifty percent of the
total costs against abutting property owners in accordance with the
provisions of this Article, without the necessity of a petition of property
owners.



§ 5.2  AUTHORITY TO ASSESS FOR SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS AND REPAIRS.



   In addition to the authority granted by general law, the Council is
authorized to order sidewalk improvements or repairs according to standards
and specifications of the Town, and to assess fifty percent of the total
costs against abutting property owners, without the necessity of a petition
of property owners.



§ 5.3  ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE.



   In exercising the authority granted by this Article, the Council shall
follow the procedure provided by the General Statutes relating to street and
sidewalk assessments, except those provisions relating to the petition of
property owners.



§ 5.4  EFFECT OF ASSESSMENT.



   The effect of the act of levying assessments under authority of this
Article shall for all purposes be the same as if the assessments were levied
under authority of the General Statutes.



§ 5.5  EXEMPTION OF CORNER LOTS.



   The Council shall have authority to exempt from assessment for street
improvements for corner lots one hundred fifty feet of the frontage of any
side of a corner lot when street improvements are installed along both sides
of such lot, or exemptions may be made as provided in G.S. 160A-219.



Part 2. Water and Sewer



§ 5.6  AUTHORITY TO LEVY BY ALTERNATE METHODS.



   In addition to the authority granted by general law for assessing the
costs of water and sewer lines and laterals, the Council is authorized to
levy any such assessments according to either of the following methods: (1)
equally against each of the lots capable of being served by such line or
lines, or (2) on the basis of the frontage of land upon a public street by an
equal rate per foot of such frontage.



§ 5.7  AVERAGE COSTS.



   In lieu of assessing the total cost of a particular project as herein
provided, the Council annually between the first days of January and July of
each year, may determine the average cost of installing water and sewer mains
or lines and on the basis of such determination may make assessments of such
average cost of any portion thereof during the following fiscal year
beginning July 1. The average cost of such installation shall include the
cost of the particular size and material of lines completed during the
preceding calendar year. It also may include the anticipated increase in
labor and materials costs based upon the average of such increases during the
preceding five calendar years. The assessment of the average cost of such
line shall not be made until after the particular assessment project has been
completed. The purpose of this is to distribute before equitably the cost of
the installation of water and sewer lines throughout the Town; to permit a
property owner to know in advance what the cost of installation of water and
sewer lines benefitting his property will be; and to permit the most
expeditious assessment of cost against property after completion of the
installation of such lines. The actual cost of acquisition of rights-of-way
also may be assessed as a part of the cost of an individual project. If the
right-of-way costs have not been determined and assessed with the assessment
of the average installation costs at the time of the completion of the
project, such costs may be assessed separately when they are determined.



§ 5.8  SUBDIVISIONS.



   If a lot or parcel of land used for a single-family residential purpose
is assessed under this section and the lot or parcel of land is subdivided
into additional lots for single-family occupancy, the Council may assess the
additional lots or parcels of land into which the original parcel of land is
from time to time divided on the basis of the average cost as determined
under the provisions of this Part at the time the owner of the additional lot
requests the utility service. Such assessment shall be made only after the
owner of the newly created lot or lots has requested water or sewer service
and an assessment against his property or has paid the amount of the
assessment in cash. In the absence of such request or payment, the service
shall be withheld from the property. If a lot or parcel of land is used for
any purpose other than for single-family occupancy, the Council may assess
the lot or parcel of land used for such other purpose in an amount equal to
the multiple of the assessment for a single-family lot by the nearest number
of times that the area so used is divisible by twenty thousand feet but in no
case shall the assessment be less than the assessment which would be made
against a single-family dwelling lot.



§ 5.9  EXEMPTION OF CORNER LOTS.



   The Council shall have authority to exempt from assessment for water
and sewer extensions for corner lots one hundred fifty feet of the frontage
of any side of a corner lot when water and sewer extensions are installed
along both sides of such lot, or exemptions may be made as provided in G.S.
160A-219.



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of construction



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time; computation of time



   10.13   Record of ordinances



   10.14   Ordinances repealed



   10.15   Ordinances unaffected



   10.16   Ordinances saved



   10.17   Amendment of code



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Edenton, North
Carolina, shall be designated as the Edenton Code and may be so cited.



(Prior Code, § 10.01)



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation
of the General Statutes of the state.



   (B)   (1)   Where a section of this code is followed by a
reference to the General Statutes of the state, the reference indicates that
the section is analogous or similar to the cited sections in the General
Statutes of the state.



      (2)   Footnotes, cross-references and other comments are by
way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any
section.



   (C)   All provisions of this code are limited in application to the
territorial boundaries of the town although the provisions may not be so
limited specifically.



   (D)   Code, title, chapter and section headings do not constitute
any part of the law as contained in the code.



(Prior Code, § 10.02)



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I not incompatible with future legislation
shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this
code unless otherwise specifically provided.



(Prior Code, § 10.03)



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



(Prior Code, § 10.04)



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and
usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The Town Code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.



      COUNCIL. The Council of Edenton.



      COUNTY. Chowan County, North Carolina.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any
part-owner, joint owner, tenant-in-common, tenant by the entireties, tenant
in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or
land.



      PERSON. Includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      STATE. State of North Carolina.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, shall include
tenants at sufferance and tenants at will and shall include any person
holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of,
the building or land, either alone or with others.



      TOWN. Edenton, North Carolina.



      TOWN COUNCIL. The Council of Edenton.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of that ordinance.



   (A)   “AND” or “OR”. Either conjunction shall include the
other as if written “and/or”, if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (C)   General term. A general term following a specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated, unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the
misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to
express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words
to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when
another word or words was clearly intended to express that intent, the
spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or
substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions
shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the
text as originally published.



   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal law,
shall be the official time for the transaction of all town business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTATION OF TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this
code or by any ordinance, the day of the act, event or default from which the
designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day
of the period so computed is to be included unless it is a Saturday; a
Sunday; a legal holiday as defined by state statute; or a day the office in
which the act is to be done is closed during regular business hours. In any
event, the period runs until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday,
a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day on which the office is closed. When the
period of time allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays,
Sundays, legal holidays and days on which the office is closed shall be
excluded from the computations.



§ 10.13  RECORD OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances hereafter passed and adopted by the Town Council shall
be recorded by the Town Manager in a book of ordinances. The original shall
be filed in the Town Manager’s office and the Town Manager shall obtain and
attach thereto the proof of publication from the publisher for all ordinances
hereafter published.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Town Council, or a certain town officer or employee, to make additional
ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the
ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature serving such
purpose effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent thereto,
shall remain in effect and are saved.



§ 10.17  AMENDMENT OF CODE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code
by ordinances passed subsequent to this code may be numbered in accordance
with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein.



   (B)   Any chapter, section or division repealed by subsequent
ordinances may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages.



   (C)   Subsequent ordinances as printed or omitted shall be prima
facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the Town Council adopts a
new code of ordinances.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section of this code, or failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with this
code, shall be, upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a
fine not to exceed $50 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that
any of the provisions of this code are violated shall constitute a separate
offense.



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS





         31.   EMERGENCIES




CHAPTER 30:  OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   30.01   Attendance requirements



   30.02   Finance Officer; powers and duties



   30.03   Auxiliary law enforcement personnel



Northeastern Regional Airport Commission



   30.40   Commission created



   30.41   Election of members



   30.42   Budget



   30.43   Powers



Statutory references:



   Administration of Council-Manager towns, see G.S. §§ 160A-147 through
160A-152



   Government generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-59 through 160A-111



   Local government finance, see G.S. §§ 159-1 et seq.



   Public enterprises, see G.S. §§ 160A-311 to 160A-338



   Sale and disposition of property, see G.S. §§ 160A-266 to 160A-276



   Special assessments, see G.S. §§ 160A-216 to 160A-238



   Taxation powers of town, see G.S. §§ 160A-206 through 160A-209 and
160A-211 through 160A-213



   Town Attorney, see G.S. § 160A-173



   Town Clerk, see G.S. §§ 160A-171, 160A-172



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Town Council may replace any member of any board,
commission or Council-appointed committee for good cause, including, but not
limited to, poor attendance, lack of participation, unfitness, malfeasance
and conflict of interest.



   (B)   The appointment of any member of any board, commission or
Council-appointed committee who fails to attend any three out of the five
previous regular meetings, or who fails to attend any three consecutive
regular meetings, shall be considered expired and may only be extended or
renewed by action of the Town Council. If a board, commission or
Council-appointed committee does not have regularly scheduled meetings, then
all meetings shall be considered special and, for the purpose of computing
attendance requirements pursuant to this section, shall be considered regular
meetings.



(Prior Code, § 2-1)  (Ord. passed 6-12-1991)



§ 30.02  FINANCE OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Finance Officer shall have the following powers and duties.



      (1)   He or she shall keep the accounts of the town in
accordance with generally accepted principles of governmental accounting and
the rules and regulations of the local government commission.



      (2)   He or she shall disburse all funds of the town in strict
compliance with G.S. Ch. 159 and the budget ordinance of the town.



      (3)   As often as may be requested by the Town Manager, he or
she shall prepare and file with him or her for submittal to the Council a
statement of the financial condition of the town.



      (4)   He or she shall receive and deposit all monies accruing
to the town or supervise the receipt and deposit of money by other duly
authorized officers or employees.



      (5)   He or she shall maintain all records concerning the
bonded debt of the town, determine the amount of money that will be required
for debt service during each fiscal year and maintain all sinking funds.



      (6)   He or she shall supervise the investment of idle funds
of the town.



      (7)   He or she shall perform such other duties as may be
assigned to him or her by law, by the Manager, the Town Council or by rules
and regulations of the NC Local Government Commission.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, all checks, vouchers or
drafts on an official depository shall be signed by the Finance Officer and
the Mayor.



   (C)   He or she shall be responsible for all activities of the town
office staff and as such shall be designated as a department head of the
Finance Department and therefor will be directly responsible to the Town
Manager.



(Prior Code, § 2-23)



Statutory reference:



   Finance officer, see G.S. §§ 159-24 et seq.



§ 30.03  AUXILIARY LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.



   There is hereby established, within the Town Police Department, an
Auxiliary Police Division. Auxiliary police officers, while undergoing
training and while performing duties on behalf of the town pursuant to orders
and instructions of the Chief or his or her designee, shall be entitled to
benefits under the State Workers Compensation Act.



(Ord. passed 11-24-2003)



NORTHEASTERN REGIONAL AIRPORT COMMISSION



§ 30.40  COMMISSION CREATED.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. §§ 63-53 and 63-57, there is hereby created
the Northeastern Regional Airport Commission (the “Commission”). The
Commission shall consist of seven voting members. The Commission membership
position shall be for a term of three years and until his or her successor is
appointed. The Council shall appoint five members, the County Commission two.
One of the Council’s appointments shall be a Councilor. The appointees of
the town shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The Town Manager and
County Manager shall serve as an ex-officio members of the Commission. The NC
Northeast Commission will be asked to appoint two ex-officio members also.



   (B)   The ex-officio members shall not be entitled to vote on
Commission matters.



(Prior Code, § 3.5-21)  (Ord. passed 8-9-1994; Ord. passed 6-10-2014)



§ 30.41  ELECTION OF MEMBERS.



   The members and Vice-Secretary of the Commission shall elect the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Secretary annually. The current Chair of
the Town Airport Commission shall serve as Chairperson until an election is
held. The Commission may appoint such other officers as it may deem necessary
for the orderly procedure of its business, and adopt by-laws, rules and
regulations covering its procedure, not inconsistent with laws of the state
and ordinances of the town. It shall hold regular monthly meetings. Four
voting members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. An affirmative
action by a majority of the voting members of the Commission shall be
necessary to constitute action by the Commission. A member of the Commission
failing to attend two consecutive regular meetings without prior excuse shall
be automatically relieved and his or her successor appointed by the entity
responsible for the appointment.



(Prior Code, § 3.5-22)  (Ord. passed 8-9-1994)



§ 30.42  BUDGET.



   The Commission shall prepare an annual budget request for the operation
of the airport which shall be submitted to the Town Council on or before
April 15 of each year. The Commission’s fiscal year will coincide with the
town’s. The airport budget shall be as adopted by the Town Council and the
Airport Commission shall operate the airport within the budget as adopted.
The budgetary funds for the construction, enlargement, improvement,
maintenance, equipment, operation and regulation of the airport shall be a
responsibility of the town. The Town Council reserves the right to inspect
the Airport Commission’s records at any time.



(Prior Code, § 3.5-23)  (Ord. passed 8-9-1994)



§ 30.43  POWERS.



   The Commission appointed as herein provided by the town shall act in an
administrative capacity and shall be vested with the following authorities
and powers; and it is hereby authorized and empowered:



   (A)   To adopt, repeal, amend and readopt rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this subchapter for its own government, management and
operation;



   (B)   To adopt, repeal, amend and readopt rules and regulations with
respect to traffic on and use of streets, alleys, driveways, roadways,
parking areas, crosswalks and safety areas (not included in the public road
system of the state) located within the territorial limits of the lands
comprising the airport, including by way of illustration, but not in
limitation, of the authority herein granted, the establishment of routes of
traffic, the regulation of speed, the location of parking areas, the
regulation and prohibition of parking and standing in designated areas of
said streets, driveways, alleys and roadways, the prohibition of obstruction
thereof, the prohibition of vehicles and pedestrians on the aprons, ramps,
taxiways, runways and other designated parts of the airport;



   (C)   To adopt, repeal, amend and readopt rules and regulations with
respect to the use of the airport and its facilities by the public, including
the terminal building, the ramps, aprons, hangars, taxiways and runways, and
to prohibit the use of, occupation of or trespass upon any part thereof as
illustrated on the attached map;



   (D)   Proceedings of the Commission shall be recorded and a true
copy of all rules and regulations adopted by the Commission shall be
certified under the hand of the Secretary of the Commission and filed with
the Town Council and County Commissioners. A monthly report of revenues,
expenditures and activities conducted shall be furnished to the Town Council
and the County Commissioners;



   (E)   To post at appropriate places on the airport, notice to the
public of applicable rules and regulations pertaining to the airport;



   (F)   To lease (without the joinder in the lease agreements of the
town) for a term not to exceed one year, and for purposes not inconsistent
with the grants and agreements under which the airport is held by the town,
real or personal property under the supervision of or administered by the
Commission including, but not limited to, the airport. The Commission shall
also negotiate leases for longer periods of time on behalf of the town, but
the Board retains the authority to enter into longer term leases;



   (G)   To negotiate with and enter into contracts with persons, firms
or corporations for terms not to exceed ten years, for the operation of
airline-scheduled passenger and freight flights, nonscheduled flights and any
other airplane activities, not inconsistent with the grant agreements under
which the airport property is held by the town, and to charge and collect
reasonable and adequate fees, charges and rents for the use of the property
or for services rendered in the operation thereof;



   (H)   To negotiate with and enter into contracts and leases with
individuals, corporations or other organizations for the purpose of providing
fixed-base operator services. The services may include, but not be limited
to, the following: aircraft storage, FAA approved domestic aircraft repairs,
student training, demonstration and sale of aircraft, aircraft rental and
charter-air taxi;



   (I)   Within the limits of the appropriate funds, to hire, terminate
and fix the compensation of any personnel necessary for the proper operation
and management of the airport who answer to Airport Commission Chairperson;



   (J)   To operate, own, control, regulate, lease or grant to others
the right to operate, on the airport premises other businesses, amusements or
concessions for a term not exceeding three years as it may appear to the
Commission advantageous or conducive to the development of the airport;



   (K)   To negotiate and deal with the Federal Aviation Administration
of the United States Government, the state or any agency of the governments
relating to the grading, constructing, equipping, improving, maintaining and
operating of airports and landing fields acquired under the authority of this
subchapter; and



   (L)   Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the
Airport Commission shall be subject to the direction, approval and paramount
authority of the Town Council which may alter, amend, repeal or revoke all or
any part of this subchapter in its sole discretion.



(Prior Code, § 3.5-24)  (Ord. passed 8-9-1994)



CHAPTER 31:  EMERGENCIES



Section



General Provisions



   31.01   Form for proclamation of state of emergency



Proclamations Imposing Prohibitions and Restrictions Generally



   31.20   Authority of Mayor; to be written; notice; records



   31.21   Amendment of proclamation



   31.22   Use of separate and superseding proclamations



   31.23   Removal of restrictions



   31.24   Curfews



   31.25   Possession, consumption or transfer of intoxicating liquor



   31.26   Possession, transportation or transfer of dangerous weapons
or substances



   31.27   Access to areas



   31.28   Forms



Proclamations Prohibiting Assemblies



   31.40   Authority of Mayor; to be written; notice; records;
amendment; removal



   31.41   Authority of police to order dispersal



   31.42   Forms



Storage and Display of Firearms and Ammunition



   31.55   Rules generally



   31.56   Authority of Council to promulgate regulations



 



   31.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Police aid to and from other political subdivisions during emergencies,
see G.S. § 160A-288



   Riots and civil disorders, see G.S. §§ 14-288.1 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.01  FORM FOR PROCLAMATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   The Mayor of the town, or the person normally acting in his or her
place during his or her absence, shall, when the situation requires that he
or she declare that a state of emergency exists as contemplated by G.S. §
160A-288, use the following form:



 


PROCLAMATION



WHEREAS, G.S. § 160A-288, authorizes the Mayor of every political
subdivision in North Carolina to declare the existence of an emergency
justifying the rendering of law enforcement assistance to that political
subdivision as contemplated by G.S. § 160A-288,


NOW THEREFORE I,                                        
(Mayor) of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina, do hereby proclaim that a
state of emergency exists within the Town of Edenton, North Carolina.


   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand and caused the sale of
the Town of Edenton, North Carolina to be affixed this the            
              day of                                
      , in the year                       .


                                                  
                                                   


   Mayor



 



(Prior Code, § 9-1)



PROCLAMATIONS IMPOSING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY



§ 31.20  AUTHORITY OF MAYOR; TO BE WRITTEN; NOTICE; RECORDS.



   (A)   The Mayor, by proclamation, may impose the prohibitions and
restrictions specified in §§ 31.24 through 31.27 in the manner described in
those sections. The Mayor may impose as many of those specified prohibitions
and restrictions as he or she finds are necessary, because of an emergency,
to maintain an acceptable level of public order and services and to protect
lives, safety and property. The Mayor shall recite his or her findings in the
proclamation.



   (B)   The proclamation shall be in writing. The Mayor shall take
reasonable steps to give notice of the terms of the proclamation to those
affected by it and shall post a copy of it in the Town Hall. The Mayor shall
retain a text of the proclamation and furnish upon request certified copies
of it for use as evidence.



(Prior Code, § 9-2)



§ 31.21  AMENDMENT OF PROCLAMATION.



   The Mayor may amend the proclamation from time to time, making the
modifications as he or she would have been authorized to include in the
original proclamation.



(Prior Code, § 9-3)



§ 31.22  USE OF SEPARATE AND SUPERSEDING PROCLAMATIONS.



   The Mayor, in his or her discretion, may invoke the restrictions
authorized by this subchapter in separate proclamations and may amend any
proclamation by means of a superseding proclamation.



(Prior Code, § 9-4)



§ 31.23  REMOVAL OF RESTRICTIONS.



   The Mayor shall, by proclamation, remove the prohibitions and
restrictions as the emergency no longer requires them or when directed to do
so by the Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-5)



§ 31.24  CURFEWS.



   (A)   A proclamation imposed by the Mayor pursuant to § 31.01 may
impose a curfew prohibiting in certain areas and during certain periods the
appearance in public of anyone who is not a member of an exempted class. The
proclamation shall specify the geographical area or areas and the period
during each 24-hour day to which the curfew applies. The Mayor may exempt,
from some or all of the curfew restrictions, classes of people whose
exemption the Mayor finds necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare. The proclamation shall state the exempted classes
and the restrictions from which each is exempted.



   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in the proclamation, the curfew
shall apply during the specified period each day until the Mayor by
proclamation removes the curfew.



(Prior Code, § 9-6)



§ 31.25  POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OR TRANSFER OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR.



   (A)   A proclamation issued by the Mayor pursuant to § 31.01 may
prohibit the possession or consumption of any intoxicating liquor, including
beer and wine, other than on one’s own premises, and may prohibit the
transfer of any intoxicating liquor. The prohibition, if imposed, shall apply
to transfers of intoxicating liquor by employees of alcoholic beverage
control stores as well as by anyone else within the town.



   (B)   If imposed, the restrictions shall apply throughout the town.



(Prior Code, § 9-7)



§ 31.26  POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION OR TRANSFER OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS OR
SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   (1)   A proclamation issued by the Mayor pursuant to §
31.01 may prohibit the possession of any dangerous weapon or substance unless
it remains in a place of storage within the possessor’s premises or, if the
weapon or substance cannot be readily stored in the possessor’s premises,
unless it remains in a customary place of storage not readily available to
the possessor.



      (2)   The proclamation may also prohibit the sale or other
transfer or the transportation of any dangerous weapon or substance.



      (3)   The Mayor may exempt, from some or all of the
restrictions, classes of people whose possession, transfer or transportation
of certain dangerous weapons or substances is necessary to the preservation
of the public health, safety or welfare.



      (4)   The proclamation shall state the exempted classes and
the restrictions from which each is exempted.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the term DANGEROUS WEAPON OR
SUBSTANCE means:



      (1)   Any deadly weapon, ammunition, incendiary device or
other instrument or substance designed for a use that carries a threat of
serious bodily injury or destruction of property, as defined in G.S. §
14-288.1;



      (2)   Any other instrument or substance that is capable of
being used to inflict serious bodily injury or destruction of property, when
the circumstances indicate that there is some probability that the instrument
or substance will be so destructively used; and



      (3)   Any part or ingredient in any instrument or substance
included above.



   (C)   If imposed, the restrictions shall apply throughout the
jurisdiction of the town.



(Prior Code, § 9-8)



§ 31.27  ACCESS TO AREAS.



   (A)   A proclamation issued by the Mayor pursuant to § 31.01 may
prohibit obtaining access or attempting to obtain access to any area,
designated in the manner described in this section, in violation of any
order, clearly posted notice or barricade indicating that access is denied or
restricted.



   (B)   Areas to which access is denied or restricted shall be
designated by the Chief of Police and his or her subordinates when directed
in the proclamation to do so by the Mayor. When acting under this authority,
the Chief of Police and his or her subordinates may restrict or deny access
to any area, street or location within the town if that restriction or denial
of access or use is reasonably necessary to promote efforts being made to
overcome the emergency or to prevent further aggravation of the emergency.



(Prior Code, § 9-9)



§ 31.28  FORMS.



   Proclamations issued under the terms of this subchapter shall be in
essentially the following forms.



   (A)   Imposition.



 




PROCLAMATION



WHEREAS , the Edenton Town Council of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina,
has duly adopted an ordinance authorizing the Mayor to impose various
restrictions after he or she determines that such restrictions are necessary
as a response to an emergency,


NOW THEREFORE I,                                   , Mayor
of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina, proclaim that:


I.   An emergency exists, and restrictions set forth in this proclamation
are necessary in order to maintain an acceptable level of public order,
services and protection of lives, safety and property during this emergency.


II.   I proclaim the following restrictions:


   A.   Possession, consumption and transfer of intoxicating liquor


      1.    No person shall possess or consume any intoxicating
liquor, including beer and wine, other than on his or her premises.


      2.    No person shall sell, purchase, transport or otherwise
transfer any intoxicating liquor, including beer and wine.


   B.   Curfew


      1.    No person not exempted by this proclamation shall appear
in public in the geographic area described in this proclamation between the
hours of     P.M. and midnight or between the hours of midnight and    
A.M. of any day until I remove this curfew by proclamation.


      2.    This curfew shall apply to the area bounded by      
                                                   
       


                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
               


                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
               


                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
               


                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
               


      3.    I find it necessary to the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare to exempt from these curfew restrictions the
following classes of people in the circumstances indicated:


         (a)   (Those whose appearance is essential in order to
obtain or furnish a service or commodity which is immediately necessary to
sustain the health of well-being of themselves or of someone within a curfew
area.)


         (b)   (Those whose appearance necessarily occurs in the
process of leaving a place at which they were temporarily engaged and from
which they could not reasonably have planned their departure so as to avoid
appearing during the period which the curfew was applicable.)


         (c) . . .


         (d) . . .


   C.   Possession and transfer of dangerous weapons or substances


      1.    No person shall possess any dangerous weapons or
substances unless they remain in a place of storage on his or her premises
or, if they cannot be readily stored on his or her premises, unless they
remain in a customary place of storage not readily available to the
possessor. No person may transport or sell or otherwise transfer any guns,
rifles, ammunition, dynamite and any or all dangerous weapons or substances.


      2.    I find it necessary to the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare to exempt from these restrictions the following
classes of people in the circumstances indicated:


                                          may possess
                  when                               .


      Anyone may possess gasoline when the gasoline is in the tank of a
car in his or her possession.


                                may transfer        
                        when                        
                    .


   D.   Access to restricted areas


      1.    I direct the Chief of Police and his or her subordinates
to restrict or deny access to any area, location or street where such a
restriction is necessary in order to help overcome this emergency or to
prevent the emergency from worsening. These restrictions on access shall be
indicated by means of barricades, posted notices or orders to anyone in the
area.


      2.    No person shall obtain access or attempt to obtain
access to any area, location, or street to which the Chief of Police and his
or her subordinates have restricted access according to the directions I have
just given to them.


III.   Anyone violating any restriction imposed by this proclamation or
under its authority is guilty of a misdemeanor.


IV.   This proclamation shall take effect immediately.


                  (hour and date)                       


                        (name)                       
   


      Mayor


(seal of the city)




 



   (B)   Removal.



 

WHEREAS, the Edentown Town Council of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina,
has duly adopted an ordinance requiring the Mayor to remove by proclamation
the various restrictions proclaimed because of emergency as the emergency no
longer requires them or when directed to do so by the Town Council,


WHEREAS, the emergency no longer requires the imposition of such
restrictions. The Town Council has directed me to remove the restrictions
identified in this proclamation.


NOW THEREFORE I,                                        
        , Mayor of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina, proclaim that the
restrictions on                                        
                                                   
                                                   
  established in Part (s) II . . .                            
                                    of my proclamation of
(date of proclamation) , as it may have been amended, are removed.


                  (hour and date)                       


                        (name)                       
   


            Mayor


(seal of the city)



 



(Prior Code, § 9-11)



PROCLAMATIONS PROHIBITING ASSEMBLIES



§ 31.40  AUTHORITY OF MAYOR; TO BE WRITTEN; NOTICE; RECORDS; AMENDMENT;
REMOVAL.



   (A)   The Mayor, by proclamation, may prohibit assemblies of three
or more persons in specified geographic areas of the town after he or she
finds that any such assemblies constitute a clear and present danger of
prolonging or aggravating an existing emergency which endangers lives, safety
and property. The proclamation shall be in writing and state the Mayor’s
findings. The Mayor shall take reasonable steps to give notice of the terms
of the proclamation to those affected by it and shall post a copy of it in
the Town Hall. The Mayor shall retain a text of the proclamation and upon
request shall furnish certified copies of it for use as evidence.



   (B)   The proclamation shall specify the geographic area or areas in
which the restrictions apply.



   (C)   The Mayor may amend the proclamation from time to time, making
modifications in the geographical area to which it applies as he or she
determines to be necessary to maintain the purposes of the prohibition.



   (D)   The Mayor shall, by proclamation, remove the prohibition when
the emergency no longer requires it or when directed to do so by the Town
Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-12)



§ 31.41  AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO ORDER DISPERSAL.



   Any police officer may order any assembly prohibited by a proclamation
authorized by this subchapter to disperse.



(Prior Code, § 9-13)



§ 31.42  FORMS.



   Proclamations issued under the terms of this subchapter shall be in
essentially the following forms.



   (A)   Imposition.



 




PROCLAMATION



WHEREAS, the Town Council of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina, has duly
adopted an ordinance authorizing the Mayor to prohibit assemblies after he or
she finds that the prohibition is necessary as a response to an emergency,


NOW THEREFORE I,                                       ,
Mayor of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina, proclaim that:


I.   An emergency exists which endangers lives, safety and property and
assemblies of three or more persons in the areas identified in this
proclamation constitute a clear and present danger of prolonging or
aggravating the emergency.


II.   No person shall be a part of any assembly of three or more persons
in the area bounded by                          


                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                     


                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
                      .


III.   This proclamation is effective immediately.


                  (hour and date)                       


                        (name)                       
   


      Mayor


(seal of the city)




 



   (B)   Removal.



 




PROCLAMATION



WHEREAS, the Town Council of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina, has duly
adopted an ordinance requiring the Mayor to remove by proclamation a
prohibition on assemblies when the emergency no longer requires it or when
directed to do so by the Town Council, and


WHEREAS, the emergency no longer requires the prohibition of assemblies 
(The Town Council has directed me to remove the prohibition on assemblies),


NOW THEREFORE I,                                        
                , Mayor of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina
proclaim that the prohibition of assemblies established by my proclamation of
(date of proclamation) , as it may have been amended is removed.


                  (hour and date)                       


                        (name)                       
   


            Mayor


(seal of the city)




 



(Prior Code, § 9-15)



STORAGE AND DISPLAY OF FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION



§ 31.55  RULES GENERALLY.



   In the event of a state of emergency, every person engaged in the
business of selling firearms and ammunition or both shall comply with the
following rules.



   (A)   No ammunition shall be displayed on an open counter or in any
other place readily accessible to the public.



   (B)   No ammunition or firearms shall be displayed in windows or
display areas when the business is not regularly open.



   (C)   During any period in which firearms or ammunition or both are
unattended, they shall be stored in a place meeting the requirements of
regulations promulgated by the Town Council under authority of this
subchapter or, if no regulations have been promulgated, in a place difficult
of access to unauthorized persons.



(Prior Code, § 9-16)



§ 31.56  AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL TO PROMULGATE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Town Council is authorized to promulgate regulations
governing the construction, location and accessibility of storage places for
firearms and ammunition required to be used by this subchapter. The Town
Council may adopt any regulations under this authority that, in its judgment,
will reasonably and effectively serve to prevent unauthorized persons from
obtaining the stored firearms and ammunition.



   (B)   The Town Council shall take reasonable steps to notify all
persons that it can reasonably identify as being affected by these
regulations or their requirements. The notification shall sufficiently
precede the effective date of the regulations to permit compliance with them.
The town shall maintain on file an official copy of the regulations.



(Prior Code, § 9-17)



§ 31.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any prohibition or restriction imposed by
a proclamation authorized by §§ 31.20 through 31.28 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable, upon conviction, by a fine or imprisonment as
provided by G.S. § 14-4.



(Prior Code, § 9-10)



   (B)   Any member of an assembly ordered to disperse by a police
officer acting under authority of §§ 31.40 through 31.42 shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor if he or she fails to comply with the order and shall be
punishable, upon conviction, by a fine or imprisonment as provided in G.S.
§§ 14-4 and 14-288.5.



(Prior Code, § 9-14)



   (C)   Any person failing to comply with any requirement of §§
31.55 and 31.56 or of any reasonable regulations promulgated under authority
of §§ 31.55 and 31.56 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 30
days, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



(Prior Code, § 9-18)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         51.   WATER AND SEWERS




CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   50.01   Director; powers and duties generally



   50.02   Right of entry



§ 50.01  DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.



   The Director of Public Works shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   General supervision of the water and sewer system subject to
the supervision of the Town Manager;



   (B)   Power to employ and discharge employees of public works
subject to approval by the Town Manager; and



   (C)   Perform other duties as may be assigned to him or her by the
Town Manager.



(Prior Code, § 24-1)



§ 50.02  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Director of Public Works or his or her authorized representative
shall be authorized to enter and have free access at all reasonable hours to
any premises to ascertain the location or condition of pipes or other
fixtures attached to the water and sewer systems of the town.



(Prior Code, § 24-2)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWERS



Section



Connections



   51.001   Sewer connections required



   51.002   Separate connections required for separate buildings;
service lines to cross only served property



   51.003   Performance of work; authority to turn water on or off



   51.004   Applications



   51.005   Inspection of plumbing fixtures prerequisite to turn-on of
water



   51.006   Fees



Extensions



   51.020   Applicability of subchapter; determination of benefit to
town



   51.021   Authority to require both water and sewer



   51.022   Costs; availability of funds



   51.023   Assessment generally



   51.024   Notice to owner



   51.025   Service lines



Water



   51.040   Selling and the like; use of hydrants and public fountains



   51.041   Private water supplies



   51.042   Meters



   51.043   Rates; establishment



   51.044   Accounts; billing; termination of service for failure to pay



   51.045   Permit required to turn on after discontinuance of service



   51.046   Maintenance of fixtures; waste



   51.047   Plumbers’ reports



   51.048   Stop and waste cocks required



   51.049   Interruption of service



   51.050   Tampering and the like with system



Sewers



   51.065   Definitions



   51.066   Permits



   51.067   Prohibited discharges into sewers generally



   51.068   Storm water and the like



   51.069   Conditional discharges into sewers



   51.070   Structures required



   51.071   Connections outside town



   51.072   Measurement of flow



   51.073   Determination of character and concentration of wastes



   51.074   Damaging and the like of testing and examination equipment



   51.075   Authority of inspector to enter for inspection; authority
of inspector to exclude certain wastes



Fats, Oils and Grease Control



   51.090   Scope and purpose



   51.091   Definitions



   51.092   Grease interceptor maintenance, record keeping and grease
removal



Water Shortage Response Plan



   51.100   Introduction



   51.101   Responsible authority for enacting the WSRP



   51.102   Public notification of water use policies and restrictions



   51.103   Identification of water use classifications



   51.104   Conservation measures and restrictions



   51.105   Declaration of phased conservation measures and restrictions



   51.106   Enforcement



   51.107   Evaluation and revision



Cross Connection Control



   51.120   Purpose of policy



   51.121   Coverage



   51.122   Policy



   51.123   Cross connection control program



 



   51.999   Penalty



CONNECTIONS



§ 51.001  SEWER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   All property owners having occupied property which is located within
300 feet of a sanitary sewer main shall connect all plumbing fixtures to the
sewer main within 90 days after having been notified so to do.



(Prior Code, § 24-7)



§ 51.002  SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED FOR SEPARATE BUILDINGS; SERVICE
LINES TO CROSS ONLY SERVED PROPERTY.



   Each separate dwelling or other structure shall have a separate
connection. Service pipes for connections shall be installed so as not to
cross any private property, except that property on which the premises to be
connected is located.



(Prior Code, § 24-8)



§ 51.003  PERFORMANCE OF WORK; AUTHORITY TO TURN WATER ON OR OFF.



   The Department of Public Works will connect all sewer and water mains
and will extend all service pipe to the curbing where a meterbox will be
placed over a stopcock and a meter, all of which shall be under the exclusive
control of the Department of Public Works. No person shall be allowed to turn
the water on or off at this stopcock, except the Director of the Department
of Public Works or his or her authorized agent; provided that, this section
shall not prevent licensed plumbers, authorized to perform plumbing work in
the town, from turning off the water at any premises in order to make
necessary repairs.



(Prior Code, § 24-9)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.004  APPLICATIONS.



   All persons desiring connections to the town water or sewer system
shall make application in writing to the Director of the Department of Public
Works stating for what purpose the water is to be used. No connections shall
be made unless the application has been filed and approved.



(Prior Code, § 24-10)



§ 51.005  INSPECTION OF PLUMBING FIXTURES PREREQUISITE TO TURN-ON OF WATER.



   Water shall not be turned on through any connection until the Director
of the Department of Public Works or his or her authorized representative has
inspected the plumbing and fixtures and found them to be properly installed
in accordance with the applicable plumbing regulations.



(Prior Code, § 24-11)



§ 51.006  FEES.



   For the extension of service pipe and tapping of water or sewer mains,
the town shall charge a connection fee as the Town Council may, from time to
time, adopt. Current connection charges shall be kept on file in the office
of the Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 24-12)



EXTENSIONS



§ 51.020  APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER; DETERMINATION OF BENEFIT TO TOWN.



   (A)   The Department of Public Works shall extend its water and
sewer facilities to serve property only under the conditions of this
subchapter.



   (B)   The Town Council have the authority to decide whether or not
an extension is beneficial to the town as a whole and, if not, it may refuse
to extend.



(Prior Code, § 24-13)



§ 51.021  AUTHORITY TO REQUIRE BOTH WATER AND SEWER.



   The Town Council may refuse a request for extension of water lines only
or sewer lines only when, in its judgment, both should be installed at the
same time.



(Prior Code, § 24-14)



§ 51.022  COSTS; AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS.



   The money to cover the cost of installation shall be available in the
town treasury prior to the starting of work.



(Prior Code, § 24-15)



§ 51.023  ASSESSMENT GENERALLY.



   The owners’ part of the cost of extension shall be paid in advance on
the property to be assessed for the owners’ cost. The assessment shall be a
lien upon the property and take precedence over all other liens and be
collected by the Tax Collector in the same manner as taxes.



(Prior Code, § 24-16)



§ 51.024  NOTICE TO OWNER.



   The town shall make an effort to advise the owners of property that
will be affected by the extension of water and sewer mains of the approximate
cost per foot to be assessed prior to beginning construction.



(Prior Code, § 24-17)



§ 51.025  SERVICE LINES.



   (A)   The cost of water and sewer service lines are not to be
considered a part of main construction cost and are not to be assessed.



   (B)   These taps on service lines shall be a separate charge and are
to be paid for at time of installation, at the price set by the Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 24-18)



WATER



§ 51.040  SELLING AND THE LIKE; USE OF HYDRANTS AND PUBLIC FOUNTAINS.



   No person shall be allowed to supply or sell water to other persons,
families or corporations nor shall any unauthorized person take or carry away
water from any hydrant or public fountain or use the water for any purpose
without written permission from the Director of Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 24-19)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.041  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, supply or provide, for
gain or profit, any water from a private well or pumps in or to any dwelling
house, boarding house, inn, hotel, café or other commercial establishment or
any room or rooms of the same when the dwelling house or any room or rooms
therein are rented or offered for rent to the public or when the
boardinghouse, inn, hotel, café or other commercial establishment is open to
or used by the public, unless and until an analysis of the water from the
private well or pump shall have first been submitted to and approved by the
Department of Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 24-20)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.042  METERS.



   Each separate building or structure shall be metered separately. In no
case shall two buildings or structures be supplied through one meter, except
by special permission from the Director of Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 24-21)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.043  RATES; ESTABLISHMENT.



   The rates and charges for water shall be those rates and charges as may
be established by the Town Council, from time to time. A current schedule of
water rates shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 24-22)



§ 51.044  ACCOUNTS; BILLING; TERMINATION OF SERVICE FOR FAILURE TO PAY.



   All water accounts shall be paid to the collection office of the town
at such time and for a period of consumption as may from time to time be
determined by the Town Council. In the event an account is not paid in full
on or before the last day of the month in which the account is due, the town
shall provide a ten-day grace period.  In the event the delinquent account
is not paid within this ten-day period, the water shall be cut off until the
account is paid in full and, in addition, charges shall be made for cutting
off and turning on the water.



(Prior Code, § 24-23)



§ 51.045  PERMIT REQUIRED TO TURN ON AFTER DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   No person shall turn on the supply of water to any premises from which
the supply has been cut off for nonpayment of water rent, or for any other
cause, without having first received a written permit from the Director of
Public Works.



(Prior Code, § 24-24)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.046  MAINTENANCE OF FIXTURES; WASTE.



   Property owners using water shall keep the service pipe and all
fixtures connected therewith in good repair and all property owners shall be
responsible for preventing the unnecessary waste of water.



(Prior Code, § 24-25)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.047  PLUMBERS’ REPORTS.



   Every plumber, within 24 hours after having installed any pipes or
other fixtures or having made any additions or alterations to any pipes or
other fixtures, shall make a correct return to the Director of Public Works
on forms to be supplied at his or her office. The plumber shall provide
information as the Director of Public Works may require.



(Prior Code, § 24-26)



§ 51.048  STOP AND WASTE COCKS REQUIRED.



   All services to any building shall have stop and waste cocks to drain
all pipes when water is cut off and all pipes installed shall drain to the
cocks.



(Prior Code, § 24-27)



§ 51.049  INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   The Department of Public Works shall have the right, at any
time, to shut off the water in the mains in case of accident or for the
purpose of making connections, alterations or repairs; and it shall be the
duty of the Director of Public Works to cause notice to be given to all
consumers within the district to be cut off, except in case of accident in
which case the water shall be cut off without notice.



   (B)   The town shall not be liable for any damage that may result to
consumers from the cutting off of water for any cause whatsoever, or for
failure to provide a supply of water.



(Prior Code, § 24-28)



§ 51.050  TAMPERING AND THE LIKE WITH SYSTEM.



   No person shall tamper with or in any manner manipulate or turn the
cutoffs on the water mains forming a part of the water system of the town,
nor shall any person tamper with or harm in any manner whatsoever any water
or sewer line, main or any appurtenance thereto. No person shall throw or
deposit any material or substance in any water or sewer line that will in any
manner obstruct the line.



(Prior Code, § 24-29)  Penalty, see § 51.999



SEWERS



§ 51.065  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Public Works Director.



   B.O.D. (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter
by weight.



   COLOR. The true color due to the substances in solution, expressed in
milligrams per liter.



   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any system of condensation,
air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other water used to reduce
temperature.



   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Liquid waste from bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens
and home laundries.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes, other than domestic sewage,
resulting from processes or operations employed in industrial and commercial
establishments.



   pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution. A STABILIZED PH will be considered as a pH which
does not change beyond the specified limits when the waste is subjected to
aeration.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to the degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



   RECEIVING STREAM. The body of water, stream or water course receiving
the discharge waters from the sewage treatment plant or formed by the waters
discharged from the sewage treatment plant.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and
industrial waste, except that of the type expressly prohibited by this
subchapter, without the admixture of surface water and storm water.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   UNPOLLUTED PROCESS WATER. Any water or waste containing no free or
emulsified grease or oil, acid or alkali, phenols or other substances
imparting taste and odor in receiving waters, toxic and poisonous substances
in suspension, colloidal state or solution and noxious or odorous gases or
other polluting materials.



(Prior Code, § 24-30)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)



§ 51.066  PERMITS.



   (A)   (1)   Any person desiring to deposit or discharge, or who
is now so doing, any industrial waste into the town sanitary sewers shall
make application to the approving authority in the manner prescribed by him
or her.



      (2)   The approving authority shall approve the applications
only when evidence is submitted by the applicant that the discharge into the
sanitary sewer will comply with all the regulations of this subchapter.



   (B)   Should any person fail to secure a permit or fail to have his,
her or its application approved, the approving authority shall, upon 24
hours’ notice, if the person is using town water, disconnect the person’s
connection with the town water system, and the same will only be reconnected
at the owner’s expense; and if the person does not use town water, the
person, after 24 hours’ notice, shall have his or her connection with the
town sewer system severed, and the service will only be restored at the
person’s expense.



(Prior Code, § 24-31)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)



§ 51.067  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES INTO SEWERS GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following
waste materials into any town sewer:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F;



      (2)   Any water or waste which may contain more than 100
milligrams per liter, by weight, of fat, oil or grease, exclusive of soap;



      (3)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



      (4)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;



      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, fish scales or fish offal, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure
or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the
flow of sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage
works;



      (6)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than
six or higher than nine, or having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage
works;



      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a biochemical oxygen demand
in excess of 300 milligrams per liter by weight;



      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing more than 500 milligrams
per liter by weight of suspended solids;



      (9)   Any waters or wastes having an objectionable color which
is not removable in the sewage treatment plant processes;



      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous
substance or any other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or create any hazard in the receiving stream at the sewage treatment
plant;



      (11)   Any water or waste that contains more than ten
milligrams per liter by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulphide,
sulphur dioxide or nitrous oxide or any gas or substance which, either singly
or by interaction with other waste, is capable of creating a public nuisance
or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewer for their maintenance and
repair;



      (12)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of a
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle the materials at the sewage treatment plant;



      (13)   Any water or waste which contains grease or oil or
other substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at
temperatures between 32 and 150°F;



      (14)   Any water or waste containing emulsified oil and grease
exceeding on analysis an average of 100 milligrams per liter (833 pounds per
million gallons) of other soluble matter; and



      (15)   Any radioactive materials in soluble ion form in
sufficient quantities to create a hazard to sewer workers, sewage works
personnel or the biological life in the sewage treatment plant.



   (B)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any
person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
admitted into the sanitary sewers by the town after approved pretreatment as
provided for in § 51.069.



(Prior Code, § 24-32)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.068  STORM WATER AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water
or unpolluted industrial or commercial process water into any sanitary sewer.



(Prior Code, § 24-33)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.069  CONDITIONAL DISCHARGES INTO SEWERS.



   (A)   Any waters or wastes discharged by any person which have the
following characteristics may be admitted into the sanitary sewers
conditionally:



      (1)   A B.O.D. greater than 300 milligrams per liter by weight;



      (2)   Containing suspended solids of more than 500 milligrams
per liter by weight; or



      (3)   Having other characteristics prohibited under § 51.067.



   (B)   Where waste discharges exceed these limits, the person
discharging the wastes shall provide, maintain and operate, at his or her
expense, the preliminary treatment as may be necessary to effect compliance
or he or she shall contract with the town whereby the town will receive the
untreated wastes and shall be compensated by the persons for providing the
necessary treatment at the town’s treatment works. The conditions under
which the town may agree to accept the untreated wastes shall be established
by the approving authority as applying to all persons under the contracts.



   (C)   Notice shall be given the approving authority when normal
operations of the industry will be interrupted for 24 hours or longer and
wastes will not be available for discharge or when a change of process is
contemplated.



(Prior Code, § 24-34)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)



§ 51.070  STRUCTURES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Storage tanks.



      (1)   In order to promote equalization of flows, each person
discharging a waste into the town’s sanitary sewers having the following
average daily volumes over a period of his or her normal work week shall
construct and maintain, at his or her own expense, a suitable storage tank,
reservoir or pond of the corresponding minimum volumes:



 


Volume of Waste Discharged in Average Gallons per Day

 

Minimum Volume of Storage Tank in Percentage of Daily Volume of Waste
Discharged




0 to 50,000

 

0




50,001 to 75,000

 

50




75,001 to 200,000

 

100




200,001 to 200,000

 

150




500,001 and above

 

200




 



      (2)   The storage tank shall have its outlet to the sewer
controlled by an approved device, the setting of flow rates being as directed
by the approving authority.



      (3)   Storage tank requirements may be waived by the approving
authority in cases where a constant rate of flow is discharged; provided that:



         (a)   The normal operating day extends over a 20- to
24-hour period and the rate of waste flow and character of load discharged is
such that, in the opinion of the approving authority, the installation of a
storage tank would not improve sewer and treatment plant loading conditions;
and



         (b)   All other requirements of this subchapter are
fulfilled or where the character of waste when held for the period of time
indicated would be detrimental to operation of the town sewerage system.



   (B)   Control manholes.



      (1)   Any person discharging industrial wastes into the
town’s sanitary sewers shall construct a suitable control manhole
downstream from any treatment, storage tank or other approved works, to
facilitate observations and provide means for measurements and sampling of
all wastes from the industry.



      (2)   The control manhole shall be constructed at a suitable
and satisfactory location and built in a manner approved by the approving
authority. The manhole shall be installed by the person discharging the
wastes at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to
be safe, accessible and in proper operating condition at all times.



      (3)   Control manhole requirements may be waived by the
approving authority:



         (a)   When a person discharging less than 20,000 gallons
of waste in a normal working day elects to be relieved of this requirement;
provided that:



            1.   The wastes meet all other requirements of
this subchapter, as determined by the approving authority;



            2.   All such wastes are discharged through a
single standard sewer manhole before entrance into the sanitary sewers; and



            3.   The person agrees to pay a surcharge equal to
the sewer service charge.



         (b)   When a person discharging 20,001 to 50,000 gallons
of waste in a normal working day elects to be relieved of this requirement;
provided that:



            1.   The person was operating at his or her
present location on or before the adoption of this subchapter;



            2.   The wastes meet all other requirements of
this subchapter, as determined by the approving authority;



            3.   All such wastes are discharged through a
single standard sewer manhole before entrance into the sanitary sewers; and



            4.   The person agrees to pay a surcharge equal to
the sewer service charge.



   (C)   Interceptors and traps.



      (1)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except
that, the interceptors or traps shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors or traps shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the approving authority and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



      (2)   Grease and oil interceptors or traps shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature.



      (3)   They shall be of substantial construction, water-tight
and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall
be gas-tight and water-tight.



      (4)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors
or traps shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times.



   (D)   Plans. Plans for the construction of the storage tank, control
manhole, interceptors and controlling devices shall be approved by the
approving authority prior to the beginning of construction.



(Prior Code, § 24-35)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)



§ 51.071  CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE TOWN.



   Any person owning or controlling premises located beyond the corporate
limits of the town and desiring to install a plumbing system for the purpose
of discharging domestic sewage and/or industrial waste into the sanitary
sewers of the town may do so by complying with the requirements of this
subchapter and by paying an additional permit fee and a sewer service charge
to be fixed by the Town Council; provided that, the person obtains a permit
therefor, as provided in § 51.066. Should the connections be made without
benefit of the permit, the person’s connections to the town water or sewer
system may be severed or disconnected as provided in § 51.066.



(Prior Code, § 24-36)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)



§ 51.072  MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.



   (A)   The volume of flow used in computing the industrial waste
surcharge shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the
records of meter reading maintained by the town. In the event that a person
discharging wastes into the town sanitary sewer system produces evidence to
the approving authority that more than 10% of the total annual volume of
water used for all purposes does not reach the town sanitary sewer, an
estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used in computing
charges may be agreed upon between the approving authority and the person
discharging industrial wastes into the sewer.



   (B)   Where the person discharging industrial wastes into the
sanitary sewers of the town procures any part or all of his or her water
supply from sources other than the town, all or parts of which is discharged
into the sanitary sewer, the person discharging the waste shall install and
maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type approved by the
approving authority for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow
to be charged.



(Prior Code, § 24-37)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)



§ 51.073  DETERMINATION OF CHARACTER AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTES.



   (A)   The industrial waste of each person discharging the waste into
the town sanitary sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection; and a
determination of character and concentration of the wastes may be made
quarterly, or oftener as may be deemed necessary, by the approving authority
or his or her authorized assistants.



   (B)   Samples shall be collected in a manner as to be representative
of the actual quality of the wastes. The laboratory methods used in the
examination of the wastes shall be those set forth in the current edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, as published by the
American Public Health Association, copies of which are on file at the wastes
treatment plant laboratory for inspection by any interested parties.



   (C)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
industrial wastes by the approving authority or his or her authorized
assistants shall be binding as a basis for charges.



(Prior Code, § 24-38)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)



§ 51.074  DAMAGING AND THE LIKE OF TESTING AND EXAMINATION EQUIPMENT.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any equipment or
materials belonging to the town used for the purpose of making tests or
examinations and left upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into
the sewers. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest undercharge of disorderly conduct.



(Prior Code, § 24-39)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.075  AUTHORITY OF INSPECTOR TO ENTER FOR INSPECTION; AUTHORITY OF
INSPECTOR TO EXCLUDE CERTAIN WASTES.



   (A)   The approving authority and other duly authorized employees of
the town, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted
to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (B)   Authority is hereby granted to the approving authority to
temporarily exclude any industrial waste, whether pretreated or not, from the
sanitary sewers whenever, in his or her opinion, the action is necessary for
the purpose of determining the effects of the wastes upon the sewers and
sewage treatment works.



(Prior Code, § 24-40)  (Ord. passed 5-13-1975)



FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTROL



§ 51.090  SCOPE AND PURPOSE.



   To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions
from contribution and accumulation of fats, oils and greases into the sewer
system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food
preparation and serving facilities. Clogged pipes must be cleaned out
manually by the Public Works Department resulting in an unnecessary burden on
the town as a result of having to employ the time, manpower and equipment
needed to do the cleanout and restore the sewer system to normal operability.



(Ord. passed 6-14-2005)



§ 51.091  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COOKING ESTABLISHMENTS. Those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation
activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling,
sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching,
roasting, toasting or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing,
barbecuing and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot,
non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.



   FATS, OILS AND GREASES. Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical
test procedures established in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as may be amended from
time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as GREASE or GREASES.



   GREASE TRAP OR INTERCEPTOR. A device for separating and retaining
waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the
trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These
devices also serve to collect settable solids, generated by and from food
preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. GREASE TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS
are sometimes referred to herein as GREASE INTERCEPTORS.



   MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY. The design features of a grease interceptor
and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain
greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer.



   NON-COOKING ESTABLISHMENTS. Those establishments primarily engaged in
the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of
cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs preparation and
serving establishments.



   PRETREATMENT STAFF. Consists of town employees or individuals
authorized by the town.



   USER. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional
limits of the town, who contributes causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute the
wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.



(Ord. passed 6-14-2005)



§ 51.092  GREASE INTERCEPTOR MAINTENANCE, RECORD KEEPING AND GREASE REMOVAL.



   (A)   Existing and proposed users shall install grease interceptors
as required by the Director or his or her designee. Grease interceptors shall
be installed at the user’s expense, when the user operates a cooking
establishment. Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooking, cold
dairy, frozen foodstuffs, industrial, commercial or residential
establishments when they are deemed necessary by the director for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease. No user shall allow wastewater
discharge concentration of oil, fats or grease from subject grease
interceptor to exceed 100 milligrams per liter. All grease interceptors shall
be of a type design, and capacity approved by the Director or his or her
designee and shall be readily and easily accessible for user cleaning and
town inspection. All grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of
accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design
capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but not less often
than every 30 days, unless a grease interceptor variance permit has been
issued. Users who are required to pass water through a grease interceptor
shall:



      (1)   Provide a minimum 1,000 gallon tank:



         (a)   The following table shall determine the size of
the grease separation tank;



 

Facility
 
Grease Tank Size


Salads only, subs, take-out grilled food
 
1,000 to 1,500 gallons depending on size


Take-out deep fried foods
 
1,500 to 2,000 gallons depending on size


Pasta and pizza
 
1,500 to 2,000 gallons depending on size


Sit-down full menu restaurants < 100 seats
 
1,500 to 2,000 gallons depending on size


Sit-down full menu restaurants > 100 seats
 
2,000 to 3,000 gallons depending on size



 



         (b)   Grease tank size for facilities other than those
mentioned above shall be determined by the Director or his or her designee.
Twenty percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor shall be allowed
for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified hereafter as a “sludge
pocket”.



      (2)   Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as
required, but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the user’s
expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials
such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells,
towels, rags and the like, which could settle into this pocket and thereby
reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor;



      (3)   Accept the following conditions: if any skimmed or
pumped wastes or other materials removed from grease interceptor are treated
in any fashion onsite and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an
activity of and after the on-site treatment, the user shall be responsible
for the attainment of established grease numerical limit consistent with and
contained herein on all discharges of wastewater from the grease interceptor
into the town sanitary sewer collection and treatment system;



      (4)   Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to
maintain the device such that attainment of the grease limit is consistently
achieved. CONSISTENT shall mean any wastewater sample taken from the grease
interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment described
herein;



      (5)   With the approval of the Director, an establishment may
request an alternate to an out-of-building grease interceptor due to exterior
space constraints. The request for an alternative location shall contain the
following information:



         (a)   Location of town sewer main and easement in
relation to available exterior space outside building; and



         (b)   Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common
plumbing for all services at that site.



      (6)   Understand and agree that the use of biological
additives as a grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon
prior written approval by the Director. Any establishment using this method
of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in a manner that
attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the
trap’s outlet, is consistently achieved;



      (7)   Understand and agree that the use of automatic grease
removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by
the Director, the Lead Plumbing Inspector of the town and the County
Department of Health. Any establishment using this equipment shall operate
the system in a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge
limit, as measured from the unit’s outlet, is consistently achieved; and



      (8)   Understand and agree that the Director reserves the
right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based
on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor
performance, facility site and building plan review and to require repairs
to, or modification or replacement of the traps.



   (B)   The user shall maintain a written record of trap maintenance
for three years. All records will be available for inspection by the town at
all times.



   (C)   No non-grease-laden sources are allowed to be connected to
sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service.



   (D)   (1)   A variance to the scheduled maintenance requirement
of this chapter is to provide specific changes to the scheduling of grease
separation device maintenance and servicing. The variance is intended to give
food service establishments an avenue to provide substantial evidence to
reducing maintenance of grease separation device servicing. All other
requirements of the town’s sewer provisions, this subchapter and any other
requirements remain in effect.



      (2)   Food service establishments shall provide a written
explanation for the need to vary from this subchapter. All establishments
requesting a variance shall agree to conform to the variance study
procedures. The town has the right to discontinue the variance study at any
time the grease separation device discharge adversely affects the sanitary
sewer system and treatment works.



      (3)   Fees associated with the request for variance study will
include a variance request fee of $195, which includes estimated
reimbursement costs associated with the study. All fees are non-refundable
and shall be paid in advance. Reimbursement of the town personnel shall be at
an hourly rate of $50 per hour, and any additional costs incurred through the
analysis of wastewater.



         (a)   If the following occurs anytime after a variance
permit is granted, the facility shall revert back to requirements set forth
by this subchapter:



            1.   Grease separation device FOG concentrations
exceeding the limits set by the town’s FOG Control Ordinance;



            2.   Grease separation device discharge adversely
affects the sewer collection system and treatment works;



            3.   Solids accumulation is greater than 20% of
the total water depth from the grease separation device’s interior floor to
the static or working water level, at any point within the grease separation
device;



            4.   FOG accumulation is greater than or equal to
three inches at any point within the grease separation device;



            5.   Facility significantly increases food service
production or seating capacity;



            6.   Facility employs the use of a garbage
disposal of food pulp that is connected to the grease separation control
device;



            7.   Facility causes or contributes to a sanitary
sewer blockage or overflow; and



            8.   Change in ownership. Variance is
non-transferable.



         (b)   All food service establishments requesting
variance to this subchapter shall conform to the following conditions and
schedules.



            1.   The applicant shall provide the town written
explanation as to the need of the variance.



            2.   The applicant agrees that any request for
variance is considered and implemented under the discretion of the town and
can be denied for any reason.



            3.   Variance request fee shall be paid in full by
check to the amount of $195 before variance study is started.



            4.   Applicant shall conform to the pumping
requirements set by the town during the variance study. Failure to follow
pumping requirements will result in variance study discontinuation.



            5.   Applicant agrees to the pumping schedule
after variance study is complete, even in the event the town requires a
service schedule greater than once every 30 days.



            6.   Applicant shall contact the Town Pretreatment
Section two working days prior to the scheduled grease separation device
cleaning.



            7.   Facilities that desire the use of biological
or chemical treatment shall provide the town all information supplied by the
manufacturer of type, solution makeup, dosing schedule and service
agreements. All facilities using biological or chemical treatment shall be
required to maintain a separation device service schedule set by this
subchapter or Town Variance Study.



            8.   During the variance study all limits and
conditions of this subchapter apply. All violations of this subchapter will
be addressed during and after the variance study.



            9.   The town will not be responsible for any FOG
discharges, odor or blockages during or after the variance study.



         (c)   Procedure for Variance Study:



            1.   The applicant shall submit to the Town Public
Works Department Pretreatment Section a written explanation as to the needs
of the service schedule variance to this chapter. This letter shall include a
copy of a current menu, total customer seating capacity, previous six months
grease pump out receipts and grease separation device size.



            2.   After submission of request to the town, the
pretreatment section will review all information submitted and will contact
the facility by mail accepting or denying the variance request.



            3.   The facility shall schedule with a service
company and the town a time during normal business hours (Monday - Friday) to
have the subject grease separation device cleaned. It is the responsibility
of the food establishment to have the grease separation device total pumped
and sufficiently cleaned by a servicing company. Variance study cannot be
conducted unless the grease separation device is properly cleaned.



            4.   The applicant shall contact the Town’s
Pretreatment Section two working days prior to the scheduled grease
separation device cleaning.



            5.   Once the grease separation device is cleaned
properly and refilled with water from the facility, pretreatment staff will
conduct a visual inspection of the grease separation device and verify that
all components of the grease separation device are in place and are in proper
working order. If the grease separation device is determined to be adequate
designed and installed the staff will collect, within 72 hours of initial
pumping, a baseline FOG sample from the grease separation device’s effluent
sampling point. Baseline grease and solids levels will be measured in all
compartments.



            6.   Two weeks after initial sampling,
pretreatment staff will obtain a second effluent FOG sample, and measure
grease and solids levels in all compartments of the subject separation device.



            7.   Two weeks after second sampling, pretreatment
staff will obtain a third effluent FOG sample, and measure grease and solids
levels in all compartments.



            8.   Additional monitoring events may be required
if deemed necessary by the town. Variance studies shall not exceed a period
of 90 days.



            9.   After a minimum of three site samples are
collected and all sampling results are obtained, the town will analyze all
data. All samples analyzed by contract laboratories will include the cost of
analysis and a 20% administrative fee. The town will not grant a grease
interceptor service schedule variance until the town receives payment for all
wastewater analysis costs, administrative fees and any costs incurred by the
town as a result of the study. After all data is reviewed by the town, the
town will submit in writing the results of the variance study to the
applicant requesting the study.



         (d)   The town will not be responsible for any FOG
discharge, odor or blockages occurring during or after the variance study. At
no time during the variance study shall the grease separation device be
pumped, except by direct approval of the town.



   (E)   Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following
adoption of this chapter, although installation of grease interceptors will
be required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this
subchapter for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from grease
interceptors. If, during or after this one-year period an obstruction of a
town sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an
impact on the environment is realized and that the overflow or failure of the
sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part
or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the town’s sewer main(s), of
the town of edenton will take appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated
in the town’s industrial pretreatment enforcement plan and sewer use
provisions, against the generator or contributor of the grease.



   (F)   If, after the one-year grace period, the user fails to achieve
limits on grease discharges, the town will take appropriate enforcement
actions, as stipulated in the town’s industrial pretreatment enforcement
plan and sewer use provisions, against the generator or contributor of the
grease.



   (G)   Access manholes, with minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be
provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend
at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water
inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers
to facilitate inspection, grease removal and wastewater sampling activities.



(Ord. passed 6-14-2005)



WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PLAN



§ 51.100  INTRODUCTION.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide specific
information to those responsible for the declaration of official phases of
water supply shortage situations, and for the implementation of voluntary,
mandatory and emergency water conservation measures and restrictions via the
Water Shortage Response Plan (WSRP).



   (B)   This subchapter should be accessible to all personnel
responsible for water shortage response at all times.



   (C)   In addition, this subchapter should be made available to the
North Carolina Public Water Supply (NCPWS) upon request.



   (D)   In the event that the information below should change or
become dated, this WSRP should be updated immediately.



(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)



§ 51.101  RESPONSIBLE AUTHORITY FOR ENACTING THE WSRP.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall enact the following water shortage
response provisions whenever the trigger conditions outlined below are met.
In his or her absence, the Public Works Director will assume this role.



   (B)   All local governments, water corporations and companies
purchasing water from the town will adopt and enforce the WSRP as a condition
of water sales agreements.



(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)



§ 51.102  PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF WATER USE POLICIES AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Public information regarding voluntary, mandatory and
emergency conservation policies, restrictions and ordinance violation
penalties should be concise, accurate, current and easily accessible to the
general public affected by this WSRP.



      (1)   Press releases should be done in “plain” and “easy
to understand” language.



      (2)   Multiple public outreach options should be used.



      (3)   The same media sources should be used for all phase
updates during a period of water shortage.



      (4)   Options may include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Newspaper ads;



         (b)   TV ads (local news, interviews);



         (c)   Radio (public service announcements);



         (d)   Independent mailings to major users;



         (e)   Water bill stuffers;



         (f)   School presentations;



         (g)   Flyers/handouts;



         (h)   Signs and posters.



      (5)   See § 51.104 for conservation measures and restrictions.



      (6)   See § 51.105(E) for variances.



      (7)   See § 51.106 for ordinance violation penalties.



   (B)   The WSRP shall be made available to the public for review and
comment 30 days prior to adoption by the governing board of the town.



(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)



§ 51.103  IDENTIFICATION OF WATER USE CLASSIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Class 1: Essential water uses.  The following drinking water
uses have been determined to be essential water uses of potable water
provided by the town in the event of a water supply shortage.



      (1)   Domestic use.  Water necessary to sustain human life
and the lives of domestic pets, and to maintain minimum standards of hygiene
and sanitation.



      (2)   Health care facilities, assisted living homes,
retirement homes.  Patient care and rehabilitation.



      (3)   Public use.



         (a)   Firefighting, including testing and drills by the
Fire Department if performed in the interest of public safety, and if
approved by the governing body of the town.



         (b)   Flushing of sewers and hydrants as needed to
ensure public health and safety, and if approved by the governing body of the
town.



   (B)   Class 2: Socially or economically important uses of water. 
The following drinking water uses have been determined to be socially or
economically important uses of water provided by the town in the event of a
water supply shortage.



      (1)   Domestic use: all domestic uses other than those
included in Classes 1 and 3.



         (a)   Home water use, including kitchen, bathroom and
laundry use.



         (b)   Minimal watering of vegetable gardens.



         (c)   Watering of trees where necessary to preserve them.



      (2)   Commercial, agricultural, industrial and institutional
uses.



         (a)   Outdoor commercial watering (public or private)
using conservation measures, and to the extent that sources of water other
than fresh water are not available to use.



         (b)   Irrigation for commercial vegetable gardens and
fruit orchards or the maintenance of livestock.



         (c)   Watering by commercial nurseries at a minimum
level necessary to maintain stock.



         (d)   Water use by arboretums and public gardens of
national, state or regional significance where necessary to preserve
specimens.



         (e)   Use of fresh water at a minimum rate necessary to
implement vegetation following earth-moving, where such vegetation is
required by law or regulation.



         (f)   Watering of golf course greens.



         (g)   Filling and operation of swimming pools.



            1.   Residential pools serving more than 25
dwelling units.



            2.   Pools used by health care facilities for
patient care and rehabilitation.



            3.   Municipal pools.



         (h)   Commercial car and truck washes.



         (i)   Commercial Laundromats.



         (j)   Restaurants, clubs and eating places.



         (k)   Air conditioning.



            1.   Refilling for start up at the beginning of
the cooling season.



            2.   Make-up of water during the cooling season.



            3.   Refilling specifically approved by health
officials and the municipal governing body, where the system has been drained
for health protection or repair purposes.



         (l)   Schools, churches, motels/hotels and similar
commercial establishments.



         (m)   Manufacturing/industrial processes critical to
operation of facilities.



   (C)   Class 3: Non-essential uses of water.  The following drinking
water uses have been determined to be non-essential uses of water provided by
the town in the event of a water supply shortage.



      (1)   Ornamental purposes.  Fountains, reflecting pools, and
artificial waterfalls.



      (2)   Outdoor non-commercial watering (public or private).



         (a)   Gardens (except vegetable gardens), lawns, parks,
golf courses (except greens), playing fields and other recreational areas.



         (b)   Filling and operation of recreational swimming
pools serving fewer than 25 dwellings.



         (c)   Non-commercial washing of motor vehicles.



         (d)   Serving water in restaurants, clubs or eating
places except by specific request.



         (e)   Air conditioning.  Refilling cooling towers after
draining except as specified in Class 2.



      (3)   Public use.



         (a)   Fire hydrants.  Any purpose, including use of
sprinkler caps and testing fire apparatus and for Fire Department drills,
except as listed in Class 1.



         (b)   Flushing of sewers and hydrants except as listed
in Class 1



(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)



§ 51.104  CONSERVATION MEASURES AND RESTRICTIONS.



   The general public should be informed of the following conservation
measures for indoor, outdoor, health care facility, assisted living,
retirement home, institutional and industrial use.



   (A)   Phase 1: Voluntary conservation measures.  When the town
declares that voluntary conservation conditions exist, the general public
should conserve as much water, and shall be encouraged to adhere to the
following measures.



      (1)   Indoor use.



         (a)   Use dishwashers only when they are full.



         (b)   The use of disposable and biodegradable dishes is
encouraged.



         (c)   Use washing machines only when full loads of
laundry are to be washed.



         (d)   Turn off faucets while brushing teeth, shaving,
washing dishes, and the like.



         (e)   Reduce water used per flush by installing toilet
tank displacement inserts.



            1.   A plastic jug may often be used as an
alternative.



            2.   Do not use bricks: they disintegrate when
soaked, and the resulting grit hinders closing of the flap valve.



         (f)   Do not use the toilet as a garbage disposal.



         (g)   Use sink and tub stoppers to avoid wasting water.



         (h)   Keep a bottle of chilled water in the refrigerator
for drinking, to avoid running water until it's cold.



         (i)   Fix leaky faucets, toilets and water-using
appliances. Faucets can usually be fixed cheaply and quickly by replacing
washers.



         (j)   Take shorter showers and shallow baths. Shorter
showers are recommended over baths.



         (k)   Don't use a garbage disposal.



         (l)   Use non-phosphate detergent and save laundry water
for lawns and plants.



         (m)   Adapt plumbing with flow-restricting or other
water-saving devices. These are usually inexpensive and easy to install.



         (n)   Limit hours of operation of water-cooled air
conditioners.



      (2)   Outdoor use.



         (a)   Lawns.



            1.   Limit lawn and garden watering to that which
is necessary for plants to survive.



            2.   Water before 10:00 a.m. to reduce evaporation.



            3.   Water only when lawn shows signs of wilt.
Grass that springs back when stepped on does not need water.



            4.   Water thoroughly, not frequently: long enough
to soak roots.



               a.   A light sprinkling evaporates quickly
and encourages shallow root systems.



               b.   Water slowly to avoid runoff.



            5.   Don't let the sprinkler run any longer than
necessary. Use an alarm clock or stove timer to remind you to shut off
sprinklers that don't have timers.



            6.   Allow a maximum of one inch of water per week
on your lawn. To measure, place cake tins outside to collect rain and water
from sprinklers.



            7.   Use pistol-grip nozzles on hoses to avoid
waste when watering flowers and shrubs.



            8.   Aerate lawns by punching holes six inches
apart. This allows water to reach roots rather than run off surfaces.



            9.   Position sprinklers to water the lawn, not
the pavement.



            10.   Keep sprinkler heads clean to prevent uneven
watering.



            11.   Adjust hose to simulate a gentle rain.
Sprinklers that produce a fine mist waste water through evaporation.



            12.   Know how to turn off an automatic sprinkler
system in case of rain.



         (b)   Vegetables and flower gardens.



            1.   Water deeply, slowly and weekly. Most
vegetables require moisture to a depth of six to eight inches.



            2.   Keep soil loose so water can penetrate easily.



            3.   Keep weeds out to reduce competition for
water.



            4.   Put the water where you want it and avoid
evaporation by using soil-soakers or slow-running hoses, not sprinklers.



         (c)   Trees and shrubs.



            1.   Water deeply using a soil-soaker or drip
irrigation.



            2.   Water only when needed. Check the depth of
soil dryness by digging with a trowel.



            3.   Mulch to reduce evaporation. A two-inch to
three-inch layer of wood chips, pine needles, grass clippings, or straw keeps
the soil cool in summer.



            4.   Dig troughs around plants to catch and retain
water.



            5.   Water trees growing in full sun more often
than those in shade.



            6.   Do not use sprinklers. Apply water directly
at base.



            7.   Do not fertilize during the summer.
Fertilizing increases a plant's need for water.



            8.   Postpone planting until fall or spring when
there is generally less need for water.



            9.   Install trickle-drip-irrigation systems close
to the roots of your plants.



               a.   By dripping water slowly, the system
doesn't spray water in to the air.



               b.   Use soil probes for large trees.



            10.   Water when cloudy.



      (3)   Other uses.



         a.   Limit car washing to a minimum.



         b.   Do not allow children to play with hose or
sprinklers.



         c.   Temporarily delay new landscape work.



         d.   Do not wash outside areas such as sidewalks,
patios, parking lots, and the like.



         e.   Catch rainfall for watering by placing containers
under drain spouts.



         f.   Use leftover household water if available.



         g.   Determine the amount of water being used outdoors
by comparing water bills for summer and winter.



      (4)   Health care facility, assisted living, and retirement
home use.



         a.   Reduce laundry usage or services by changing
linens, and the like only when necessary to preserve the health of patients
or residents.



         b.   Use disposable food service items.



      (5)   Institutional and industrial use.



         a.   Identify and repair all leaky fixtures and
water-using equipment. Give special attention to equipment connected directly
to water lines, such as processing machines, steam-using machines, washing
machines, water-cooled air conditioners, and furnaces.



         b.   Assure that valves and solenoids that control water
flows are shut off completely when the water-using cycle is not engaged.



         c.   Adjust water-using equipment to use the minimum
amount of water required to achieve its stated purpose.



         d.   Shorten rinse cycles for laundry machines as much
as possible; implement lower water levels wherever possible.



         e.   For processing, cooling and other uses, either
re-use water or use water from sources that would not adversely affect public
water supplies.



         f.   Install toilet-tank-displacement inserts; place
flow restrictors in shower heads and faucets; close down automatic flushes
overnight.



         g.   Install automatic flushing valves to use as little
water as possible or to cycle at longer intervals.



         h.   Place water-saving posters and literature where
employees, students, patients, customers, and the like will have access to
them.



         i.   Check meters on a frequent basis to determine
consumption patterns.



         j.   Review usage patterns to see where other savings
can be made.



   (B)   Phase 2: Mandatory conservation measures and restrictions. 
When the town declares that mandatory conservation conditions exist, the
general public shall be required to adhere to the following restrictions, in
addition to the voluntary guidelines already in effect.



      (1)   All Class 3 water uses are banned during this phase.



      (2)   No residential washing of cars or any other type of
automobiles or transport equipment.



      (3)   No washing of outside areas such as sidewalks,
driveways, patios, streets, service station aprons, parking lots, office
buildings, homes.



      (4)   Watering of lawns will be permitted only once per week
per customer and only from the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.



      (5)   Vegetable gardens and food trees should be given minimal
amounts of water on an individual basis only.



      (6)   Do not water inedible plants.



      (7)   Do not use sprinklers.



   (C)   Phase 3: Water shortage emergency measures and restrictions. 
When the town declares that water shortage emergency conditions exist, the
general public shall be required to adhere to the following restrictions, in
addition to the voluntary and mandatory guidelines already in effect.



      (1)   All Class 2 and Class 3 water uses are banned during
this phase.



      (2)   Turn off shower while soaping up.



      (3)   Do not use water outside for any use other than drinking
or emergencies such as a fire.



      (4)   Use of disposable eating utensils and plates is strongly
encouraged for home use and at all eating establishments.



(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)



§ 51.105  DECLARATION OF PHASED CONSERVATION MEASURES AND RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Use of the Drought Monitor.  The Town Utility Director will
monitor regional water resources conditions through the North Carolina
Drought Monitor (http://www.ncwater.org/drouqht/). When the Drought Monitor
indicates impending drought conditions, the Utility Director will increase
monitoring of water demand and the available supply of water.



   (B)   Phase 1: Declaration of voluntary conservation.



      (1)   Voluntary conservation shall be initiated when a
potential water supply shortage exists, which is indicated when:



         (a)   Daily use is greater than the 18-hour production
of the wells one day within a 30-day period; or



         (b)   A 20% reduction in the seasonal normal distance
between the static water level in the well and the pump intake; or



         (c)   Consideration will also be given when the US
Drought Monitor indicates abnormally dry or moderate drought in the town.



      (2)   When the governing body of the town finds that a
potential water supply shortage is indicated, it shall be empowered to
declare by adoption of an ordinance (WSRO) that voluntary conservation
conditions exist, and that the Director of Public Works, on a daily basis,
monitors the supply and demand upon that supply.



      (3)   In addition, the governing body is authorized to call
upon all water customers to employ voluntary water conservation measures to
limit water use (especially Class 3 uses) and eliminate the waste of water.



         (a)   This resolution shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the area that qualifies under G.S. § 1-597, and
may be publicized through the general news media or any other appropriate
method for making such resolutions public.



         (b)   A water shortage advisory shall be issued.



      (4)   During Phase 1 water use restrictions, the reduction
goal for systemwide daily average use will be 5%.



   (C)   Phase 2: Declaration of mandatory conservation.



      (1)   Mandatory conservation shall be initiated when water
supplies are consistently below seasonal averages, and the continued decline
of water supplies would result in a water supply shortage due to an
inadequate water supply to meet normal needs. This is indicated when:



         (a)   Daily use is greater than the 18-hour production
of the wells for two days or more within a 30-day period; or



         (b)   A 40% reduction in the seasonal normal distance
between the static water level in the well and the pump intake; or



         (c)   Equipment failure, facility failure or
contamination in raw water quality results in discontinued use of one or more
groundwater wells, resulting in pumping times greater than 18 hours for the
remaining wells for a period less than 30 days; or



         (d)   Consideration will also be given when the US
Drought Monitor indicates moderate or severe drought in the town.



      (2)   When the governing body of the town finds raw water
supplies to be consistently below seasonal averages, and if they continue to
decline and may not be adequate to meet normal needs, it shall be empowered
to declare by adoption of an ordinance (WSRO) that mandatory conservation
conditions exist.



         (a)   The governing body of the town shall continue to
encourage voluntary water conservation measures defined under the voluntary
conservation declaration, and further shall impose a ban on all Class 3,
non-essential water uses for the duration of the shortage, until it is
declared ended by ordinance of the governing board.



         (b)   Publication of these ordinances shall follow the
provisions declaration in § 51.102.



         (c)   A water shortage alert shall be issued.



      (4)   During Phase 2 water use restrictions, the reduction
goal for systemwide daily average use will be 15%.



   (D)   Phase 3: Declaration of a water shortage emergency.



      (1)   A water shortage emergency shall be initiated when raw
water supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs and a
serious water supply shortage exists. This is indicated when:



         (a)   Daily use is greater than the 18-hour production
of the wells for four days or more within a 30-day period; or



         (b)   A 60% reduction in the seasonal normal distance
between the static water level in the well and the pump intake; or



         (c)   Equipment failure, facility failure or
contamination in raw water quality results in discontinued use of one or more
groundwater wells, resulting in pumping times greater than 18 hours for the
remaining wells for a period greater than or equal to 30 days; or



         (d)   Consideration will also be given when the US
Drought Monitor indicates severe or extreme drought in the town.



      (2)   When the governing body of the town finds that raw water
supplies are below the level necessary to meet normal needs and a serious
water supply shortage exists, it shall be empowered to declare by adoption of
an ordinance (WSRO) that a water shortage emergency exists.



         (a)   Specific Class 1, essential water uses shall be
identified as targets for voluntary conservation initiatives.



         (b)   Also, all  Class 2, socially or economically
important water uses shall be banned in addition to Class 3, non-essential
water uses.



         (c)   These restrictions shall continue until the
emergency is declared ended by ordinance of the governing body.



         (d)   Publication of these ordinances shall follow the
provisions in § 51.102.



         (e)   A water shortage emergency shall be issued.



      (3)   During Phase 3 water use restrictions, the reduction
goal for systemwide daily average use will be 25%.



   (E)   Variances. 



      (1)   Customers seeking variance from the conservation
requirements in the WSRP should submit to the town a written request for
variance, containing the following items:



         (a)   Name;



         (b)   Address;



         (c)   Utilities account number;



         (d)   Date of request;



         (e)   Proposed duration for requested variance;



         (f)   Detailed explanation for requested variance; and



         (g)   Justification for approval of the requested
variance.



      (2)   Variances shall be evaluated by the Director of Public
Works.



      (3)   The Director of Public Works will then make a
recommendation to the governing body of the town.



      (4)   The governing body of the town shall make the final
decision within 30 days after receipt of the request.



   (F)   Return to normal.



      (1)   When water shortage conditions have abated and the
situation is returning to normal, water conservation measures employed during
each phase should be decreased in reverse order of implementation.



      (2)   Permanent measures directed toward long-term monitoring
and conservation should be implemented or continued so that the community
will be in a better position to prevent shortages and to respond to recurring
water shortage conditions.



(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)



§ 51.106  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The provision of the Water Shortage Response Plan will be
enforced by the Public Works Department and the Police Department.



   (B)   Violators may be reported by calling any town department phone
line.



   (C)   Citations are assessed according to the following schedule,
depending on the number of prior violations and current level of water
shortage.



 


Water Shortage Level

 
First Violation
 
Second Violation
 
Third Violation


Voluntary Reductions
 
N/A
 
N/A
 
N/A


Mandatory Reductions (Stages 2 and 3)
 
Warning
 
$250
 
Discontinuation of service


Emergency Reductions
 
$250
 
Discontinuation of service
 
Discontinuation of service


Water Rationing
 
$500
 
Discontinuation of service
 
Discontinuation of service



 



   (D)   Drought surcharge rates are effective in Stages 3, 4 and 5.



(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)



§ 51.107  EVALUATION AND REVISION.



   (A)   Evaluation of Plan effectiveness.



      (1)   In order to maintain the effectiveness and
sustainability of the Water Shortage Response Plan, it is imperative to
maintain accurate water use records. Water use records should be collected
and monitored prior to, during, and after implementation of conservation
restrictions.



      (2)   In evaluating the effectiveness of the Water Shortage
Response Plan, the Public Works Director will compare historical use data to
determine if the reduction amount is accurate. If reduction amounts are
inadequate, the WSRP should be updated, with further conservation
restrictions and triggers that initiate water conservation requirements
earlier.



      (3)   The Public Works Director will monitor the frequency
that the WRSP conservation restrictions are implemented, and recommend
revisions to the governing board to correct for inappropriate water
restrictions.



      (4)   The Public Works Director will monitor the water
transmission system and water use records to determine if events outside of
the scope of the WSRP require implementation of the water conservation
methods in the WSRP. The triggers activating water conservation restrictions
should be updated to reflect these observations.



      (5)   The Public Works Director will record citations and
violations of the water conservation requirements. If citations and violation
numbers are excessive, the WSRP may be revised to show additional public
announcements, or to increase enforcement as described in § 51.106.



   (B)   Revisions to the Water Shortage Response Plan.



      (1)   In the event that evaluation of the WSRP indicates a
revision is needed, the Public Works Director shall make recommendation to
the governing body of the town.



      (2)   The governing body of the town will then consider
revisions to the WSRP, based on the observations and data provided by the
Public Works Director.



      (3)   Customers will have multiple opportunities to comment on
the provisions of the Water Shortage Response Plan.



         (a)   First, a draft plan will be available at Town Hall
for customers to view.



         (b)   A notice will be included in customer water bills
notifying them of such.



         (c)   The Plan will be posted on the town's website.



         (d)   All subsequent revisions to the draft plan will be
published at least 30 days prior to an adoption vote by the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)



CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL



§ 51.120  PURPOSE OF POLICY.



   The purpose of this policy statement is to articulate and adopt an
official policy that will establish a cross connection control policy for the
town. The policy will:



   (A)   Ensure that the town's potable public water supply is
protected from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating
within each consumer's water system such contaminants, waterborne health
hazards and other significant pollutants, which could backflow into the
public water systems.



   (B)   Ensure that existing cross connections, actual or potential,
between the consumer's potable water system(s) and non-potable water
system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems are eliminated or
controlled.



   (C)   Provide an inspection program of cross connection control,
which will systematically and effectively control all actual or potential
cross connections, which may be installed in the future.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2013)



§ 51.121  COVERAGE.



   This policy, upon adoption by the Town Council, shall be applicable to
all water system customers of the town that are served by the town's public
water distribution system, until such time as the policy statement is
altered, modified, or rescinded by the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2013)



§ 51.122  POLICY.



   (A)   This policy defines the Town of Edenton as the water purveyor
in the elimination of all cross connections within its public potable water
supply.



   (B)   The cross connection control program, which is based on the
cross connection control ordinance and on this policy, shall ensure that,
after the effective date of the cross connection control ordinance:



      (1)   That all new residential and non-residential water
services requiring water from the town's public water system, shall have an
appropriate backflow prevention device installed prior to water service
activation.



      (2)   That all existing non-residential and irrigation water
services which do not have an approved backflow prevention assembly be
required to retrofit the approved backflow prevention assembly within 120
days following written notification from the town.



      (3)   That all existing non-residential water services and
irrigation which have an approved backflow prevention assembly shall
immediately begin, upon written notification from the town, an annual testing
and certification program for their approved backflow prevention assembly.



      (4)   That all existing single family residential water
services connected to the town's public potable water system, be required to
retrofit the appropriate backflow prevention device as a water meter
replacement occurs for each such water service, beginning approximately six
months after the effective date of this policy.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2013)



§ 51.123  CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM.



   (A)   Application, purpose, authorization. This section applies to
all persons who use, or connect in any way to, the public potable water
distribution system of the town of Edenton (“Public Water System”). The
purpose of this subchapter is to protect the public water system from
contaminants and pollution “backflowing” into the public water system
from private water systems by:



      (1)   Requiring the installation of backflow prevention
assemblies which will minimize the possibility of contamination by confining
within the customer's private water system those contaminants or pollutants,
which could, under adverse conditions, back flow or back siphon through
uncontrolled cross connections into the public water system; and



      (2)   Establishing a backflow prevention program.



   (B)   Definitions. As used in this subchapter, the following
definitions apply:



      (1)   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (Sometimes “BPA”).  A
device used to prevent backflow into the public water system from a
customer's water service connection. The type of BPA required by this
subchapter to be used shall depend on whether the hazard, which can be an
existing hazard or a potential hazard, presented by backflow from a
particular private system is a “pollution” (“non-health”) hazard or a
“contamination” (“health”) hazard. An “approved” backflow
prevention assembly is a BPA that has been approved by the American Society
of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) or the American Water Works Association (AWWA),
or USC, or the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research, whichever is most restrictive.



      (2)   CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TECHNICIAN
(sometimes "technician"). Any person who has received from the state a
certificate to install, test, repair, overhaul, or maintain approved backflow
prevention assemblies by holding a current NC cross-connection certification
(certified tester).



      (3)   CONSUMER. Any customer of the town's public water
system, or any person, firm, or entity using or receiving water from the
town's public water system or owning or possessing property or facilities
that receive water from, or connecting to the town's public water system.



      (4)   CONTAMINATION HAZARD. The term “contamination
hazard” represents the type of existing or potential hazard presented by a
private system and means an existing or potential impairment of the quality
of the water, which creates a potential or actual hazard to the public health
through the introduction of hazardous or toxic substances or waterborne
health hazards in the form of physical or chemical contaminants or biological
organisms and pathogens.



      (5)   CROSS CONNECTION. Any unprotected actual or potential
connection or structural arrangement between the town's public water system
and any other pipe, conduit, source or system through which it is possible to
introduce any contamination or pollution other than the intended potable
water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other
temporary or permanent devices or arrangements through which or because of
which backflow can or may occur are considered to be cross connections.



      (6)   DEGREE OF HAZARD. Whether the hazard or potential hazard
is a “pollution” (non-health) hazard, or a “contamination” (health)
hazard. The degree of hazard shall be determined by the town from the
evaluation of conditions within a private water system and the use to which a
property connected to public system is put.



      (7)   HEALTH HAZARD. An actual or potential threat of
contamination of a physical, chemical, biological, pathogenic or toxic nature
to the public or private water system to such a degree or intensity that
there would be a danger to health. Examples of waterborne health hazards
include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Physical: Radioisotopes/radionuclides;



         (b)   Chemical: Lead, mercury and other heavy metals,
organic compounds, other toxins and hazardous substances;



         (c)   Biological: Microorganisms and pathogens like
Cryptosporidium, typhoid, cholera and  E. Coli.



      (8)   IMMINENT HAZARD. The term “imminent hazard” means a
health hazard situation that is likely to cause an immediate threat to human
life, an immediate threat of serious physical injury, an immediate threat of
serious adverse health effects, or a serious risk of irreparable damage to
the environment if no immediate action is taken.



      (9)   POLLUTION OR NON-HEALTH HAZARD. An actual or potential
threat to the quality of water of the town's public system or a private
potable water system. A non-health hazard is one that, if introduced into the
public water supply system, could be a nuisance to water users, but would not
adversely affect human health.



      (10)   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM. That part of a water service
connection to the town's public water system which is located on the
consumer's side of the town's water meter. A private water system may be a
water service line to a single premise or structure or it may be a privately
owned and maintained water distribution system, which serves more than one
structure or premises. For the purpose of this subchapter, once water from
the town's public water system passes through the meter to the customer's
side, that water is considered part of the private water system.



      (11)   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. The town water system and includes
all of the system for the provision to the public of potable water for human
consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances and includes:



         (a)   Any collection, treatment, storage or distribution
facility and all appurtenance to those facilities under control of the town
and used primarily in connection with the town's water system; and



         (b)   Any collection, treatment, storage or distribution
facility and all appurtenances to those facilities not under the control of
the town that is used primarily in connection with the town's water system.



         (c)   New unprotected cross-connections prohibited,
existing cross-connections to be protected. No contamination or pollution of
public water system. All consumers and any other person or entity receiving
water from the town's public water system shall be in violation of this
subchapter if they fail to comply with any of the following:



            1.   New water service connections. No new
residential or nonresidential water service connections to the public system,
on or after the effective date of this subchapter, shall be made unless
equipped with an approved backflow prevention assembly. The BPA shall be
tested and properly functioning as prescribed herein prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy for any building. All new nonresidential
construction plans and specifications shall be made available to the town for
review to determine the health hazard and level (health or non-health) to the
town's public water system.



            2.   Existing water service connections. An
approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on all existing
cross connections to the town's public water system upon notification of the
need for installation by the town. Upon determining that a backflow
prevention assembly is required to be installed on an existing water service
connection the town will notify the consumer in writing of:



               a.   The requirement for installation;



               b.   The health hazard level (“health
hazard” or “non-health hazard”) which has been established for that
customer by the town based upon the use of their premises;



               c.   The type of approved backflow
prevention assembly required;



               d.   The date by which it must be installed
and tested. The consumer will have the following time periods within which to
install and test the specified backflow prevention assembly.



 


Health Hazard

 
Within 14 calendar days of date of notice, unless specified otherwise by the
town


Non-health Hazard
 
Within 60 calendar days of date of notice



 



   (C)   Contamination and pollution prohibited. No consumer shall
cause or allow any contamination or pollution of the town's public water
system through uncontrolled backflow or backsiphonage from or through their
private water system.



   (D)   No cross-connections. No private water system may be connected
to any private well, or to any spring, or to any other water source not
approved by the state of North Carolina as a public water supply and
commissioned by the town as a public water supply source, or to any other
private source of water, or to any plumbing located on private property which
may be connected to any of the above. Any such connection must be terminated
upon the effective date of this subchapter. It shall also be unlawful to have
plumbing cross-connected or so installed that water from the town's public
water system and water from or in any private water system may in any way
become intermingled.



   (E)   Compliance. No private water system shall be connected in any
manner to the town's public water system nor may any service connection be
made or maintained to the town's public water system unless the requirements
of this subchapter have been satisfied.



   (F)   Approved BPAs and installations required. Only an approved
backflow prevention assembly shall be installed to meet the requirements of
this subchapter. Any backflow prevention assembly that is installed that is
not an approved BP A, or any installation of any backflow prevention
assembly, which is not installed in accordance with the provisions hereof
shall be a violation hereof and must be replaced with an approved backflow
prevention assembly, and/or installed in accordance with the ordinance from
which this section is derived.



   (G)   Notification of change in use ofproperty. The consumer shall
notify the town within ten calendar days of the date the nature of the use of
any non-residential property connected to the town's public water system
changes so that the town can reassess the health hazard level of that
property.



   (H)   Certification and testing program.



      (1)   Installation, maintenance, testing and repair of BPAs
shall be done only by a certified backflow prevention assembly technician.
Consumers shall have a technician test the assembly system for proper
operation and that technician shall certify the results in writing to the
town.



      (2)   Any consumer or other person who removes or repairs any
cross-connection condition shall notify the town for the purpose of securing
an inspection or re-inspection by the town.



      (3)   All backflow prevention assemblies required by this
subchapter shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.



      (4)   All backflow prevention assemblies required by this
subchapter must be installed and maintained on the consumer's premises as
part of the consumer's water system.



      (5)   Ownership, installation, testing and maintenance of a
backflow prevention assembly and all costs associated therewith shall be the
responsibility of the consumer.



      (6)   Each backflow prevention assembly required under this
subchapter must be accessible by the town.



      (7)   Any bypass around a backflow prevention assembly at any
time, including when the assembly is in need of testing, repair or
replacement, is prohibited. When it is not possible to interrupt water
service, the customer shall provide for the parallel installation of an
approved backflow prevention assembly.



      (8)   Backflow prevention assemblies with test ports or test
cocks shall not be installed below ground.



   (I)   Testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies.



      (1)   Testing/Certification. A certified backflow prevention
assembly technician shall conduct testing of backflow prevention assemblies
at the consumer's expense. Tests shall be conducted upon installation, and
annually thereafter, with a record of all testing and repairs retained by the
consumer. Each consumer shall send a copy of the report, certified by the
certified backflow prevention assembly technician, for each test or repair to
the town within 30 days after the completion of each test or repair. Such
records must also be maintained by the consumer on forms provided by the town
for a period of three years.



      (2)   Repairs. Any time that repairs to a backflow prevention
assembly are deemed necessary, whether through annual testing or routine
inspection by the consumer or by the town, these repairs must be completed
within a time specified below, in accordance with the health hazard level.



         (a)   Health hazard facilities: Within seven days of
discovery.



         (b)   Non-health hazard facilities: Within 21 days of
discovery.



      (3)   Equipment. All certified backflow prevention assembly
technicians must obtain and employ backflow prevention assembly test
equipment. All test equipment shall be checked for accuracy annually (at a
minimum), calibrated if necessary, and certified to the town as to such
accuracy/calibration, employing a calibration method acceptable to the town.



      (4)   Records. It is unlawful for any consumer or certified
backflow prevention assembly technician to submit any record to the town,
which is false or fraudulent in any material respect. It is unlawful for any
consumer or certified backflow prevention assembly technician to fail to
submit any record, which is required by this section to the town. Such
violations may result in any of the enforcement actions outlined in division
(m) of this section.



   (J)   Protection of the public water system during bulk water sales.
No bulk water may be taken except as a sale from a fire hydrant through a
metered assembly provided by the town which includes a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly. In addition, any truck, tank, or
receiving vessel which is directly or indirectly connected to any pipe, hose,
or outlet from the town's public water system must be equipped with an
approved, permanently installed, air gap designed to create a minimum of four
inches separation between the receiving tank or vessel and the connection to
the town's public water system.



   (K)   Backflow prevention assembly protection. Any backflow
prevention assembly which might be subjected to pressure surges or abnormally
high pressures shall be protected against possible damage by a device
approved by the town, such as a water hammer arrestor or a pressure reducing
valve.



   (L)   Violations. Any consumer or other person who fails to comply
with any provision of this section, or who fails to comply with any notice or
order made hereunder, or who shall install or alter a private water system in
violation of this section or any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
hereunder, or who shall fail to comply with such a notice or order within the
time fixed therein, or who shall submit a false or fraudulent report, or who
fails to submit a report shall be in violation of this section for each such
occurrence or noncompliance and shall be subject to enforcement as provided
in this section.



      (1)   A written notice of violation shall be given to any
person who is determined to be in violation of this section. Such notice
shall be personally delivered, or delivered by certified mail, return receipt
requested.



      (2)   Such notice shall set forth the violation and the time
period within which the violation must be corrected. The violation must be
corrected within the time period specified in the notice. If the town
determines that the violation is occurring on a consumer's private water
system and that such violation has created or contributed to the existence of
an imminent health hazard, the consumer may be required to correct the
violation immediately.



      (3)   Water service may be suspended or terminated to a
consumer if the consumer fails to correct a violation in a timely manner or
fails to pay any civil penalty or expense assessed under this section.
Suspension or termination of water service will be without prejudice to the
town's ability to assert any other remedy available to the town against the
consumer or any other person responsible for the violation.



      (4)   The violation of any provision of this section shall
subject the violator to a civil penalty. Each subsequent day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The offender
shall be issued a written citation by delivery in person or mailed by
certified or registered mail. The civil penalty must be paid within 72 hours
of receipt of written citation by the offender.



         (a)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private
water system, which is a health hazard, shall receive a civil penalty of
$1000 per day.



         (b)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private
water system, which is a non-health hazard, shall receive a civil penalty of
$500 per day.



         (c)   Falsifying records that are required to be
submitted by this article, per violation, $1,000.



         (d)   Failing to test backflow prevention assemblies as
required, per violation, $500.



         (e)   Failing to maintain backflow prevention assemblies
as required, per violation, $500.



         (f)   Any other violation of this section, per
violation, $500.



      (5)   The town may increase any civil penalty assessed by 50
percent of the maximum civil penalty associated with the violation for a
second violation of the same provision within a two-year period. The town may
increase any civil penalty by doubling the amount of the penalty for a third
violation of the same provision within a two-year period. Water service may
be terminated after a third violation of the same provision within a two-year
period.



      (6)   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter
shall pay to the town all expenses incurred by the town in repairing any
damage to the public water system caused in whole or in part by such
violation and any expense incurred by the town in investigating such
violation. All such expenses are deemed to be a part of the civil penalty
assessed with the violation.



      (7)   The application of civil penalties shall not be held to
prevent the enforced correction or removal of any prohibited condition.



      (8)   If a certified backflow prevention assembly technician
submits falsified records to the town, the town may report this offence to
the North Carolina Water Treatment Facility Operators Certification Board.



   (M)   Administration of program. The Director of Public Works, or
the town's cross-connection ORC, shall administer this program.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2013)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of
§§ 51.065 through 51.075, except § 51.074, shall be served by the town
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all
violations.



      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for in division (B)(1) above shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding an amount as set by the Town Council for each violation. Each day
in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
51.065 through 51.075 shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss
or damage occasioned the town by reason of the violation.



(Prior Code, § 24-41)



   (C)   (1)   Administrative remedies.



         (a)   Notification of violation. Whenever the Director
of the Public Works Department of the town (hereafter “Director”) finds
that any user has violated or is violating §§ 51.090 through 51.092  or
any variance permit issued pursuant to §§ 51.090 through 51.092, the
Director may serve upon the user a written notice stating the nature of the
violation. Within 30 days from the date of the notice, an explanation for the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be
submitted to the town by the user. Submission of the explanation and plan
does not relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring before or
after the receipt of the notice of violation.



         (b)   Consent orders. The Director is hereby empowered
to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the user responsible for the
non-compliance. The orders will include the specific action to be taken by
the user to correct the noncompliance within the time period specified in the
order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an
administrative order issued pursuant hereto.



         (c)   Show cause hearing.



            1.   The Director may order any user who causes or
is responsible for a violation of §§ 51.090 through 51.092 or variance
permit issued pursuant to §§ 51.090 through 51.092 to show cause as to why
a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event that the
Director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall
be served on the user specifying the time and place for a hearing, the
proposed enforcement action to be taken, the reasons for the action and a
request that the user appear and show cause as to why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of hearing shall be served
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days
prior to the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation, or any employee in charge of the location where the violation is
alleged to have occurred.



            2.   The Director shall review the evidence
presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement
action is appropriate.



            3.   A show cause hearing under this division (C)
is not a prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under division
(C)(4) below, nor is any action or inaction taken by the Director under this
section subject to administrative appeal.



         (d)   Administrative orders. When the Director finds
that a user has violated or continues to violate §§ 51.090 through 51.092
or any variance permit issued pursuant to §§ 51.090 through 51.092, the
Director may issue an order to cease and desist all violations and direct
those persons in noncompliance to do any one or more of the following:



            1.   Immediately comply with all requirements of
§§ 51.090 through 51.092 or the variance permit;



            2.   Comply in accord with the compliance schedule
set forth in the order;



            3.   Take immediate appropriate remedial or
preventative action in the event of a continuing or threatened violation; and



            4.   Disconnect from the town sewer collection
system unless an adequate grease trap or interceptor is installed and
properly operating within a specified period of time. A user to whom an
administrative order is issued may appeal the administrative order under the
procedures set out herein.



         (e)   Emergency suspensions.



            1.   The Director may suspend the sewer connection
of a user when the suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
adverse effect on the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system.



            2.   Any user notified of a suspension of sewer
service shall immediately stop or eliminate any non-conforming discharge into
the sewer system. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of
suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or whether the
user’s connection to the sewer system should be terminated. In the event of
a failure to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director shall
take steps as are deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer collection and
treatment system.



            3.   The Director shall reinstate the sewer
service upon proof that the noncompliance and the potential for noncompliant
discharge into the sewer system has been eliminated. Prior to the
above-mentioned hearing, the user shall submit to the Director a detailed
written statement describing the causes of the non-compliance and the
measures taken to prevent any future noncompliance.



         (f)   Termination of sewer service. Any user who
violates the following conditions of §§ 51.090 through 51.092 or applicable
state or federal regulations is subject to having its sewer service
connection terminated:



            1.   Failure to maintain accurate grease
interceptor maintenance reports as required hereby;



            2.   Failure to report significant changes in
operations which would affect the size or type of grease interceptor required
by §§ 51.090 through 51.092;



            3.   Refusal to grant the Director or his or her
staff reasonable access to the user’s premises for purposes of inspection
or monitoring. Noncompliant users will be notified of the proposed
termination of their sewer service connection and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause hereunder why the proposed action should not be
taken.



      (2)   Civil penalties.



         (a)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply
with any provision of §§ 51.090 through 51.092 or the orders, rules,
rulings, regulations or permits issued hereunder may be fined up to $25,000
per day per violation.



         (b)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty,
the Director shall consider the following:



            1.   The degree and extent of the harm to the
sewage collection and treatment system or to the environment or to public
health;



            2.   The duration and gravity of the violation;



            3.   The cost of rectifying the damage;



            4.   The amount of money saved by the user as a
result of noncompliance;



            5.   Whether the violation was committed willfully
or intentionally;



            6.   The prior record of the violator for failure
to comply with §§ 51.090 through 51.092; and



            7.   The costs of enforcement to the town.



         (c)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance
with this section shall be as provided herein.



      (3)   Other available remedies. Remedies in addition to those
already mentioned in §§ 51.090 through 51.092 are available to the
Director, who may use any single remedy or combination of remedies against a
noncompliant user. Additional remedies include, but are not limited to:



         (a)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation
of the provisions of §§ 51.090 through 51.092 or an order or permit issued
hereunder, the Director, through the Town Attorney, may petition the District
or Superior Court for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary or
permanent injunction which restrains or compels the user to perform or
refrain from performing activities connected to the violation;



         (b)   Water supply severance. Whenever a user is in
violation of the provisions of §§ 51.090 through 51.092 or an order or
permit issued hereunder, water services to the user may be severed and
service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after the user has
satisfactorily demonstrated the user’s ability and willingness to comply;
and



         (c)   Public nuisance. Any violation of the limitations
on wastewater discharge concentrations of oil, fats or grease as set forth
herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the Director. An user or other person creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the town’s code governing
the nuisances, including reimbursement to the Director for any costs incurred
in removing, abating or remedying the nuisance.



      (4)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies provided for in
§§ 51.090 through 51.092 are not exclusive. The Director may take any, all,
or any combination of these actions against a non-complying user, and the
Director may simultaneously take more than one enforcement action against a
non-compliant user.



(Ord. passed 5-13-1975; Ord. passed 6-14-2005)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS





         72.   PARKING RULES





         73.   BICYCLES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Compliance with title



   70.02   Authority of police to direct traffic



   70.03   Official traffic maps



   70.04   Exemptions for authorized emergency vehicles



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.20   Obedience generally



   70.21   When signs required for enforcement of title



   70.22   Traffic-control signal legend



   70.23   Flashing signals



   70.24   No turn signs; turning markers



   70.25   Markers of no parking zones and safety zones



Registration of Vehicles



   70.40   Applicability of subchapter



   70.41   When required; fee; period of registration



Operation and Registration of Golf Carts



   70.50   Purpose and definitions



   70.51   Operation of golf carts allowed; exceptions



   70.52   Driver’s license required



   70.53   Registration



   70.54   Manner of operation



   70.55   Disclaimer and liability



   70.56   Violation



Statutory reference:



   Applicability of traffic regulations to drivers of vehicles of the
state and political subdivisions, see G.S. § 20-168



   Authority of town to regulate motor vehicles and traffic generally, see
G.S. §§ 20-169, 160A-296 through 160A-308



   Authority of town to use official traffic maps, see G.S. § 160A-77



   Authority of town to use traffic-control devices, see G.S. § 20-158



   Control of vehicles by signals, see G.S. § 20-158



   Exemption of emergency vehicles from speed limits, see G.S. § 20-145



   Motor vehicles and traffic generally, see G.S. §§ 20-1 et seq.



   Turning at intersections and authority of town to alter turning
methods, see G.S. § 20-153



   Yielding right-of-way to emergency vehicles, see G.S. §§ 20-156,
20-157



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE.



   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 15-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.02  AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to
expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic
as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.



(Prior Code, § 15-2)



§ 70.03  OFFICIAL TRAFFIC MAPS.



   (A)   There shall be kept on file, in the office of the Town Clerk,
official traffic maps on which shall be shown:



      (1)   The location of traffic-control devices;



      (2)   The location of areas or zones where certain
regulations, limitations or restrictions are applicable to the parking of
vehicles;



      (3)   The location of stop intersections;



      (4)   The location of yield intersections;



      (5)   The location of one-way streets;



      (6)   The location of loading areas, bus stops and taxicab
stands;



      (7)   Speed limits applicable to certain streets;



      (8)   The location of streets where certain regulations are
applicable to trucks or trailers; and



      (9)   The location of intersections where certain regulations
are applicable to the turning of vehicles.



   (B)   The official traffic maps of the town shall constitute the
official codification of the town’s ordinances relative to those areas of
traffic regulations set forth in division (A) of this section.



(Prior Code, § 15-3)



§ 70.04  EXEMPTIONS FOR AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation,
parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, as defined in this chapter, except as follows. A driver, when
operating the vehicle in any emergency, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer, may:



      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he or she
does not endanger life or property; and



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement of
turning in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property.



   (B)   The exemptions in division (A) of this section shall not
protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequences of his or her
reckless disregard of the safety of others.



(Prior Code, § 15-4)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.20  OBEDIENCE GENERALLY.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with this
chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in § 70.04.



(Prior Code, § 15-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.21  WHEN SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT OF TITLE.



   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does
not state that signs are required, the section shall be effective without
signs being placed to give notice thereof.



(Prior Code, § 15-6)



§ 70.22  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
the words “go”, “caution” or “stop” or exhibiting differently
colored lights successively, one at a time, the following colors only shall
be used and the terms and lights shall indicate as follows.



   (A)   Green alone or “go”.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits either
turn; provided that, vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time the
signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   Yellow alone or “caution”, when shown following the green
or “go” signal.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection; provided that, if the
stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the
intersection.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal are hereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross a roadway and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.



   (C)   Red alone or “stop”.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as
may be indicated by a clearly visible line and shall remain standing until
green or “go” is shown alone; provided that, any vehicle, after coming to
a complete stop for a red light facing the vehicle, may make a right turn
after yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles unless a sign has been
erected at the intersection indicating that the right turn on red is
prohibited.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
unless he or she can do safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.



   (D)   Red with green arrow.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter
the intersection only to continue the movement in the direction indicated by
the arrow, but shall not interfere with other traffic.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.



(Prior Code, § 15-7)



§ 70.23  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a line when marked, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.



(Prior Code, § 15-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.24  NO TURN SIGNS; TURNING MARKERS.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating
that no right, left or “U” turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle
shall disobey the directions of any such sign and when authorized markers,
buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning thereat, no driver of
a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.



(Prior Code, § 15-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.25  MARKERS OF NO PARKING ZONES AND SAFETY ZONES.



   Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected or installed
indicating no parking zones or safety zones, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the regulations in connection therewith.



(Prior Code, § 15-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES



§ 70.40  APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, bicycles with motors attached,
motorcycles and scooter cars shall not be deemed motor vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 15-57)



§ 70.41  WHEN REQUIRED; FEE; PERIOD OF REGISTRATION.



   Every resident motor vehicle operated in the town, except motor
vehicles temporarily operated for a period or periods of time not exceeding a
total of 30 days during any one year, shall be annually assessed an annual $5
registration fee.  The fee will be added to vehicle tax bills.  The period
of registration shall include the 12 months from January 1 to December 31.



(Prior Code, § 15-58)



OPERATION AND REGISTRATION OF GOLF CARTS



§ 70.50  PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a means
of travel that is convenient, conserves resources, and protects the
environment. Golf carts, if properly used, may be an effective way to travel
for short distances within the town. However, to help insure the public
safety and welfare, the operation of golf carts must not only comply with
normal regulations regarding vehicles, but should comply with special safety
regulations intended to protect the operator and passengers in a vehicle that
is primarily designed for operation on a golf course or recreational
purposes. This article establishes the basic, minimum standards of care to be
used by the users of golf carts on public roads, streets and highways.
Likewise, the public safety requires that golf carts, used as a means of
transportation, must also meet certain minimum safety standards that can only
be assured through a system of registration and inspection. The registration
and inspection of golf carts is required in order to protect the public
health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, those
definitions set out in G.S. § 20-4.01 shall also apply throughout this
subchapter. A “golf cart” is defined as a vehicle designed and
manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational
purposes and that is not capable of exceeding 20 miles per hour. The
definition is republished here for convenience only and the definition set
out in G.S. § 20-4.01 (12a), as amended from time to time, is controlling
for all purposes.



(Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



§ 70.51  OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ALLOWED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Allowed. The operation of golf carts on the public streets,
roads and highways within the town and on property owned or leased by the
town in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter shall be permitted;
however, it shall be unlawful to operate any golf cart that is not properly
registered with the town or to operate any golf cart at any place or in any
manner not authorized herein.



   (B)   Exceptions. The operation of golf carts is not subject to the
provisions of this subchapter under the following circumstances:



      (1)   The operation of golf carts at golf courses, private
clubs or on private property, with the consent of the owner of the applicable
real property, or



      (2)   The operation of golf carts within gated or limited
access communities unless the streets of the community are dedicated for
public use and maintained by the town, or



      (3)   The use of a golf cart in connection with a parade, a
festival or other special event provided the consent of the sponsor is
obtained and provided such golf cart is only used during and in connection
with such event.



      (4)   The use of golf carts by the Edenton Police Department
on official police business or the use of golf carts by town personnel for
official business on town owned property and town leased property, including
cemeteries, parks and greenways.



(Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



§ 70.52  DRIVER'S LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)    No person may operate a golf cart on any public street, road
or highway within the town or on any property owned or leased by the town
unless that person:



      (1)   Is at least 16 years old and has a valid driver's
license issued under or granted by the laws of North Carolina or some other
state; and



      (2)   Has that license on his or her person; and



      (3)   Complies with any restrictions applicable to the license.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, a learner's permit shall not be
considered as a valid driver's license nor shall any license that has been
revoked, temporary or otherwise, or suspended for any reason, be considered
as a valid driver's license, during the period of suspension or revocation.



(Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



§ 70.53  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Required.  No golf cart may be operated on any public street,
road or highway within the town or on property owned or leased by the town
unless the golf cart has first been registered with the Edenton Police
Department as required herein. The registration shall be renewed thereafter
in accordance with the provisions of this section. To evidence the
registration, the owner shall be issued a biennial permit which shall be
displayed in a prominent, visible place on the left rear-most portion of the
golf cart at all times.  The permit may contain a registration number
assigned for the particular golf cart and may contain an expiration date. 
Lost or stolen permits are the responsibility of the owner and must be
replaced before the golf cart is operated on a public street, road or highway
within the town or on any property owned or leased by the town.



   (B)   Registration fee.  A registration fee in the amount of
$25.00, or such other amount as may be established and published in the
schedule of fees and charges adopted by the Edenton Town Council from time to
time, as amended, shall be paid to the town at the time the application for
registration is filed with the Edenton Police Department or for any renewal
of the application.



   (C)   Application. The application for registration shall be made to
the Police Chief, or to some other person designated by him or her, on forms
provided by the Police Department. The application may, among other things,
require the owner's name, street address, mailing address, a phone number,
the make, model and identification or serial number of the golf cart, proof
of insurance and such other information as may be reasonably required as well
as a release or disclaimer of liability which releases the town from any
liability that may arise as a result of the operation of a golf cart on
public streets, roads and highways within the town and on property owned or
leased by the town.



   (D)   Procedures.  The Police Chief may establish written
procedures, consistent with this subchapter, setting out the process and the
procedure, including the form of the application, the check list for items to
be inspected and the type of form evidencing the issuance of the registration
permit.



   (E)   Inspection.  Prior to issuing the initial registration permit
or any renewal thereof, the golf cart shall either be inspected pursuant to
such procedures as the Police Chief may establish, to determine that:



      (1)   The brakes provided by the manufacturer of the golf cart
are in proper working order, and



      (2)   The golf cart has all of the standard safety features
provided by the manufacturer and will not exceed a speed of 20 miles per hour
(gas powered golf carts may require a speed governor to comply with the
forgoing speed limitation) nor otherwise modified in any way that creates a
hazard, and



      (3)   The golf cart is equipped with all mechanical systems
and safety equipment required by this subchatper including, but not limited
to, the following:



         (a)   A seat belt installed at each seat; and



         (b)   A mechanical horn and an audible reverse warning
device; and



         (c)   A rear vision mirror and at least two red rear
reflectors or rear red lights, which reflectors or lights must be at least
three inches in height and width, and



         (d)   A rear triangle reflector of the same type
required by North Carolina law and an orange flag that is elevated at least
six feet above the road surface, both of which must be installed at the rear
of the golf cart.



   (F)   Denial and revocation.  The initial registration of a golf
cart may be denied or subsequently revoked if it is determined that:



      (1)   The application contains any material misrepresentation,
or



      (2)   Financial responsibility requirements of the State of
North Carolina (liability insurance) have not been met, or



      (3)   The golf cart is not in compliance with the requirements
set out above, or



      (4)   The golf cart has been altered or customized and no
longer meets the definition of a golf cart, or



      (5)   Equipment supplied by the manufacturer, especially
safety equipment, has been removed from the golf cart or the vehicle
identification or serial number removed, or



      (6)   Other good cause shown, including, but not limited to, a
violation of this subchapter.



   (G)   Financial responsibility.  The owner of a golf cart required
to be registered with the town for use on the public streets and highways of
the town shall maintain in full force and effect and continuously throughout
any period of registration, liability insurance for all liability associated
with operation of the golf cart in an amount not less than required by North
Carolina law for motor vehicles operated on public highways in North
Carolina.  This shall cover the financial responsibility in the minimum
amounts and in the manner defined and described in Article 9A, Chapter 20 of
the General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended, or any other law of the
State of North Carolina requiring financial responsibility for the
registration and/or operation of a motor vehicle.



   (H)   Disqualified vehicles.  ATV's, 4-wheel utility vehicles and
other similar utility vehicles which are not manufactured for operation on a
golf course and golf carts which have been modified so that it no longer
meets the definition of a golf cart, may not be registered as a golf cart nor
shall such vehicles be operated on the public roads, streets and highways
within the town unless such vehicles are otherwise registered with and
allowed under the motor vehicle laws of the State of North Carolina.



(Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



§ 70.54  MANNER OF OPERATION. 



   Golf carts shall not be operated on the public streets, roads and
highways within the town or on any property owned or leased by the town
except in full compliance with the provisions of this section.



   (A)   Hours of operation.



      (1)   Daytime operation. Except as otherwise provided by
ordinance, including division (A)(3) below of this section, or applicable
law, golf carts may be driven on approved public roads, streets and highways
within the town or on any property owned or leased by the town from sunrise
until sunset; and



      (2)   Nighttime operation.  Except as otherwise provided by
ordinance, including division (A)(3) below of this section, or applicable
law, a golf cart may be driven on approved public roads, streets and highways
within the town or on any property owned or leased by the town between sunset
and sunrise if the golf cart is equipped with the following equipment, all of
which must be visible for a distance of not less than 500 feet:



         (a)   Two operating headlights, each having at least a
55 watt halogen, or equal, bulb, one on either side of the front of the golf
cart;



         (b)   Two operating tail lights, one on either side of
the rear of the golf cart; and



         (c)   Four operational mechanical turn signal lights,
one on each corner of the golf cart.



      (3)   No operation if poor visibility.  Notwithstanding the
provisions of divisions (A)(1) and (2), above, golf carts may not be operated
when fog, smog, smoke or other conditions reduce visibility so that the golf
cart is not visible for a distance of at least 500 feet.



   (B)   Streets.  Golf carts may not be operated on any of the
following streets or sections of any street except for the sole purpose of
crossing such street at a right angle and either at a signalized intersection
or at a perpendicular crossing at a through intersection:



      (1)   Any street where the posted speed limit is more than 35
miles per hour, or



      (2)   Broad Street, North of Queen St., or



      (3)   Queen Street (NCHwy 17 bus), or



      (4)   East Church Street (NCHwy 32), or



      (5)   Virginia Road.



   (C)   Motor vehicle laws.



      (1)   All laws, regulations, and ordinances, including, but
not limited to, traffic rules and regulations, regarding the use of motor
vehicles in the State of North Carolina and all ordinances regarding the use
of motor vehicles in the town, not inconsistent therewith shall be observed,
except that no golf cart may be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour or at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent for existing
conditions.



      (2)   No golf cart containing any open container of alcohol
shall be operated on public street, road or highway within the town or on any
property owned or leased by the town.



   (D)   Travel and right-of-way. Golf carts must be operated at the
right edge of the public street, road or highway within the town and shall
yield the right-of-way to:



      (1)   All vehicular and bicycle traffic, including that of
overtaking vehicles or bicycles, and



      (2)   Pedestrians.



   (E)   Town property and sidewalks. Golf carts shall not be operated
on any sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, jogging path, greenway, park, and trail
except for official police business or by town personnel while on town
business.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, golf carts shall
not be operated on property owned or leased by the town except with the
express written consent of the Town Administrator and/or the Police Chief and
upon the terms and conditions as may be set forth in such written permission.



   (F)   Golf cart seating and capacity.



      (1)   The manufacturer's seating capacity (normally no more
than four passengers) shall not be exceeded.



      (2)   No person may ride on any part of a golf cart not
designed to carry seated passengers, including, but not limited to, that part
of the golf cart designed to carry golf bags.



      (3)   Each person who is riding on or in a golf cart must be
seated in a seat that is designed to carry a person. 



   (G)   No commercial purposes. Golf carts may not be used as a
taxicab or bus or for the commercial carrying of passengers or the hauling of
freight.



   (H)   Parking. Golf carts may only be parked in the same manner and
at the same places designated for the parking of motor vehicles. The
stopping, standing or parking of golf carts in an area where parking is not
allowed or in any place that impedes the flow of traffic, pedestrian walkways
or a passageway is prohibited.



   (I)   No towing. Golf carts may not be used for the purpose of
towing, including, but not limited to, towing another golf cart or a trailer,
vehicle, person, skateboard or bicycle.



   (J)   No texting.  The driver of a golf cart may not engage in
texting unless the golf cart is in a proper parking spot with its engine is
turned off.



   (K)   Signals and protruding body parts.  If mechanical turn
signals are not required, then hand turn signals are required in those
situations where motor vehicle drivers would be required to give turn
signals.  Except when making hand turn signals, not body part may protrude
from a golf cart unless that golf cart is parked in a proper parking spot and
its engine is turned off.



(Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



§ 70.55  DISCLAIMER AND LIABILITY.



   (A)   Disclaimer. Golf carts are not designed for nor manufactured
to be used on public streets, roads and highways and the town neither
advocates nor endorses the golf cart as a safe means of travel on public
streets, roads and highways within the town or on any property owned or
leased by the town. The town, by regulating such operation, is merely trying
to address obvious safety issues, and adoption of this subchapter is not to
be relied upon as a determination that operation on public streets, roads and
highways within the town and on property owned or leased by the town is safe
or advisable if done in accordance with this subchapter. The town in no way
shall be liable for accidents, injuries or death involving the operation of a
golf cart.



   (B)   Assumption of risk. Any person, who owns, operates or rides
upon a golf cart on a public street, road or highway within the town or on
any property owned or leased by the town does so at his or her own risk and
peril and assumes all liability resulting from such ownership, operation, or
use of the golf cart.



(Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



§ 70.56  VIOLATION.



   If any person shall violate this subchapter, he shall be guilty of a
Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 or such other
amount as shall be set forth in the schedule of fees and charges adopted by
the Edenton Town Council from time to time, except that the owner or operator
of a golf cart who shall violate a provision regulating the parking of
vehicles shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount set forth in the
schedule of fees and charges adopted by the Edenton Town Council from time to
time.



(Ord. passed 6-12-2012)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Quiet zones



   71.02   Driving on sidewalks



   71.03   Riding bicycle or motorcycle



   71.04   Riding coasters, roller skates and the like



   71.05   Persons riding to stay inside vehicle



   71.06   Persons to ride only in passenger areas of public
conveyances and the like



   71.07   Boarding or alighting from vehicles



   71.08   Riding and the like on vehicle without permission



   71.09   Spinning tires and the like



   71.10   Obstructing intersections



   71.11   Truck routes



   71.12   Driving through funeral processions



   71.13   Yield intersections



   71.14   Stop intersections



   71.15   One-way streets



   71.16   Turns and turning



   71.17   Moving vehicles from parked positions



   71.18   Limitations on backing movements



   71.19   Driving on roadways laned for traffic



   71.20   Speed limits



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to erect stop signs, see G.S. § 20-157



   Authority of town to erect yield signs, see G.S. § 20-158.1



   Authority of town to establish one-way streets, see G.S. § 20-169



   Driving on sidewalks, see G.S. § 20-160



   Driving overcrowded vehicle, see G.S. § 20-140.2



   One-way traffic, see G.S. § 20-165.1



   Operation of motorcycles, see G.S. § 20-146.1



   Overcrowded vehicles, see G.S. § 20-140.2



   Right-of-way generally, see G.S. §§ 20-155, 20-156



   Speed restrictions, see G.S. §§ 20-141, 20-144, 20-145



   Turning at intersections generally, see G.S. § 20-153



§ 71.01  QUIET ZONES.



   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed indicating a
zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any zone shall
sound the horn or other warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency.



(Prior Code, § 15-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.02  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or temporary driveway.



(Prior Code, § 15-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  RIDING BICYCLE OR MOTORCYCLE.



   (A)   Passenger on handlebars, tank and the like. No operator of a
motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall carry any person upon the
handlebar, frame or tank of any vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon
any vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 15-13)



   (B)   On sidewalk; without hands on handlebars. No person shall ride
a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without having his or her hands upon
the handlebars, nor shall any person ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk or
walkway within the town.



(Prior Code, § 15-14)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  RIDING COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE.



   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway unless to cross a
street at a crosswalk or intersection, except upon streets set aside as play
streets.



(Prior Code, § 15-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  PERSONS RIDING TO STAY INSIDE VEHICLE.



   No person when riding shall allow any part of his or her body to
protrude beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding,
except to give signals as are by law required.



(Prior Code, § 15-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  PERSONS TO RIDE ONLY IN PASSENGER AREAS OF PUBLIC CONVEYANCES AND
THE LIKE.



   No person shall ride on any public conveyance or vehicle or any portion
thereof, not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision
shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty
or to persons riding within truck bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.



(Prior Code, § 15-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.



   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is
in motion.



(Prior Code, § 15-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.08  RIDING AND THE LIKE ON VEHICLE WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.



(Prior Code, § 15-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.09  SPINNING TIRES AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle in the town limits in a
manner as to cause the wheels thereof to lose traction with the surface on
which they are driven so as to cause the tires to squeal.



(Prior Code, § 15-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.10  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.



(Prior Code, § 15-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.11  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   All trucks and trailers are prohibited from the parts of
streets designated on the official traffic maps of the town as being closed
to trucks; except that, trucks and trailers may travel on the parts of
streets to reach or to return from a destination upon the streets.



   (B)   All trucks and trailers entering the town, destined to any
point outside the town and not taking on or discharging any goods, wares or
merchandise within the town limits, shall travel exclusively on the truck
routes designated on the official traffic maps of the town and over the part
of the truck routes as shall constitute the shortest and most direct route
from the point of entrance into the town and departure from the town.



   (C)   The Chief of Police shall cause to be erected and maintained
at points where through truck routes enter the town and at all junction
points and turns where necessary and at all approaches to the parts of
streets on which trucks are prohibited, signs of the dimensions and at the
locations as shall be approved by him or her, directing truck traffic in
accordance with the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 15-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.12  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except
authorized emergency vehicles when responding to calls.



(Prior Code, § 15-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.13  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   When signs have been erected at those intersections designated as yield
right-of-way intersections on the official traffic maps of the town as
adopted by the Town Council, the driver of any vehicle shall approach the
intersection with caution and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
approaching on the intersected street.



(Prior Code, § 15-24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.14  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   When signs have been erected at those intersections designated as stop
intersections on the official traffic maps of the town, no person shall drive
a vehicle into an intersection unless he or she shall have come to a complete
stop and has determined that the movement will not conflict with traffic.



(Prior Code, § 15-25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.15  ONE-WAY STREETS.



   (A)   When signs have been erected giving notice that certain
streets or portions of streets are limited to traffic in a certain direction
as designated on the official traffic maps of the town, no person shall
operate a vehicle on the streets or portions of streets, except in the
direction indicated by the signs.



   (B)   One-way streets shall be designated on the official traffic
maps of the town as adopted by the Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 15-26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.16  TURNS AND TURNING.



   (A)   Left turn indicators at certain intersections. In making left
turns at the street intersections designated on the official traffic maps of
the town, all traffic shall travel to the left of the center of the
intersections as may be indicated by buttons, markers or other directing
signs.



(Prior Code, § 15-27)



   (B)   No left turn intersections. When signs have been erected, no
vehicle shall make a left turn at any street intersection designated as a no
left turn intersection on the official traffic maps of the town.



(Prior Code, § 15-28)



   (C)   No right turn intersections. When signs have been erected, no
vehicle shall make a right turn at any street intersection designated as a no
right turn intersection on the official traffic maps of the town.



(Prior Code, § 15-29)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.17  MOVING VEHICLES FROM PARKED POSITIONS.



   (A)   Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed or, if they
are parked at an angle with the curb, they shall back out on that angle until
they have cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they
are most nearly headed in.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any driver of a motor vehicle to
proceed from a parked position into the path of approaching traffic without
seeing the movement can be made in safety.



(Prior Code, § 15-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.18  LIMITATIONS ON BACKING MOVEMENTS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection
or over a crosswalk and shall not, in any event or at any place, back a
vehicle unless the movement can be made in safety, in which case he or she
shall give ample warning to those who may be behind, by hand and horn or
other signal.



(Prior Code, § 15-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.19  DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.



   All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been marked with lanes
for traffic shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single
lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.



(Prior Code, § 15-32)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.20  SPEED LIMITS.



   When signs have been erected, no person shall drive a vehicle in excess
of the speed established for the street or portion of street as shown on the
official traffic maps of the town.



(Prior Code, § 15-33)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING RULES



Section



   72.01   Prohibited in certain places



   72.02   Prohibited for certain purposes



   72.03   Stopping in the street



   72.04   Obstructing traffic



   72.05   Stopping with left side to curb



   72.06   Moving vehicles of other operators



   72.07   Parking on certain streets



   72.08   Parking parallel to curb



   72.09   Parking within lines



   72.10   Trailers; semi-trailers



   72.11   Bus, taxi stands and the like



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate parking, see G.S. § 160A-301



   Parking near fire, see G.S. § 20-157



   Parking near fire hydrant, fire station or private driveway, see G.S.
§ 20-162



   Stopping on highway, see G.S. § 20-161



§ 72.01  PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device in any of the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk;



   (B)   In that area in between the firm established curb line and the
sidewalk where the town has established trees and grass in the right of way.
For the purposes of this division (B), the term FIRM ESTABLISHED CURB LINE
shall be defined as that feature of the roadway and street system of the town
made of concrete, cement or similar material which separates the road or
street from the grass, dirt or sidewalk and which rises above the street.
This definition shall include both 90-degree (square) type curbs and roll top
type curbs so long as the curbs rise above the street level. It is the intent
of this division (B) not to prohibit parking between the street and sidewalk
in those areas where the town has not established a firm established curb
line as defined hereinabove;



   (C)   Crosswalk;



   (D)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or roadway;



   (E)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction,
when the stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



   (F)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any
underpass structure;



   (G)   Within 15 feet in either direction or the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanatorium or fire hydrant; provided that, emergency
vehicles may park, stop or stand a distance of not less than eight feet from
a fire hydrant;



   (H)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped;



   (I)   On either side of any street approaching a railroad underpass
or overhead bridge within 50 feet in any direction of the outer edge of the
underpass or overhead bridge;



   (J)   On either side of any street approaching a grade crossing
within 50 feet of the closest rail; provided that, where existing permanent
structures are located along the street and closer that 50 feet, parking may
be permitted in front of the structures, unless otherwise prohibited, if the
parking does not interfere with the view in either direction of any
approaching locomotive or train;



   (K)   Within an intersection;



   (L)   So as to obstruct a driveway.



   (M)   Between the curb or edge of the pavement of a street and the
front building line of a single family detached, duplex triplex, or
quadruplex dwelling unit projected to the side lot other than completely upon
an improved driveway or improved parking pad. For purposes of this
subsection, “improved” means surfaced with concrete, asphalt, gravel, or
any other material commonly used for the parking of vehicles, but not
including grass or dirt.



      (1)   Except as further provided, parking areas for single
family dwellings shall not cover more than 30% of any front yard area.



      (2)   Parking areas for two-family attached development or
conversion shall not cover more than 40% of any front yard area.



      (3)   Parking, storage and/or maneuvering of vehicles, boats,
trailers, campers and the like shall not be permitted within any front and/or
side yard area except as provided by this section.



   The prohibitions of this section shall not apply:



      (1)   On lots where parking is not permitted on adjacent
streets surrounding the property and the front building line of the dwelling
unit is less than 20 feet from the back of the curb line or edge of pavement,
or the lot width at the front building line is less than 25 feet; or



      (2)   In conjunction with special events involving family or
social gatherings provided such events do not occur more frequently than once
a week.



   Violations and penalties: Any person violating or permitting the
violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to all
enforcement remedies as provided by G.S. § 160A-175 and G.S.§ 14-4.  See
§ 10.99 of this Code for further detail.



(Prior Code, § 15-34)  (Ord. passed 10-6-1998; Am. Ord. passed 8-10-2004) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.02  PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purposes of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale;



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;



   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when the
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the automobile
or other vehicle;



   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van, when the towing unit
has been disconnected, or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or
freight from one vehicle to another;



   (E)   Advertising; and



   (F)   Selling or offering for sale any merchandise, fruits, fish,
vegetables or other goods; provided that, any person wishing to sell fruit,
fish, vegetables or other merchandise from cars or other vehicles may park on
town property set aside by the Town Council for this purpose only.



(Prior Code, § 15-35)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.03  STOPPING IN THE STREET.



   (A)   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of
parking as prescribed in this chapter, unless the stop is made necessary by
the approach of fire apparatus, by the approach of a funeral or other
procession which has the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public
conveyance, by the lowering of railway gates, by the giving of traffic
signals, by the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian or by some
emergency. In any case covered by these exceptions, the vehicles shall stop
so as not to obstruct any driveway, footway, pedestrian aisle, safety zone,
crossing or street intersection.



   (B)   Double parking will be allowed in areas marked on the official
traffic maps upon the following conditions.



      (1)   Delivery trucks may be double parked for a specified
period of time only under the following conditions:



         (a)   When there is not sufficient space to park at the
curbing;



         (b)   When it is necessary for loading or unloading
goods, wares or merchandise; and



         (c)   When there is at least one lane of traffic open
upon the street where such delivery truck is parked.



      (2)   Passenger automobiles may double park only for the
purpose of allowing passengers to alight from or enter the automobiles;
provided that:



         (a)   No continuous double parking shall exceed 60
seconds;



         (b)   During the double parking, there shall be at all
times a licensed driver in the driver’s seat; and



         (c)   The motor of the vehicle shall be in operation.



(Prior Code, § 15-36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.



   No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere
with the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 15-37)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  STOPPING WITH LEFT SIDE TO CURB.



   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in the business
district; except that, on one-way streets, vehicles shall stop headed in the
direction of traffic.



(Prior Code, § 15-38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  MOVING VEHICLES OF OTHER OPERATORS.



   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by the person into any
prohibited area or sufficiently away from the curb to make the distance
unlawful.



(Prior Code, § 15-39)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.07  PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   (A)   When signs have been erected giving notice that certain
streets or portions of streets as designated on the official traffic maps of
the town are subject to certain restrictions or limitations on the parking of
vehicles, no person shall park any vehicle on the streets or portions of
streets, except in conformity with the directions of the signs.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, whenever
authorized and directed by an order of the Town Council, to erect and place,
or cause to be erected or placed, signs indicating that parking in the zones
is limited or limited as provided for in the order of the Town Council.



      (2)   The existence of signs designating that parking is
limited to two hours at any place within the town shall be prima facie
evidence that the parking regulator signs were erected or placed by authority
of the Town Council and in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (C)   Proof that any automobile has been parked in violation of this
section and proof of the ownership of the vehicle shall be prima facie
evidence that the owner of the vehicle did, in fact, park the vehicle in
violation of the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 15-40)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB.



   Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter and where the street is
not marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel
to the curb and not more than six inches therefrom.



(Prior Code, § 15-41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  PARKING WITHIN LINES.



   On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking
spaces for vehicles, the vehicles shall be parked between the lines.



(Prior Code, § 15-42)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.10  TRAILERS; SEMI-TRAILERS.



   No trailer or semi-trailer, attached or unattached to a prime mover
shall be parked on any street in the town unless permission has been granted
by the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 15-44)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.11  BUS, TAXI STANDS AND THE LIKE.



   Those streets or parts of streets designated on the official traffic
maps of the town shall be reserved as stands for the specific purpose and at
the exact location named therein and no automobile or other vehicle shall
park therein except those for which the space or stand has been designated.



(Prior Code, § 15-45)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 73:  BICYCLES



Section



   73.01   Registration



   73.02   Operation



   73.03   Impoundment



Statutory reference:



   Applicability of traffic laws to bicyclists, see G.S. § 20-4.01(49)



§ 73.01  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
use a bicycle upon the streets or other public places of the town without
first obtaining a certificate of registration from the Chief of Police of the
town and attaching a license as shall be provided by the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Issuance. The Chief of Police shall provide registration
plates or decals to be numbered in numerical order and it shall be the duty
of the Chief of Police to attach one of the plates or decals to the frame of
each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the owner of
same upon payment of the fee herein required.



   (C)   Attaching to bicycle. The owner shall keep the license plate
or decal attached to the bicycle to which it was issued whenever same shall
be operated within the town.



   (D)   Registry. The Chief of Police shall maintain a permanent
registry in which shall be entered the name, address and other pertinent
information concerning each registered bicycle. The information shall include
such as may be necessary for the identity of each bicycle.



   (E)   Sale or transfer. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell
or transfer ownership of the bicycle without reporting the sale or transfer
to the Chief of Police within 48 hours from the time of the transfer, giving
full and complete information with reference to the transferee, and the
purchaser or transferee shall apply for a registration of the bicycle within
five days from the time the bicycle is acquired by him or her.



   (F)   Stamping of frame; mutilation of stamp and the like. It shall
be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, mutilate or alter the serial
number or the number which was stamped into the frame of the bicycle, or
registration card of any bicycle registered pursuant to this section so long
as the registration shall be applicable. The Chief of Police is authorized to
place a number on the frame of each bicycle at a place chosen by him or her
by indenting same into the metal of the bicycle for identification purposes.



   (G)   Fee. The registration fee for each registration shall be an
amount as set by the Town Council per year and same shall cover all charges
in connection with each registration.



(Prior Code, § 6-1)  (Ord. passed 1-14-1975)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.02  OPERATION.



   (A)   Lights required for night operation. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a bicycle on any street or public place in the town
after dark unless the bicycle shall be equipped with a light attached to the
front and a reflector attached to the rear of same so as to be clearly
visible.



   (B)   Use of sidewalks in business area. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk in the business area of the
town.



   (C)   Clinging to vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person
riding a bicycle to hold onto a moving automobile or other motor vehicle.



   (D)   Obedience to traffic rules; control generally. Any person
operating a bicycle shall be required to observe traffic regulations or
traffic-control signals in the same manner as required of operators of motor
vehicles and shall be required to maintain the bicycle under complete control
at all times.



   (E)   Helmet required for persons under 16. It shall be unlawful for
any parent or legal guardian of a person below the age of 16 to knowingly
permit that person to operate or be a passenger on a bicycle unless at all
times when the person is so engaged he or she wears a protective bicycle
helmet of good fit fastened securely upon the head with the straps of the
helmet.



(Prior Code, § 6-2)  (Ord. passed 1-14-1975; Ord. passed 12-11-2012) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.03  IMPOUNDMENT.



   Any bicycle operated by the owner, or any other person who shall have
lawful custody of a bicycle, in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, may be impounded for a period not exceeding 30 days.



(Prior Code, § 6-3)  (Ord. passed 1-14-1975)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   PARADES AND PICKETING





         92.   FIRE PROTECTION





         93.   CEMETERIES





         94.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES





         95.   TOWN DOCKS





         96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         97.   TREES





         98.   PARKS





         99.   FOOD TRUCKS




CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   90.01   Bird sanctuary



   90.02   Killing squirrels



   90.03   Keeping pigeons



   90.04   [Reserved]



   90.05   Chickens, ducks or other fowl running at large



   90.06   Animal or fowl fights



Livestock



   90.20   Permits for keeping certain types



   90.21   Hogs



   90.22   Running at large



Dogs



   90.35   Definitions



   90.36   License



   90.37   Vaccination



   90.38   Responsibility of owners



   90.39   Impounding



   90.40   Suspected rabies



   90.41   Rabies emergencies



   90.42   Running at large



   90.43   Vicious dogs



   90.44   Barking dogs



   90.45   Teasing and the like



   90.46   Running over with vehicle and the like



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to define and prohibit abuse of animals, see G.S. §
160A-182



   Authority of town to establish or contribute to animal shelters, see
G.S. § 160A-493



   Authority of town to regulate domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186



   Cruelty to animals generally, see G.S. §§ 140-360 to 140-363 and
140-366 to 140-368



   Dogs generally, see G.S. §§ 67-1 et seq.



   Possession and harboring of wild animals, see G.S. § 160A-187



   Protection of animals generally, see G.S. §§ 19A-1 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  BIRD SANCTUARY.



   (A)   The area embraced within the corporate limits of the town and
all lands owned or leased by the town outside the corporate limits is hereby
designated as a bird sanctuary.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or otherwise kill,
within the sanctuary established by this section, any native wild bird;
provided that, it shall be lawful to trap starlings or similar birds or fowl
when the birds or fowl are found to be congregating in a number in a
particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or
property.



   (C)   The bird clubs of the town are hereby granted permission to
erect the signs, giving notice of this section, at the places and of the
design as may be approved by the Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 4-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to establish bird sanctuary, see G.S. § 160A-188



§ 90.02  KILLING SQUIRRELS.



   This issue is now under the jurisdiction of the North Carolina Wildlife
Resources Commission.



(Ord. passed 3-13-2012)



Statutory reference:



   Wildlife Resources Commission issuance of depredation permits, see G.S.
§ 113-274(1a)



§ 90.03  KEEPING PIGEONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep pigeons within the town, if
not confined.



(Prior Code, § 4-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.04  [RESERVED.]



§ 90.05  CHICKENS, DUCKS OR OTHER FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful to allow chickens, ducks or other fowl to run at
large.



(Prior Code, § 4-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.06  ANIMAL OR FOWL FIGHTS.



   No person shall attend, encourage or stage any animal or fowl fight.



(Prior Code, § 4-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LIVESTOCK



§ 90.20  PERMITS FOR KEEPING CERTAIN TYPES.



   (A)   Required. No person shall stable, tie or otherwise keep any
cattle, horses, mules, sheep or goats within the town nearer than 500 feet to
any dwelling, house, apartment or other residence occupied by any person,
without first obtaining therefor a permit in writing issued pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-7)



   (B)   Application generally.



      (1)   Any person desiring a permit required by division (A)
above shall apply therefor in writing over his or her signature to the Town
Manager.



      (2)   The application shall state the type and number of
animals to be stabled, pastured, tied or otherwise kept; the name of one
adult occupant, if any, of the dwelling house, apartment or residence within
500 feet of the place or places; and the distance of each dwelling house,
apartment or other residence from the place.



(Prior Code, § 4-8)



   (C)   Fee. Each applicant for a permit required by division (A)
above shall pay to the Tax Collector a fee as set by the Town Council for
each separate application, which fee shall be paid by the Tax Collector into
the town’s General Fund.



(Prior Code, § 4-9)



   (D)   Approval. Upon determination that a proper application has
been filed and that the fee provided for in division (C) above has been paid
and upon finding that the stabling, pasturing, tying or otherwise keeping of
the animals mentioned in the application in the place or places mentioned
therein will not endanger the health of any person occupying a dwelling,
house, apartment or residence within 500 feet of the place or any other
citizen or inhabitant of the town, a permit shall be issued specifying the
number and type of animals to be stabled, pastured, tied or otherwise kept;
provided that, there may be accepted as proof that the stabling, pasturing,
tying or otherwise keeping of the animals in the places will not endanger the
health of any person hereinabove mentioned, the written assent to the
issuance of the permit signed by one adult occupant of each dwelling,
apartment or other residence then occupied by human beings and within 500
feet of the place or places where the animals are to be stabled, pastured,
tied or otherwise kept.



(Prior Code, § 4-10)



   (E)   Term. Each permit required by division (A) above issued shall
be and remain valid until the first day of January next following the
issuance of the permit or until revoked as provided in division (F) below. At
any time within 30 days before the expiration of any permit, the holder
thereof may apply for its renewal, which renewal shall be issued upon the
same conditions as the issuance of the original permit and which renewal
shall be valid for one year from the expiration of the former permit.



(Prior Code, § 4-11)



   (F)   Revocation. Any permit issued in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter shall be revoked by him or her upon his or her
finding that the stabling, pasturing, tying or otherwise keeping of any
animals described therein at the place or places described therein endangers
the health or safety of the inhabitants of the town. The revocation shall be
effective ten days after the mailing by registered mail of a notice thereof
to the last known address of the holder of the permit.



(Prior Code, § 4-12)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.21  HOGS.



   (A)   Except as provided in the Zoning Ordinance of the town, it
shall be unlawful for any person to keep any live hogs or to maintain a hog
pen within the corporate limits of the town.



   (B)   No person shall allow a hog or pig to stray upon the public
streets or sidewalks or other property belonging to the town or upon the
property belonging to any person within the town.



(Prior Code, § 4-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.22  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   No person shall stable, pasture, tie or otherwise keep any animal of
any type enumerated in § 90.20(A) upon the property of any other person or
permit any animal to stray upon the property within the town of any other
person, without first obtaining the permission of the other person. No person
shall pasture, tie or otherwise keep any animal upon the public streets or
sidewalks of the town or upon any other property belonging to the town or
permit any animal to stray upon the public streets or sidewalks or other
property of the town.



(Prior Code, § 4-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DOGS



§ 90.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner or a member of his or her immediate family or other responsible
person, either by leash, cord or chain, or confined within a motor vehicle
owned or being operated by the owner or a member of his or her immediate
family.



   DOG. Both male and female dogs.



   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog. The head of the
household shall be deemed to be the OWNER in respect to any dog or dogs
owned, kept or harbored by any person residing in the household and kept on
the premises.



   POUND. The place provided and operated by the town for the restraint,
care and disposition of animals.



(Prior Code, § 4-15)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972)



§ 90.36  LICENSE.



   (A)   Required; application; fee. All dogs kept, harbored or
maintained by their owners in the town shall be licensed and registered if
over six months of age. Dog licenses shall be issued by the Town Manager upon
payment of a license tax of an amount as set by the Town Council. The owner
shall state, at the time application is made for the license and upon printed
forms provided for the purpose, his or her name and address and the name,
breed, color and sex of each dog owned or kept by him or her. The provisions
of this section shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are
nonresidents temporarily within the town, nor to dogs brought into the town
for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor to “seeing-eye”
dogs properly trained to assist blind persons when the dogs are actually
being used by blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from
place to place. The license tax imposed by this section shall be an annual
charge and shall be payable on or before January 1 of each year. The license
tax on any dog over six months of age brought into the town to be kept in the
town or on any dog which becomes six months of age after January 1 of any
year shall become immediately due and payable to the town. All licenses must
be purchased by February 15 or the owner will be subject to prosecution.



(Prior Code, § 4-16)



   (B)   Certificate; tags. Upon payment of the license fee, the Town
Manager shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for
each dog so licensed. The shape of the tag shall be changed every year and
shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the number
corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall be
required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tax must be
affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a
dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the Town Manager
upon the payment of a fee as set by the Town Council and the presentation of
a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year. Dog
tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no refunds shall
be made on any dog license fee because of death of the dog or the owner’s
leaving the town before expiration of the license period.



(Prior Code, § 4-17)



(Ord. passed 7-1-1972; Ord. passed 12-9-1980)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to levy an annual animal license tax, see G.S. §
160A-212



§ 90.37  VACCINATION.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to keep or maintain it
unless it shall have been vaccinated by a licensed veterinary surgeon with
anti-rabies vaccine as required by G.S. § 106-385. Proof of the inoculation
shall be attached to the dog.



(Prior Code, § 4-18)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Editor’s Note:



   G.S. § 106-385 has been repealed



§ 90.38  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS.



   Owners are responsible for the acts of their dogs. The owner of any dog
who commits a nuisance upon the property of another person or who damages
another person’s property or person shall be fully responsible and
accountable for those acts. The owners of dogs shall provide humane and
sanitary shelter from heat, cold, rain, wind and snow and shall provide food
and water adequate to keep the animals in good health and comfort. All dogs
shall be given opportunity for vigorous daily exercises and shall be provided
by their owners with veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering. No
person shall poison or maim a dog nor may a dog be abandoned. Unwanted
animals may be given to the Chowan County Animal Control Officer to be sold
by the county or destroyed in a humane manner.



(Prior Code, § 4-19)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to define and prohibit abuse of animals, see G.S. §
160A-182



   Cruelty to animals generally, see G.S. §§ 140-360 through 140-363 and
140-366 to 140-368



   Protection of animals generally, see G.S. §§ 19A-1 et seq.



§ 90.39  IMPOUNDING.



   No dog of fierce, dangerous or vicious propensities and no female dog
in heat, whether licensed or not, shall be allowed to run at large or upon
the premises of one other than the owner. If any dog is found running at
large in violation of this section, it shall be taken up and impounded and
shall not be released, except upon approval of the poundmaster of the pound
after payment of the fees; provided that, if any dangerous, fierce or vicious
dog so found at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded, the dog may be
slain by any police officer or Animal Control Officer.



(Prior Code, § 4-24)



(Ord. passed 7-1-1972; Ord. passed 12-9-1980)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.40  SUSPECTED RABIES.



   (A)   If a dog is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by a
dog suspected of having rabies, the dog shall be confined in the pound and
shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the
owner for a period of ten days. The owner shall notify the Chowan Animal
Control Officer of the fact that his or her dog has been exposed to rabies.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a
dog has rabies to allow the dog to be taken off his or her premises or beyond
the limits of the town without the written permission of the poundmaster.
Every owner or other person, upon ascertaining a dog is rabid, shall
immediately notify the Chowan Animal Control Officer or a police officer who
shall remove the dog to the pound.



(Prior Code, § 4-25)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.41  RABIES EMERGENCIES.



   Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers
of hydrophobia, the Mayor, if he or she deems it necessary, shall issue a
proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to confine it
securely on his or her premises unless the dog shall have a muzzle of
sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. Any unmuzzled dog
running at large during the time of the proclamation shall be seized and
impounded, unless noticeably infected with rabies. All dogs noticeably
infected with rabies and displaying vicious propensities shall be killed by
the Dog Warden without notice to the owner. Dogs impounded during the first
two days of the proclamation shall, if claimed within five days, be released
to the owner, unless infected with rabies, upon payment of the impounding
charges. If unclaimed after that period, the dog may be summarily destroyed.



(Prior Code, § 4-26)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972)



§ 90.42  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   Any dog shall be confined within an enclosed secure area and shall not
be allowed outside the enclosed secure area unless securely leashed with a
leash no longer than four feet in length. No person shall permit any dog to
be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside the enclosed secure
area unless the person is in direct physical control of the leash. No dogs
shall be leashed to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, stake,
building, vehicle and the like.



(Prior Code, § 4-27)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972; Ord. passed 9-14-2004) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.43  VICIOUS DOGS.



   (A)   Prohibited. No person residing within the corporate limits of
the town for a period of seven or more days shall keep, harbor, own or in any
way possess any of the following dogs:



         (1)   Any unregistered potentially vicious dog. For the
purposes of this section, a POTENTIALLY VICIOUS DOG is defined to mean:



            (a)   The bull terrier breed of dog;



            (b)   The Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog;



            (c)   The American pit bull terrier breed of dog;



            (d)   The American Staffordshire terrier breed of
dog;



            (e)   The Rottweiler breed of dog;



            (f)   The Chow Chow breed of dog;



            (g)   Any dog breed or mixed breed known by a
commonly accepted derivative name of the above listed breeds, including
without limitation, pit bulls, pit bull dogs, and pit bull terriers.



            (h)   Any dog that has the appearance or physical
characteristics of being predominantly one of breeds of dogs listed above; or
any combination thereof.



            (i)   Any owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of
a dog, who is unsure whether it meets the definition of a potentially vicious
dog as defined herein, shall follow provisions set forth in division (B)(10)
to the determine of whether the dog must be registered.



      (2)   Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition
to initiate attack, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety
of, humans or other domestic animals; or



      (3)   Any dog that bites (to the extent of severely bruising
or puncturing the skin), attacks, assaults, inflicts injury or otherwise
harms, a human being or a domestic animal without provocation. PROVOCATION
shall be defined to include: a person or domestic animal who, at the time of
injury or damage, was committing a trespass or other tort upon the premises
occupied by the owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of the dog; or a person
was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog. PROVOCATION does not
include a dog protecting or defending the premises occupied by the owner,
keeper, harborer or possessor of the dog; or a dog protecting or defending a
person within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an attack or assault.



   (B)   Keeping of registered potentially vicious dogs. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A), no resident of the town shall
be prohibited from keeping, harboring, owning or possessing a potentially
vicious dog that has been registered with the town, subject to the following
conditions:



      (1)   Leash.



         (a)   No owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of a
registered potentially vicious dog shall fail to confine such dog in a manner
required by division (B)(2), unless such dog is secured by a leash not more
than four feet in length.



         (b)   No person shall permit a potentially vicious dog
to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen
unless the person is in physical control of the leash and the dog is
adequately restrained.



         (c)   Any person in control of a leashed and registered
potentially vicious dog must be physically able to control/restrain the dog.



         (d)   No registered potentially vicious dog may be
leashed to a stationary object, including without limitation, any tree, post
or building.



      (2)   Confinement.



         (a)   General requirement.  All registered potentially
vicious dogs shall be confined indoors and within the residence or house, or
in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except as leashed in
conformance with the requirements of division (B)(1).



         (b)   Pen, kennel or structure.



            1.   Any pen, kennel or structure in compliance
with this division shall consist of four secure sides with a height of at
least six feet, or if shorter have an enclosed top.



            2.   All structures used to confine registered
potentially vicious dogs shall be locked with a key or combination lock
during any time such animals are confined within the pen or kennel.



            3.   Such pen or kennel shall have a secure bottom
or floor attached to the sides of the pen or kennel, or in the alternative,
each side of the pen must be embedded in the ground to a depth of no less
than two feet.



            4.   All pens or kennels shall adequately contain
the dog and prevent escape.



            5.   All pens or kennels erected to house
potentially vicious dogs shall comply with all zoning and buildings
regulations of the town.



            6.   All pens or kennels shall be adequately
lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



         (c)   Confinement indoors.



            1.   A registered potentially vicious dog may be
kept indoors, but may not be kept in a house or structure in which open
windows or screen doors may provide the dog exit from the structure by the
dog's own volition.



            2.   No registered potentially vicious dog may be
kept in/on any structure attached to the house, such as a porch or patio,
that allows a dog, by its own volition, an exit, and such structure must be
secured by a locked gate or door suitable to prevent the dog from escaping.



      (3)   Signs.



         (a)   All owners, keepers, harborers or possessors of a
registered potentially vicious dog within the town shall display in a
prominent place on their premises, where anyone seeking to enter the property
will see it, a sign easily readable by the public, displaying the words
“Beware of Dog”.



         (b)   The sign shall also be posted on the pen or kennel
of such animal.



      (4)   Identification photographs.



         (a)   All owners, keepers, harborers or possessors of
registered potentially vicious dogs must, upon registration, provide to the
Chief of Police with two color photographs of the registered animal, clearly
demonstrating the animal's color and approximate size.



         (b)   The owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of any
potentially vicious dog shall also provide satisfactory evidence to the Chief
of Police that the dog has been implanted with a microchip identification
marking.



      (5)   Reporting requirements. All owners, keepers, harborers
or possessors of registered potentially vicious dogs must report the
following information, in writing, to the Chief of Police within ten days of
its occurrence:



         (a)   The death or removal from the town of a registered
potentially vicious dog;



         (b)   The birth or offspring of a registered potentially
vicious dog;



         (c)   The change of address of a registered potentially
vicious dog moved to any location within the town corporate limits;



         (d)   Any attack involving a registered potentially
vicious dog upon a human, which inflicts injury, including but not limited
to, bruising, scratches and bites;



         (e)   Any attack involving the registered potentially
vicious dog upon a domestic animal or pet.



      (6)   Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited.  No person
shall sell, barter or in any other way convey a registered potentially
vicious dog to any person within the town, unless the recipient resides
permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the registered
owner of the dog; provided that the registered owner of a potentially vicious
dog may sell, barter or otherwise convey a registered potentially vicious
dog, or the offspring of a registered potentially vicious dog, to persons not
residing within the town.



      (7)   Animals born of registered dogs.  There shall be an
irrebuttable presumption that any offspring born of a registered potentially
vicious dog is, in fact, a potentially vicious dog that must be registered
and kept in accordance with this section.



      (8)   Spay or neuter requirement.



         (a)   Any registered potentially vicious dog shall be
spayed or neutered at the appropriate age as determined by a licensed
veterinarian.



         (b)   The owner, keeper, harborer or possessor shall
provide satisfactory evidence to the Chief of Police that any registered
potentially vicious dog has been spayed or neutered.



         (c)   The Chief of Police or Chowan County Animal
control may authorize the non-spaying or non-neutering of a registered
potentially vicious dog for the purpose of breeding for the American Kennel
Club, if such breeding takes place outside the town.



      (9)   Irrebuttable presumption.



         (a)   There shall be an irrebuttable presumption that
any dog registered with the town as a potentially vicious dog, or capable of
designation as a potentially vicious dog pursuant to division (A), is in fact
a dog subject to the requirements of this section.



         (b)   Any registered potentially vicious dog that has
been certified as a “seeing eye dog” or other
human-handicapped-assistance dog, shall be exempt from the standards of this
section, as long as such dog is being used for the certified assistance
purposes.



      (10)   Application of section.



         (a)   If an owner, keeper, harborer or possessor of a
dog is unsure if their dog meets the definition of a potentially vicious dog
under division (A), they may make a formal request in writing to the Chief of
Police for a determination on the classification of their dog.



         (b)   No action shall be taken against the owner,
keeper, harborer or possessor of the dog while a determination is being made
as to its classification.



         (c)   A written response shall be provided no later than
three weeks after the request has been submitted to the Chief of Police.



      (11)   Failure to comply.



         (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper,
harborer or possessor of a potentially vicious dog registered with the town
to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this
section.



         (b)   Any dog so kept may be subject to immediate
seizure and impoundment, at the cost of the owner, keeper, harborer or
possessor.



         (c)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this
section will result in the revocation of any registration of such animal(s)
and the immediate removal of the animal from the town.



      (12)   Violations and penalties. Any person violating or
permitting the violating of any provision of this section shall be subject to
all enforcement remedies as provided by G.S. § 160A-175 and G.S. § 14-4.



      (13)   Registration and fee.



         (a)   Registration of potentially vicious dogs will be
conducted at the Police Department.



         (b)   The fee for registering a potentially vicious dog
will be $25, to be paid at the time of registration.



         (c)   All registrations will be kept on file with the
Police Department, with copies sent to the Chowan County Animal Control.



(Prior Code, § 4-28)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972; Ord. passed 9-14-2004; Am.
Ord. passed 7-12-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.44  BARKING DOGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep or have within the town a
dog that habitually or repeatedly barks in a manner or to the extent that it
is a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 4-29)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.45  TEASING AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, molest, bait or in any
way bother any dog not belonging to him or her or legally under his or her
control.



(Prior Code, § 4-30)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to define and prohibit abuse of animals, see G.S. §
160A-182



   Cruelty to animals generally, see G.S. §§ 140-360 through 140-363 and
140-366 to 140-368



   Protection of animals generally, see G.S. §§ 19A-1 et seq.



§ 90.46  RUNNING OVER WITH VEHICLE AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person injuring a dog, by running over or
into same or coming into contact with same, with an automobile, motorcycle,
bicycle or other vehicle, to fail to notify immediately the owner of the dog
or the Town Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 4-31)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1972)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 91:  PARADES AND PICKETING



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Certain acts by participants prohibited



   91.03   Interference



Parades and Group Demonstrations



   91.15   Exemptions from subchapter



   91.16   Permit required



   91.17   Application; issuance



   91.18   Restrictions



   91.19   Revocation



   91.20   Appeal from denial



Picket Lines



   91.35   Exemptions from subchapter



   91.36   Permit required



   91.37   Application; issuance



   91.38   Restrictions



   91.39   Revocation



   91.40   Appeal from denial



   91.41   Conduct of participants



Cross-reference:



   Health and Sanitation; Nuisances, see Ch. 94



   Parks, see Ch. 98



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Ch. 96



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to establish and control use of streets, sidewalks
and the like, see G.S. § 160A-296



   Authority of town to regulate use of streets by processions or
assemblages, see G.S. § 20-169



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK. The portion of any street lying between its intersections with
other streets, or that section of a street designated as a block for building
numbering purposes by the town, whichever is the least distance.



   GROUP DEMONSTRATION. Any assembly together or concert of action between
or among two or more persons which takes place on streets, sidewalks, alley
ways, public parking facilities, private parking lots open to the public and
other public grounds for the purpose of protesting any matter or of making
known any position or promotion of the persons, or of or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention
to the assembly.



   PARADE. Any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or
operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession
of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other
public grounds or places.



   PICKET LINE. Any two or more persons formed together for the purpose of
making known any position or promotion of the persons or of or on behalf of
any organization or class of persons.



(Prior Code, § 17-1)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.02  CERTAIN ACTS BY PARTICIPANTS PROHIBITED.



   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken by any
participant in conjunction with or as a part of, any parade, group
demonstration or picket line, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:



   (A)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm or any weapon
or article, including, but not limited to, blackjacks, nightsticks or
flashlights, which, by their use, might constitute a deadly weapon; and/or



   (B)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal,
whether leashed or unleashed.



(Prior Code, § 17-2)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.03  INTERFERENCE.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct or interfere with any parade, group
demonstration or picket line being conducted under authority of a permit duly
issued by the issuing authority.



(Prior Code, § 17-3)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PARADES AND GROUP DEMONSTRATIONS



§ 91.15  EXEMPTIONS FROM SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Funeral processions;



   (B)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities where the activity is under the immediate supervision
and direction of proper school authorities; and/or



   (C)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Prior Code, § 17-4)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.16  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate
in any parade, or group demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley
or other public place within the town unless a permit therefor has been
issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 17-5)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.17  APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall issue permits
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. The
issuing authority may issue permits when they are applied for in connection
with parades taking place on national holidays and in connection with
regularly scheduled athletic events. In addition to the aforesaid permits,
the issuing authority may issue a permit to a person who applies for a permit
to conduct a parade or group demonstration which purports to promote a
particular or singular objective; provided that, he or she may issue only one
permit during any 24-hour period.



   (B)   In the issuance of permits to conduct a parade or group
demonstration which purports to promote a particular or singular objective,
the issuing authority shall:



      (1)   Require a written application for a permit, signed by
the applicant, to be filed not less than 24 hours in advance of the parade,
which application shall specify the time, place, route and duration of any
parade or group demonstration. The applicant shall be an adult 18 years of
age or older;



      (2)   Refuse to issue the permits for parades or group
demonstrations to commence before 6:00 a.m. or terminate after 5:00 p.m.;



      (3)   Refuse to issue the permits for parades or group
demonstrations to be held at the same time and place as those designated in a
permit issued pursuant to a written application previously received by the
issuing authority;



      (4)   Require that the application for a permit specify
whether or not minors below the age of 16 years will be permitted to
participate. No minor below the age of 16 years will be permitted to
participate unless written permission for the participation, signed by the
parent or guardian of the minor, is presented to the issuing authority, a
permit is applied for and the name of the minor is listed on any the permit
issued;



      (5)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify
and the permit shall designate the person or persons in charge of the
activity. The person shall be required to accompany the parade or group
demonstration and shall carry the permit with him or her at that time. The
person shall be an adult 18 years or older. The permit shall not be valid in
the possession of any other person; and



      (6)   Require that the application shall specify, within 50,
the number of persons that will participate and, within five, the number of
vehicles that will participate.



(Prior Code, § 17-6)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.18  RESTRICTIONS.



   Parades and group demonstrations shall be subject to the following
additional regulations.



   (A)   Any group demonstration which takes place in any area normally
subject to heavy pedestrian or heavy vehicular traffic may be limited in the
permit issued to a concentration of not more than six persons participating
within any one block.



   (B)   (1)   The permit may set the starting time and duration of
any parade or group demonstration and may set the speed of its travel, the
space between persons or vehicles, the portions or areas of the streets and
sidewalks to be used, the names of the units participating in the parade,
group or line, the length of the parade, group or line, the route of the
parade and other regulations as the issuing authority may include in the
permit for the control of free movement of traffic upon the streets and
sidewalks or for the health, safety and property rights of the participants
and general public.



      (2)   Parades of less than 100 participants shall be limited
to a duration of one hour. Parades of 100 or more participants shall be
limited to a duration of three hours.



      (3)   The issuing authority, in setting requirements of the
permit, shall consider, among other considerations provided, the following:



         (a)   Whether the activity will require excessive
diversion of police from other necessary duties;



         (b)   Whether the activity will interfere with the
rights of property owners in the area to enjoy peaceful occupancy and use of
their property;



         (c)   Whether the activity can be conducted without
unreasonable interference with normal vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the
area and normal police or fire protection to the public; and



         (d)   Whether the activity will be likely to cause
injury to persons or property, provoke disorderly conduct or create a public
nuisance.



   (C)   (1)   Parade or group demonstration participants shall
assemble in the area or areas as are designated in the permit. The parade or
group demonstration shall commence within 30 minutes after the time stated in
the permit.



      (2)   No participant shall be allowed to join in any parade
after the parade unit has left the assembly area.



(Prior Code, § 17-7)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.19  REVOCATION.



   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade or
group demonstration and order the participants to disperse for any of the
following causes:



   (A)   The violation by any participant of § 91.02 or of any law of
the United States or of the state in the course of the parade or group
demonstration; and/or



   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit.



(Prior Code, § 17-8)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.20  APPEAL FROM DENIAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit shall have a right of
appeal to the Town Council, but the appeal must be filed with the Town
Manager within five days after the denial and the appeal, upon the notice,
will be heard by the Council at its next regular meeting or at any special
meeting called by the Council for the appeal.



(Prior Code, § 17-9)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



PICKET LINES



§ 91.35  EXEMPTIONS FROM SUBCHAPTER.



   The following are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:



   (A)   Funeral processions;



   (B)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities where the activity is under the immediate supervision
and direction of proper school authorities; and



   (C)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Prior Code, § 17-10)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.36  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate
in any picket line in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public
place within the town unless a permit therefor has been issued by the town in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 17-11)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.37  APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall issue permits
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. The
issuing authority may issue a permit to a person who applies for a permit to
conduct a picket line which purports to promote a particular or singular
objective; provided that, he or she may issue only one permit during each
24-hour period.



   (B)   In the issuance of all permits, the issuing authority shall:



      (1)   Require a written application for permit to be filed not
less than 24 hours in advance of the picket line, which application shall
specify the time and place for the commencement and duration of any picket
line. The applicant shall be an adult 18 years of age or older;



      (2)   Refuse to issue the permits for picket lines to commence
before 6:00 a.m. or terminate after 5:00 p.m.;



      (3)   Refuse to issue the permits for picket lines to be held
at the same time and place as those designated in a permit issued pursuant to
a written application previously received by the issuing authority or his or
her designee;



      (4)   Require that the application for a permit specify
whether or not minors below the age of 16 years will be permitted to
participate. Picketing, by its very nature, tends to lead to controversy
which may be detrimental to the health and safety of the minors and therefore
participation by minors is of legitimate concern to their parents and
municipal authorities. No minor below the age of 16 years will be permitted
to participate unless written permission for the participation, signed by the
parent or guardian of the minor, is presented to the issuing authority when a
permit is applied for and the name of the minor is listed on any permit
issued; and



      (5)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify
and the permit shall designate the person or persons in charge of the
activity. The person shall be required to accompany the picket line and shall
carry the permit with him or her at that time. The person shall be an adult
18 years or older.



(Prior Code, § 17-12)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.38  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   A permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may designate the
particular area within the business district within which picketing shall be
permitted on any specified day for which a permit is issued. The permit may
set the starting time and duration of the picketing and other regulations as
the issuing authority may include in the permit for the control of free
movement of traffic upon the streets and sidewalks or for the health, safety
and property rights of the participants and general public. The issuing
authority, in setting requirements of the permit, shall consider, among other
considerations provided, the following:



      (1)   Whether the activity will require excessive diversion of
police from other necessary duties;



      (2)   Whether the activity will interfere with the rights of
property owners in the area to enjoy peaceful occupancy and use of their
property;



      (3)   Whether the activity can be conducted without
unreasonable interference with normal vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the
area and normal police or fire protection to the public; and



      (4)   Whether the activity will be likely to cause injury to
persons or property or provoke disorderly conduct or create a public nuisance.



   (B)   If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use the
same sidewalk for picketing and the use would result in the presence of more
than six pickets thereon, the issuing authority shall allot time to each
group of pickets for the use of the sidewalk on an equitable basis.



(Prior Code, § 17-13)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.39  REVOCATION.



   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a picket line
and direct those participating to disperse for any of the following causes:



   (A)   The violation by any participant of § 91.02 or of any law of
the United States or of the state in the course of the picketing; and/or



   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit.



(Prior Code, § 17-14)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.40  APPEAL FROM DENIAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit, as herein provided,
shall have a right of appeal to the Town Council, but the appeal notice must
be filed with the Town Manager within five days after the denial, and the
appeal, upon the notice, will be heard by the Council at its next regular
meeting or at any special meeting called by the Council for the appeal.



(Prior Code, § 17-15)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 91.41  CONDUCT OF PARTICIPANTS.



   Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional
regulations.



   (A)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic.



   (B)   Not more than six pickets promoting the same objective shall
be permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any
one time.



   (C)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not
exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the objective
for which the picketing is done; provided that, the words used are not
profane, indecent, abusive or inflammatory in nature.



   (D)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and they
must not march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another.
Pickets shall not be allowed to walk more than five feet from the curbline
and shall be in continuous motion.



   (E)   Pickets will not physically interfere with any pedestrian in
the use of the sidewalk or address profane, indecent, abusive or threatening
language to or at any pedestrian which would tend to provoke the pedestrian
or others to a breach of the peace.



   (F)   Pickets will not block or obstruct entrances or exits to any
stores or businesses so as to hinder or impede the normal ingress or egress
of business customers or invitees.



(Prior Code, § 17-16)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PROTECTION



Section



General Provisions



   92.01   Fire Prevention Code adopted



   92.02   Storage of explosives



   92.03   Blasting



   92.04   Storage of combustible containers



   92.05   Accumulation of rubbish, weeds and the like



   92.06   Dead overhead wires and the like



   92.07   Failure to comply with order of Fire Chief to abate hazards



   92.08   Interfering with firefighters



   92.09   Interfering with alarm apparatus



   92.10   False alarms



   92.11   Loitering in fire station; handling and the like of equipment



   92.12   Riding on fire apparatus



   92.13   Damaging fire hydrants and the like



   92.14   Extinguishers



Flammable Liquids



   92.30   Dispensers



   92.31   Parking of vehicles used for transporting certain flammable
liquids



   92.32   Oil plants



Fire Department



   92.45   Organization



   92.46   Duties of Fire Chief



   92.47   Officer in command at fires



Smoke Detectors



   92.60   Definitions



   92.61   Automatic smoke detectors outlets required in rental
residential dwelling units



   92.62   Responsible building owner



   92.63   Permits



   92.64   Maintenance



   92.65   Compliance dates



   92.66   Enforcement and inspectors



   92.67   Appeals



 



   92.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to organize, equip and the like Fire Department, see
G.S. § 160A-291



   Authority of town to regulate the sale, storage, use and the like of
flammable substances, see G.S. § 160A-183



   Authority of town to send firefighters beyond town limits, see G.S.
Chapter 58, Article 83 and § 160A-293



   Fire protection authority of town, see G.S. §§ 160A-291 through
160A-294



   Fire protection generally, see G.S. §§ 69-25.1 et seq.



   “Firemen’s Pension Fund”, see G.S. Chapter 58, Articles 84
through 88



   “Firemen’s Relief Fund”, see G.S. Chapter 58



   Interference with firefighters, see G.S. Chapter 58, Article 82



   State Volunteer Fire Departments, see G.S. Chapter 58, Article 80



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted by the Town Council, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire and explosions, that certain code known as the Fire Prevention
Code, recommended by the American Insurance Association, being particularly
the 2009 edition thereof, and save and except the portions as may be deleted,
modified or amended by the Town Council, of which code not less than one copy
has been and now is filed in the office of the Town Clerk, and the same is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the town.



(Prior Code, § 11-1)  (Ord. passed 2-9-1993)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to adopt technical codes by reference, see G.S. §
160A-76



§ 92.02  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to store in any place within the town for
a longer period of time than 48 hours, more than 50 pounds of gunpowder or
dynamite or ten gallons of gasoline, except in a container or magazine
designed and built for the safe handling of the articles and approved by the
Fire Inspector.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to store under any stairway or other
means of egress any combustible or explosive material.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to install or turn on any lights in any
building or buildings where combustibles or explosives are stored without
first having secured a permit from the Fire Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 11-2)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate storage of explosives, see G.S. §
160A-183



§ 92.03  BLASTING.



   It shall be unlawful to do any blasting without first having a permit
secured from the Fire Inspector and approved by the Mayor.



(Prior Code, § 11-3)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate use of explosives, see G.S. § 160A-183



§ 92.04  STORAGE OF COMBUSTIBLE CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful to store or have in charge for storage any
combustible containers without first having secured a permit from the Fire
Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 11-4)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.05  ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH, WEEDS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful to permit the accumulation of waste paper, weeds,
litter or rubbish of any kind to remain upon any roof, lots or any other
place where the rubbish and the like is liable to create a fire hazard.



(Prior Code, § 11-5)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.06  DEAD OVERHEAD WIRES AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any electric, telegraph or telephone company
to permit any of their disconnected, dead or unused wires to hang or remain
on any pole, tree or house where the wires have formerly been connected and
in use.



(Prior Code, § 11-6)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.07  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER OF FIRE CHIEF TO ABATE HAZARDS.



   Failure of an owner or tenant of any premises to comply with an order
of the Fire Chief to correct a fire hazard on the premises shall be
considered a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 11-7)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   No person shall interfere with a firefighter in the discharge
of his or her duty or hinder him or her in the performance of the duty.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to congregate on any street, alley or
square adjacent to a fire, in a manner as will interfere with the Fire
Department.



(Prior Code, § 11-8)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Interference with firefighters, see G.S. § 69-39



§ 92.09  INTERFERING WITH ALARM APPARATUS.



   No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the fire alarm
system or injure the poles, wires, boxes or other apparatus connected
therewith.



(Prior Code, § 11-9)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Blocking fire-fighting equipment and the like, see G.S. § 20-157



   Interfering with fire alarm system, see G.S. § 14-286



§ 92.10  FALSE ALARMS.



   No person shall give or cause to be given a false alarm of fire;
provided that, alarms may be given by the Fire Chief or any one acting under
his or her direction for the purpose of testing the fire alarm system.



(Prior Code, § 11-10)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Giving false fire alarms, see G.S. § 14-286



§ 92.11  LOITERING IN FIRE STATION; HANDLING AND THE LIKE OF EQUIPMENT.



   No person other than a member of the Fire Department shall loiter about
any fire station or change, handle or meddle in any manner with any fire
engine or any other fire apparatus.



(Prior Code, § 11-11)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.12  RIDING ON FIRE APPARATUS.



   No person, other than a bona fide member of the Fire Department, shall
mount any fire engine or apparatus before it leaves the station or while on
its way to or from a fire or at any other time, unless by permission of the
Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 11-12)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.13  DAMAGING FIRE HYDRANTS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully break, deface, impair
or, in any way, injure any fire hydrant or to in any manner obstruct the free
use of the same in case of fire.



(Prior Code, § 11-13)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Driving over fire hose, see G.S. § 20-157



   Parking near fire hydrant, see G.S. § 20-162



§ 92.14  EXTINGUISHERS.



   Hand or other portable fire extinguishers shall be installed or
maintained in every store, factory, garage or other public building in
sufficient number and type as shall be required by the Fire Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 11-14)  Penalty, see § 92.99



FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS



§ 92.30  DISPENSERS.



   (A)   Service station.



      (1)   Service stations are buildings and premises where
gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be
supplied and dispensed at retail and where, in addition, the following
services may be rendered and sales made, and no other:



         (a)   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries and
distributors and distributor parts;



         (b)   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or
regrooving;



         (c)   Replacement of mufflers and tailpipes, water
hoses, fanbelts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers,
windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors
and the like;



         (d)   Radiator cleaning and flushing;



         (e)   Washing and polishing and sale of automotive
washing and polishing materials;



         (f)   Greasing and lubrication;



         (g)   Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps and
lines;



         (h)   Minor servicing and repair of carburetors;



         (i)   Emergency wiring repairs;



         (j)   Adjusting and repairing brakes;



         (k)   Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of
the head or crankcase or racing the motor;



         (l)   Sales of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and
similar convenience goods for filling station customers, as accessory and
incidental to principal operation; and



         (m)   Provision of road maps and other informational
material to customers and provision of restroom facilities.



      (2)   Uses permissible at a service station do not include
major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting,
welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work
involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent
greater than normally found in service stations. A service station is not a
repair garage nor a body shop.



   (B)   Building requirements. Service stations will strictly meet all
setback and building requirements contained in ordinances of the town.



   (C)   Self-service stations.



      (1)   SELF-SERVICE STATION shall mean that portion of property
where flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored and
subsequently dispensed from fixed approved dispensing equipment into the fuel
tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station attendant
and can include facilities available for sale of other retail products.



      (2)   Approved dispensing devices such as, but not limited to,
coin-operated, card-operated and remote controlled types are permitted at
self-service stations.



      (3)   All self-service stations shall have at least one
attendant on duty while the station is open to the public. The attendant’s
primary function shall be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of
Class I liquids while the liquids are actually being dispensed.



      (4)   It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to:



         (a)   Prevent the dispensing of Class I liquids into
portable containers not in compliance with the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code;



         (b)   Control sources of ignition; and



         (c)   Immediately handle accidental spills and fire
extinguishers if needed.



      (5)   The attendant or supervisor on duty shall be mentally
and physically capable of performing the functions and assuming the
responsibility prescribed in this section.



      (6)   Emergency controls specified in the applicable
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code shall be installed at a location
acceptable to the Fire Chief, but controls shall not be more than 100 feet
from dispensers.



      (7)   Operating instructions shall be conspicuously posted in
the dispensing area.



      (8)   The dispensing area shall at all times be in clear view
of the attendant and the placing or allowing of any obstacle to come between
the dispensing area and the attendant control area shall be prohibited. The
attendant shall at all times be able to communicate with persons in the
dispensing area.



      (9)   Hose nozzle valves used at a self-service station for
the dispensing of Class I liquids shall be an approved automatic-closing type.



      (10)   Warning signs shall be conspicuously posted in the
dispensing area incorporating the following or equivalent wording:



         (a)   “Warning—It is Unlawful and Dangerous to
Dispense Gasoline into Unapproved Containers”;



         (b)   “No Smoking”; and



         (c)   “Stop Motor”.



   (D)   Drainage and waste disposal.



      (1)   Provision shall be made in the area where Class I
liquids are dispensed to prevent spilled liquids from flowing into the
interior of service station buildings. The provision can be by grading
driveways, raising door sills or other equally effective means.



      (2)   Crankcase drainings and flammable or combustible liquids
shall not be dumped into sewers, streams or adjoining property, but shall be
stored in tanks or drums outside any building until removed from the premises.



   (E)   Sources of ignition. In addition to the previous restrictions
of this section, the following shall apply. There shall be no smoking or open
flames in the areas used for fueling, servicing fuel systems for internal
combustion engines, receiving or dispensing of Class I and Class II liquids.
Conspicuous and legible signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted within
sight of the customer being served. The motors of all equipment being fueled
shall be shut off during the fueling operation, except for emergency
generators, pumps and the like where continuing operation is essential.



(Prior Code, § 11-15)  (Ord. passed 5-10-1972; Ord. passed 4-14-1981)



§ 92.31  PARKING OF VEHICLES USED FOR TRANSPORTING CERTAIN FLAMMABLE
LIQUIDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to remain
standing upon any street or public parking facility or public alley of the
town, or in any residential area within 100 feet of a dwelling house, any
transport truck or combination of truck and trailer or any other vehicle
designed or constructed or used for the bulk transportation of gasoline, LP
gas, naphtha, kerosene, distillate, oil or other inflammable or explosive oil
derivatives, whether the same may be empty or loaded; provided, this section
shall not be so construed as to prohibit the delivery to residences or
businesses, in the ordinary course of business, of kerosene, fuel oil, LP gas
or other products.



(Prior Code, § 11-16)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.32  OIL PLANTS.



   (A)   An OIL PLANT is any place where gasoline or other highly
flammable or explosive petroleum or other products are received in tank cars
or other bulk quantities, stored and delivered by tank wagon or otherwise to
dealers, consumers or places outside the plant.



   (B)   Oil plants shall be kept in proper shape and repair and clean
and free from rubbish, litter and waste oils as may render it unnecessarily
hazardous and a menace to life and property.



   (C)   No oil plant shall be established or located within the
business or fire district or in or near any mercantile or manufacturing
sections, nor shall an oil plant be established or located within any other
part of the town unless its arrangement, construction, equipment and location
conform to the following requirements.



      (1)   Each tank for storage of the products shall be of steel
or reinforced concrete, shall conform to the specifications of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters or U.S. Bureau of Standards and shall rest on
noncombustible supports of ample strength and stability, with factor of
safety not less than five. Shutoff gate valves shall be of a gate type and
shall be equipped with two or more layers of nickel gauze separated one-half
inch or more and not larger than 40 mesh to the inch. All tank supports shall
be of brick or concrete or properly protected steel work and all valves and
pumps shall be of an improved design, make or specification and location as
are approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters or U.S. Bureau of
Standards, as modern and standard equipment for such purposes.



      (2)   All tanks shall be thoroughly and effectively grounded
as protection against lightning and static electricity. No tank shall be
located nearer than 25 feet to the boundary line of the land occupied by the
oil plant, unless it is the line of a railroad or common carrier, nor nearer
than 50 feet to any building not a part of the plant; provided that, in case
of large storage tanks, 25,000 gallons’ capacity or over, the distance
shall not be less than is prescribed by the rules and regulations of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters.



      (3)   Oil tanks shall not be located on land sloping toward
combustible property or in proximity to streams, drainage, ditches or
waterfronts where escaping oil can reach combustible property. In locations
where aboveground tanks are liable, in case of breakage or overflow, to
endanger surrounding property, each tank shall be protected by an embankment
or dike. The protection shall have a capacity of not less than one and one
quarter times the capacity of the tanks surrounded and shall be at least four
feet high, but in no case higher than one quarter the height of the tank when
the height of the tank exceeds 16 feet.



(Prior Code, § 11-17)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 92.45  ORGANIZATION.



   The Fire Department shall consist of the Chief of the Fire Department
and a sufficient number of firefighters, voluntary, part time or full time,
to maintain and operate the Department. The Town Manager shall appoint the
Chief and approve the appointment to the Department of all members. The
Department may from time to time adopt its own rules and regulations
governing the Department subject to the approval of the Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 11-18)



§ 92.46  DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.



   The duties of the Fire Chief, subject to supervision of the Town
Manager, shall be as follows.



   (A)   Command. He or she shall:



      (1)   Have general control of the Fire Department, the
personnel, apparatus and fire alarm systems;



      (2)   Command the Department and supervise the fire fighting
and extinguishing of all fires; and



      (3)   Have authority to keep away from the vicinity of all
fires any and all idle, disorderly or suspicious persons.



   (B)   Fire inspector. As Fire Inspector, the Fire Chief shall:



      (1)   Have authority to enter any and all premises at a
reasonable time for purposes of inspection;



      (2)   Make quarterly inspections of all structures located
within the fire districts;



      (3)   Investigate complaints promptly;



      (4)   Investigate the cause of fires and keep records of his
or her findings as to origin, location, owner, extent of damage, injury and
amount of insurance carried. The findings must be reported to the State
Insurance Commissioner and the Town Council at regular intervals;



      (5)   Cause the removal of fire hazards by serving proper
order to the owner or agent of the premises in question, the order to state a
reasonable time limit to correct the fire hazard;



      (6)   Inspect or cause to be inspected all fire hydrants and
fire alarm systems at least once every three months and shall make a report
of the inspection to the Town Council; and



      (7)   Inspect or cause to be inspected all trucks and other
equipment of the Fire Department each and every week to ascertain that the
equipment is being kept in proper condition. He or she shall report annually
to the Town Council the condition of all equipment and report the name,
residence and occupation of all firefighters.



(Prior Code, § 11-19)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of Fire Chief, see G.S. § 160A-292



§ 92.47  OFFICER IN COMMAND AT FIRES.



   (A)   The officer in command at a fire shall have authority to
summon aid and no citizen so summoned may refuse to help in extinguishing the
fire or in protecting exposed property or to do and perform any act that may
lawfully be required of members of the Fire Department.



   (B)   During the continuance of any fire, the officer in command
shall have authority to demolish or destroy any burning structures or other
structures necessary to prevent the spread of the fire. The officer in
command shall also have authority to remove any contents of any structure to
prevent their destruction or to prevent the spread of fire.



   (C)   The officer in command and his or her delegates shall have
authority to disperse any persons unlawfully congregating in the vicinity of
a fire, in violation of § 92.46 and to close streets and alleys to prevent
their congregation in areas adjacent to the fire or in streets and areas
needed for fire-fighting activities.



(Prior Code, § 11-20)



SMOKE DETECTORS



§ 92.60  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTOR DEVICE. Battery powered, for the purpose
of this subchapter, a self-acting approved battery powered device, operating
by its own mechanism when actuated by smoke. (Note: May be used in
residential dwelling units constructed prior to 1-1-1975.)



      AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTOR DEVICE (120-VOLT PLUG-IN). For the
purpose of this subchapter, a self-acting approved device powered by 120
volts, cord and plug connected, operating by its own mechanism when actuated
by smoke. (Note: May be used in residential dwelling units constructed prior
to 1-1-1975.)



      AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTOR OUTLET (120-VOLT). For the purpose of
this subchapter, a self-acting approved outlet (non-plug-in) powered by 120
volts operating by its own mechanism when actuated by smoke. (Note: Required
in all residential dwelling units constructed after 1-1-1975. As per NEC
210-71, a state amendment to the State Electrical Code.)



      RENTAL RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. For the purpose of this
subchapter a structure with one or two dwelling units that is not owner
occupied; or a structure with three or more dwelling units whose units are
not required to have smoke detectors under the State Building Code Vol. 1-B,
§ 35.



      RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. For the purpose of this subchapter,
single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, apartment houses, condominiums
and/or town houses.



   (B)   For the purposes of this subchapter, certain abbreviations,
terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as set forth
in the definition sections of the State Building Codes and Town Zoning
Ordinance.



   (C)   For the purpose of this subchapter, all other wording shall be
defined as per a dictionary.



(Prior Code, § 11-21)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



§ 92.61  AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTORS OUTLETS REQUIRED IN RENTAL RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   A minimum of one 120-volt outlet shall be installed outside
each sleeping area in each dwelling unit within single-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings, apartment houses, condominiums and/or town houses for
the connection of approved fixed automatic smoke detectors (non-plug-in) as
required in the State Building Code Vol. I-B, § 35.



   (B)   Automatic smoke detector outlets required in residential
dwelling units. The outlets shall be located on or near the ceiling in
accordance with the listing and the instructions of the manufacture of the
approved automatic smoke detector.



   (C)   Exception: The 120-volt outlets specified in this section
shall not be required when an approved automatic smoke detecting system is
installed which provides equivalent protection and whose primary source of
power is 120-volts.



   (D)   Note: The wording in this section is identical to the wording
contained in § 210-71, state amendment to the 1990 National Electric Code
adopted 4-15-1990.



   (E)   Local Exception No. 1: At least one listed detector either
battery powered or a 120-volt (plug-in-type) shall be installed, in rental
residential dwelling units constructed prior to 1-1-1975. A detector shall be
installed outside each sleeping area. Detectors shall have either a visible
light to indicate operability or an audible trouble signal. Audible trouble
signals shall be designed to operate at least every minute for seven
consecutive days. The alarm signaling device shall emit not less than 85
decibels at ten feet. Detectors shall be on or near the ceiling installed in
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions.



(Prior Code, § 11-22)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



§ 92.62  RESPONSIBLE BUILDING OWNER.



   The owner(s) of a building having a rental residential dwelling unit or
dwelling units shall be responsible for installing or having qualified
persons install outlets as required by this subchapter. Installation of
120-volt automatic smoke detector outlets shall be done by a licensed
electrical contractor.



(Prior Code, § 11-23)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



§ 92.63  PERMITS.



   Permits will only be required if the type installation is as outlined
in G.S. § 160A-417. This statute explains in detail when permits are
required.



(Prior Code, § 11-24)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



§ 92.64  MAINTENANCE.



   The owner of a rental residential dwelling unit shall be responsible
for maintaining his or her automatic smoke detector and its power source.



(Prior Code, § 11-25)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



§ 92.65  COMPLIANCE DATES.



   (A)   Compliance dates for rental residential dwelling units not in
compliance with this subchapter on its effective date.



   (B)   All rental residential dwelling units shall be in compliance
with this subchapter not more than 90 days from its effective date.



(Prior Code, § 11-26)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



§ 92.66  ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTORS.



   The Planning and Inspections Department and/or the Fire Prevention
Office shall be responsible for enforcing this subchapter. Inspectors shall
be qualified by the Code Officials Qualification Board when inspecting the
120-volt permanent type units.



(Prior Code, § 11-27)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



§ 92.67  APPEALS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, appeals from an inspector’s
decision may be taken to the Town Council by filing an appeal with the staff
within five days of an inspector’s written decision.



(Prior Code, § 11-28)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall be adjudged to have violated
§§ 92.60 through 92.67 shall be subject to a civil penalty of an amount as
set by the Town Council for each offense. Each 30 days that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



      (2)   The Inspector shall make written demand for payment of
the penalty assessed upon the person in violation and shall set forth in a
description of the violation for which the penalty has been imposed. If
payment is not received within 30 days after demand for payment is made, the
town may recover the penalty, and all subsequently accruing penalties, in a
civil action.



      (3)   Any person who shall be adjudged to have violated §§
92.60 through 92.67 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction, be liable to a fine not to exceed an amount as set by the Town
Council for each offense. Each 30 days that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.



      (4)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(1), (2) and (3) above,
§§ 92.60 through 92.67 may also be enforced by appropriate equitable
remedies issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 11-29)  (Ord. 90-1, passed 9-11-1990)



CHAPTER 93:  CEMETERIES



Section



   93.01   Reference to chapter in document granting right of interment



   93.02   Temporary modifications



   93.03   Applicability of other ordinances and laws



   93.04   Sextons



   93.05   Designation of land for burial; enlargement or alteration of
town cemeteries



   93.06   Lots



   93.07   Interments



   93.08   Opening of casket



   93.09   Visiting hours



   93.10   Conduct on premises



   93.11   Use as thoroughfares; driving over lots and the like



   93.12   Removal of articles



   93.13   Litter; maintenance



   93.14   Damage



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town as to cemeteries generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-341 to
160A-348



   Cemetery trustees, see G.S. §§ 160A-349.1 to 160A-349.13



   Desecration of cemeteries, see G.S. §§ 14-148 and 14-149



   Disturbing graves, see G.S. §§ 14-148 and 14-149



   Interfering with graveyards, see G.S. § 14-149



   Removing or defacing tombstones, see G.S. § 14-148



§ 93.01  REFERENCE TO CHAPTER IN DOCUMENT GRANTING RIGHT OF INTERMENT.



   Reference to this chapter in the instrument granting right of interment
shall have the same force and effect as if the provisions of this chapter
were set forth in full therein.



(Prior Code, § 8-1)



§ 93.02  TEMPORARY MODIFICATIONS.



   Temporary exceptions, suspensions or modifications in the provisions of
this chapter to avoid imposing unnecessary hardships shall in no way be
construed as affecting the general application of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-2)



§ 93.03  APPLICABILITY OF OTHER ORDINANCES AND LAWS.



   Besides being subject to the provisions of this chapter, all
interments, disinterments and removals are made subject to the orders and
laws of the properly constituted authorities of the town, the county and the
state.



(Prior Code, § 8-3)



§ 93.04  SEXTONS.



   (A)   There shall be a sexton for town cemeteries, appointed or
designated by the Town Manager, to whom shall be introduced the supervision
of Beaver Hill and Vine Oak Cemeteries. The compensation of the sexton shall
be from time to time fixed and determined by the Town Manager. The sexton
shall be at all times subject to dismissal by the Town Manager in like manner
and to the same extent as any other municipal employee.



   (B)   The sexton shall be responsible for the sale of lots, issuance
and recording of deeds and the enforcement of all rules and regulations
regarding the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 8-4)



§ 93.05  DESIGNATION OF LAND FOR BURIAL; ENLARGEMENT OR ALTERATION OF TOWN
CEMETERIES.



   (A)   No person shall set apart land within the town limits for the
burial of the dead until the same has been submitted to and approved by the
Town Council.



   (B)   The town reserves the right to enlarge, reduce, replace or
change the boundaries or grading of the cemeteries or sections thereof from
time to time as it deems advisable or necessary.



(Prior Code, § 8-5)



§ 93.06  LOTS.



   (A)   Prices. The Town Council shall establish a schedule of prices
for cemetery lots from time to time as it deem best. All lots shall be paid
for in advance. A current price schedule shall be on file in the Town
Clerk’s office.



   (B)   Descriptions and the like. The town shall have the right to
correct any errors that may be made by it in the descriptions, transfer or
conveyance of any interment property.



   (C)   Inscriptions. The names or inscriptions on monuments, vaults
or markers must correspond with the names and records in the Town Clerk’s
office and no changes may be made thereon except upon request of the proper
parties and approval of the town.



   (D)   Transfer. No transfer or assignment by any lot owner of any
lot or portion of a lot or interest therein shall be valid unless approved by
the town and, in no case, can this be given as long as there is any
indebtedness due on the lot.



   (E)   Supervision. The town retains control and supervision of all
lots that are sold, with the purpose of preventing anything which is
objectionable or injurious to a lot, adjoining lots or the cemeteries in
general.



   (F)   Perpetual care. Perpetual care provided by the town shall be
held to mean only the maintenance of roadways and walks, the cutting of grass
upon the lots at reasonable intervals and the pruning of shrubs and trees
planted by the town. If found economically necessary at any time, the town
may limit perpetual care to that amount that can be done with the income
received from the sale of cemetery lots and any investment of other funds.



   (G)   Monument foundations. Foundations for all monuments and all
markers shall be constructed by approved dealers at the cost of the lot
owner, from materials specified by the town, but monument foundations shall
not be built until after full purchase price of the lot is paid. Monument
foundations shall extend six inches outside the edges of the monument at all
points and shall be flush with surrounding ground.



   (H)   Fencing, walks and the like. No coping, curbing, fencing,
hedging, grave mounds, borders, shrubbery, trees or enclosures of any kind
shall be allowed around any lot; and no walks of brick, cinders, tile, stone,
marble, terra-cotta, sand, cement, gravel or wood shall be allowed on any lot.



   (I)   Flowers. Artificial flowers will be allowed for seasonal
holidays or memorials. After they become faded or unattractive, they will be
removed immediately by the caretakers. Cut flowers will be allowed for a
period of seven days, after which they will be removed by the caretakers. No
vases, clay pots or flower containers will be allowed to remain unused on any
grave plot or lot. The vases, pots and containers shall be removed as
necessary by the caretakers.



   (J)   Emblems, flags and the like. Metal emblems, markers, flags and
guidons are allowed on lots or graves only immediately preceding and after
Memorial Day.



   (K)   Removal of baskets, designs and the like after interment. Upon
request of lot owner or his or her representative, frames, designs or baskets
remaining upon a lot after an interment may be held for five days after
interment and, if not called for in that time, may be disposed of by the town
without any liability on its part whatever.



(Prior Code, § 8-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.07  INTERMENTS.



   (A)   The body of any deceased person shall not be interred within
the corporate limits, except in the cemetery owned by the town or in a
cemetery that has been set apart and approved by the Town Council.



   (B)   No interment may be made unless the body is accompanied by a
burial permit.



   (C)   Not more than one body or the remains of more than one body
shall be interred in one grave or vault without written permission from the
town. Proper identification of the interment shall be made on suitable
memorial or marker.



   (D)   All interments, disinterments and removals shall be made at
the time and in the manner as prescribed by the town.



   (E)   A permanent type container (vault) is required for each
interment.



(Prior Code, § 8-7)  (Ord. passed 10-10-1978)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.08  OPENING OF CASKET.



   Consent of the legal representatives of the deceased or a relative in
charge of the funeral or a court order shall be required in order for a
casket containing a body to be opened after it is within the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 8-8)



§ 93.09  VISITING HOURS.



   The town cemeteries shall be open to visitors from 7:00 a.m. to sunset
from April 1 to October 31; and from 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. from November 1
to March 31.



(Prior Code, § 8-9)



§ 93.10  CONDUCT ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person shall disturb the quiet, repose and good order of
the cemetery. No unauthorized person shall enter the cemetery except during
the normal visiting hours of that cemetery.



   (B)   Trespassing, theft or noisy, boisterous or other improper
conduct or other violations of rules may result in arrest of the violators.



(Prior Code, § 8-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.11  USE AS THOROUGHFARES; DRIVING OVER LOTS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person shall use any cemetery or any part thereof as a
driveway or walkway; provided that, this prohibition shall not apply to
funeral occasions nor to visiting graves.



   (B)   There shall be no driving over lots or lawns except by town
employees where necessary in the discharge of their duties. Heavy trucking
shall be permitted only in connection with work in the cemeteries. Vehicles
shall not be driven in the cemeteries faster than 15 mph.



(Prior Code, § 8-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.12  REMOVAL OF ARTICLES.



   In order to discourage theft and unauthorized entrance upon lots or
graves, nothing may be removed from the cemeteries without the permission of
the town.



(Prior Code, § 8-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.13  LITTER; MAINTENANCE.



   No person shall deposit any rubbish, filth, waste or other unclean or
unsightly substance in any town cemetery, and all materials carried within
the cemeteries and not used in the erection of monuments, markers or other
lawful structures authorized by this chapter shall be promptly removed
therefrom by the owner of the lot upon which the monument, marker or
structure shall be located.



(Prior Code, § 8-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.14  DAMAGE.



   (A)   Headstones, vases and the like. The town shall not be liable
for accident or damage to headstones, vases, monuments or mausoleums,
resulting from the ordinary hazards of cemetery work.



   (B)   Acts of God, thieves and the like. The town shall not be
liable for loss or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control,
including damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy,
thieves, vandals, strikes, malicious mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable
accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or orders of any military or civil
authority, whether damage be direct or collateral.



   (C)   Fences. No person shall break down, climb over or through,
destroy or otherwise injure any fence surrounding the cemetery.



   (D)   Trees, shrubs and flowers. It shall be unlawful to cut down,
pull up or otherwise injure or destroy or to carry away any trees, shrubs or
flowers growing or placed within the cemetery.



(Prior Code, § 8-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 94:  HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES



Section



General Provisions



   94.001   Definitions



Solid Wastes, Scrap Materials and Noxious Growth



   94.020   Accumulation of solid wastes



   94.021   Dumping or littering on public or private property



   94.022   Transportation of solid waste within town



   94.023   Burning or burying solid wastes



   94.024   Scrap materials



   94.025   Noxious growth



Storage and Collection of Solid Wastes



   94.040   Property owners to provide adequate receptacles



   94.041   Size, number and type of receptacles required



   94.042   Storage and collection practices



   94.043   Special collections



   94.044   Ownership, maintenance, rental fee for dumpsters



   94.045   Miscellaneous



Abandoned and Junked Motor Vehicles



   94.060   Administration



   94.061   Definitions



   94.062   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   94.063   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   94.064   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized



   94.065   Removal of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles;
pretowing notice requirements



   94.066   Exceptions to prior notice requirement



   94.067   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements



   94.068   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final
disposition of vehicle



   94.069   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings



   94.070   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle



   94.071   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property



   94.072   Protection against criminal or civil liability



   94.073   Exceptions



   94.074   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle



Public Nuisances



   94.080   Declaration of nuisance



   94.081   Investigation



   94.082   Notice



   94.083   Abatement order



   94.084   Failure to comply



   94.085   Cost



   94.086   “Owner” defined



Enforcement



   94.100   Summary abatement of conditions dangerous or prejudicial to
the public health



   94.101   Notice required



   94.102   Hearing procedures



   94.103   Order



 



   94.999   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned and derelict vehicles generally, see G.S. §§ 20-137.6 et
seq.



   Authority of town to abate public health and safety nuisances, see G.S.
§ 160A-193



   Authority of town to operate solid waste collection and disposal
system, see G.S. § 160A-312



   Authority of town to place containers along state highways, see G.S. §
136-18.3



   Authority of town to prohibit littering of streets and the like, see
G.S. § 160A-303.1



   Authority of town to provide for removal of abandoned or junked
vehicles, see G.S. § 160A-303



   Authority of town to regulate garbage and refuse generally, see G.S. §
160A-192



   Littering generally, see G.S. § 14-399



   Regulation of placement of garbage and refuse, see G.S. § 160A-303.1



   Removal of unauthorized vehicles from service stations, see G.S. §
20-219.3



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that:



      (1)   Is left on public grounds or town-owned property in
violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking;



      (2)   Is left for longer than 24 hours on property owned or
operated by the town;



      (3)   Is left for longer than two hours on private property
without the consent of the owner, occupant, or lessee of the property; or



      (4)   Is left for longer than seven days on public grounds.



   GARBAGE. All solid wastes capable of being rapidly decomposed by
microorganisms, including, but not limited to, animal and vegetable wastes
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, as
well as animal offal and carcasses, but excluding sewage and human wastes.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES. An abandoned motor vehicle that also:



      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;



      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which
it was originally intended to move;



      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less
than $100; or



      (4)   Does not display a current license plate when the motor
vehicle is required by laws of this state to have a license plate to operate
on the public roads.



   MOTOR VEHICLES. Any machine designed or intended to travel over land or
water by self-propulsion or while attached to a self-propelled vehicle.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director or any other person
designated by the manager to perform the functions and exercise the
responsibilities assigned by this chapter to the Public Works Director.



   REFUSE. All solid wastes, except:



      (1)   Garbage; and



      (2)   Solids that are dissolved or suspended in domestic,
commercial or industrial wastewater effluent.



   SCRAP MATERIALS.



      (1)   Pieces or fragments of metal, wood, glass, masonry,
plastic, textiles, rope, leather, rubber, paper or any other substance, that
formerly were part of the construction of some useful object or thing or that
consist of the excess resulting from the creation of some useful object or
thing;



      (2)   Objects or things, including, but not limited to,
machines, tools, equipment, hardware, furniture, appliances and the like or
parts of the same that are no longer in serviceable condition or are valuable
only as raw material for reprocessing; or



      (3)   Motor vehicles or remnants thereof that:



         (a)   Do not display current license plates;



         (b)   Cannot, without substantial repairs, be made to
operate in the manner originally intended; and



         (c)   Are valuable only as raw materials for
reprocessing, but that do not constitute solid wastes, as herein defined,
because they are or may be useful to or wanted by or have not been discarded
by the person in control of the premises where they have been located.



   SOLID WASTES. Wastes that are nongaseous and non-liquid (except that
liquid wastes resulting from the processing of food are deemed solid wastes
for the purposes of this chapter).



   WASTES. All useless, unwanted or discarded materials resulting from
domestic, industrial, commercial or community activities.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-1)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)



SOLID WASTES, SCRAP MATERIALS AND NOXIOUS GROWTH



§ 94.020  ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTES.



   (A)   Subject to the qualifications contained in division (B) below,
no person may cause, suffer or permit solid wastes to accumulate or remain on
premises under his or her control, except in accordance with the provisions
hereof.



   (B)   Natural solid waste materials resulting from lawn or garden
work, such as bush and tree trimmings, leaves, grass, stumps, dirt and stones
may be allowed to accumulate or remain on premises under a person’s control
unless these materials become or threaten to become a fire hazard or a
harboring place for rats, mice, snakes or other vermin or otherwise pose a
danger to the public health or safety.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-21)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.021  DUMPING OR LITTERING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person may place, discard, throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be
placed, discarded, thrown, dropped or deposited any solid wastes on:



   (A)   Any public street or sidewalk within the town or on any
property owned or operated by the town or any other public property, except
in properly designated receptacles; or



   (B)   Any property not owned by him or her without the consent of
the owner, occupant or lessee thereof.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-22)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 94.999



Editor’s note:



   G.S. § 14-399 makes the acts prohibited in this section a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $200. Therefore, this section may be
enforced by the town only through civil penalties or injunctive relief.



§ 94.022  TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE WITHIN TOWN.



   No person may transport or cause to be transported any solid wastes on
the public streets of the town unless the solid wastes are so secured that no
solid wastes escape from the transporting vehicle. In addition, any garbage
so transported shall be carried in closed containers that prevent the escape
of noxious odors or liquids.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-23)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.023  BURNING OR BURYING SOLID WASTES.



   (A)   No person may burn or cause to be burned any garbage for
purposes of disposal and no person may burn or cause to be burned any refuse
unless otherwise specifically authorized by this code.



   (B)   No person may bury or cause to be buried any solid waste for
purposes of disposal.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-24)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.024  SCRAP MATERIALS.



   (A)   Declaration of policy. The Town Council hereby declares that
the uncontrolled accumulation of scrap materials on any premises constitutes
a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town in
that the accumulations can furnish shelter and breeding places for vermin,
present physical dangers to the safety and well-being of children and other
citizens, pose a danger of fire and depreciate property values or cause a
loss of business by detracting from the appearance and character of
residential and commercial neighborhoods.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-25)



   (B)   Accumulations. No person may cause, suffer or permit scrap
materials to accumulate or remain on premises under his or her control unless
the scrap materials are:



      (1)   Surrounded by a fence of sufficient height, strength and
construction to deny persons, especially small children, access from and to
shield neighboring properties from the view of them; or



      (2)   Are so stored within a structure or within a container
outside of a structure as to minimize substantially the dangers set forth in
division (A) above.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-26)



(Ord. passed 3-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.025  NOXIOUS GROWTH.



   No person may cause, suffer or permit on premises under his or her
control any growth of weeds, grasses or other plants or bushes that becomes
or threatens to become a fire hazard or a harboring place for rats, mice,
snakes or other vermin or otherwise poses a danger to the public health or
safety.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-27)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 94.999



STORAGE AND COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTES



§ 94.040  PROPERTY OWNERS TO PROVIDE ADEQUATE RECEPTACLES.



   The owner of every premises shall be responsible for providing adequate
solid waste receptacles in accordance with this section to store the solid
wastes generated by activities taking place on those premises between
scheduled pickups.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-31)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)



§ 94.041  SIZE, NUMBER AND TYPE OF RECEPTACLES REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every retail, wholesale and commercial establishment
generating more than three 30-gallon trash receptacles full of waste
materials twice weekly on the regularly scheduled collection days shall be
required to utilize the bulk container system. The type and size of the
containers shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works
or his or her duly authorized representative.



   (B)   Every retail, wholesale and commercial establishment not
placing refuse at the curb-side for collection on the regularly scheduled
twice weekly collection days shall likewise use the bulk container system.



   (C)   Stationary bulk refuse containers for townhouses, apartment
complexes, condominiums or group housing will be required of the owners when
adequate garbage container receptacles are not provided for their tenants.
Adequate garbage container receptacles shall be defined as masonry
receptacles constructed high enough to prevent garbage containers from being
overturned by dogs or other animals and large enough for containers having a
capacity of not more than 32 gallons.



   (D)   The owners of residential apartment buildings or of a group of
resident apartment buildings in the same complex where there are four or more
living units, either in a single building or in a complex treated as a unit,
are hereby required to install, for each resident apartment building which
contains four or more living units, and for each resident apartment group or
complex which group or complex contains, in the aggregate, four or more
living units, stationary bulk containers according to the following
specifications when adequate garbage container receptacles are not provided
for their tenants.



   (E)   The minimum size stationary bulk container for any residential
apartment building will be four cubic yards. The ratio to be used for units
in excess of eight residents will be one-half cubic yard per unit.



   (F)   Prior to enforcement of the above section, the Town Manager
shall give written notice to the property owner stating the problem and
giving same 15 days to provide adequate garbage container receptacles for his
or her tenants. At the expiration of 15 days the Town Manager may request
permission from the Town Council to require the respective property owner to
install stationary bulk containers.



   (G)   The term BULK CONTAINER, for the purposes of this subchapter,
shall mean a metal container of not less than four cubic yards nor more than
eight cubic yards in capacity. The container shall be of right construction
with doors opening on the sides or top and constructed so that it can be
serviced by the town equipment. The term DUMPSTER is used interchangeably
with the term BULK CONTAINER.



   (H)   Unless otherwise determined by the Public Works Director for
good cause shown, the owners of all premises not required to be served by
dumpsters shall provide at least one 30- to 32-gallon container made of
galvanized metal, plastic, rubber or other material resistant to rust,
corrosion or rapid deterioration. Each required container shall be watertight
and provided with handles and a tight fitting cover.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-32)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.042  STORAGE AND COLLECTION PRACTICES.



   (A)   Premises served by dumpsters. With respect to premises served
by dumpsters:



      (1)   The location of dumpsters shall be determined by the
Public Works Director after consultation with the owner of the premises
concerned. In making this determination, the Public Works Director shall
consider the needs of the occupants of the premises, the welfare of the
occupants and neighbors, and the town’s need to facilitate collection and
minimize the cost of service.



      (2)   Solid waste shall be collected from the dumpsters by the
town where the dumpsters are located by the Public Works Director.



      (3)   The Public Works Director may require that screening be
provided around dumpsters if he or she determines that the screening is
necessary to prevent solid wastes from being transported onto neighboring
properties or if the location of the dumpsters is such that, in the absence
of screening, the dumpsters would present an offensive appearance or cause
offensive odors to be transmitted to neighboring properties.



      (4)   All solid wastes shall be stored in dumpsters pending
collection by the town. No solid wastes not placed in dumpsters will be
collected by the town, except in accordance with § 94.043.



      (5)   All dumpsters shall be cleaned periodically to minimize
offensive odors and the tops or openings to all dumpsters shall be kept
securely fastened at all times pending collection.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-33)



   (B)   Premises not served by dumpsters. With respect to premises not
served by dumpsters:



      (1)   Garbage may be stored pending collection by the town
only in the receptacles described in § 94.041(H). Refuse may be stored
(between scheduled collections only) in any appropriate and convenient
fashion.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, solid
wastes may not be stored between scheduled pickups within 45 feet of the
centerline of any public street unless the solid wastes are stored within a
completely enclosed substantial structure such as a house, garage or shed.



      (3)   Solid wastes shall be placed adjacent to the street for
collection on the scheduled collection day or after dark on the preceding
day. After collection, all solid waste receptacles and all uncollected solid
wastes shall be removed to a storage location that complies with division
(B)(2) above by 6:00 a.m. on the day following the collection day. Solid
wastes should only be placed on the curb of the house that generated the
solid waste.



      (4)   If the Public Works Director determines that because of
the physical infirmity of the occupant of any premises, the occupant cannot
without severe hardship transport the solid wastes from the storage location
required by division (B)(2) above to the collection point required by
division (B)(3) above, he or she may do one of the following:



         (a)   Authorize the occupant to store solid wastes at or
near the pickup location between scheduled pickups;



         (b)   Provide solid wastes receptacles mounted on wheels
or otherwise constructed so that the occupant can transport the solid wastes
from the point of storage to the point of pickup; and/or



         (c)   Provide rear yard pickup service.



      (5)   Containers other than those described in § 94.041(H)
will be treated as solid wastes and collected by the town.



      (6)   (a)   Grass cutting, hedge clippings, tree trimmings
and similar materials less than four inches in diameter and 60 inches in
length will be collected by the town as part of the regular collection
service if properly bundled to facilitate collection. Yard waste should only
be placed on the curb of the house that generated the yard waste. Yard waste
shall be placed adjacent to the street, not in the street and not blown into
street using mechanical blowers, to prevent waste from entering storm sewer
system and making its way into Edenton Bay.



         (b)   Yard waste collection is a residential service.
Landscapers, tree surgeons, contractors or other technicians hired by
residents or property owners to trim or remove trees on private property are
responsible for removing and properly disposing of tree trimmings and/or
limbs, branches, trunks and stumps.



      (7)   Leaves will be collected by the town between November 15
and April 1 on days specified for the collection if placed adjacent to the
street so that they may easily be handled by the collector. No tree limbs,
shrubs or other material may be mixed with the leaves. At other times during
the year, leaves will be picked up as part of the regular collection if
prepared in accordance with division (B)(6) of this section.



      (8)   Excessive amounts of yard waste items weighing more than
75 pounds and heavy or bulky items such as tree trunks, tree trimmings or
hedge cuttings more than 60 inches in length or four inches in diameter,
furniture and similar items will be assessed fees and collected only in
accordance with § 94.043.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-34)



(Ord. passed 3-14-1984; Ord. passed 7-12-2016; Ord. passed 11-14-2017) 
Penalty, see § 94.999



§ 94.043  SPECIAL COLLECTIONS.



   Solid wastes that are too bulky or too heavy or too cumbersome to be
collected by the town as part of its regular collection service may be
collected by the town pursuant to a request made to the Public Works Director
and payment of a fee for this service. The fee will be determined by the
Public Works Director based upon the nature and amount of the materials to be
collected and the estimated time required to perform the service, but in all
cases a fee of an amount as set by the Town Council shall be charged. This
fee must be paid in advance of the service. The town reserves the right to
refuse any request made pursuant to this section and the failure of the town
to provide this service shall not relieve any person of any of the
obligations imposed by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-35)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)



§ 94.044  OWNERSHIP, MAINTENANCE, RENTAL FEE FOR DUMPSTERS.



   (A)   The town shall purchase and maintain all bulk containers.



   (B)   The rental fee may vary from time to time, depending on the
cost of labor and equipment.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-36)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)



§ 94.045  MISCELLANEOUS.



   (A)   Collection routes and schedules. The Public Works Director
shall establish collection routes and schedules and may alter these routes
and schedules from time to time. A copy of the current routes and schedules
shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk. Notice of any changes
in the routes or schedules shall be published in the local newspaper at least
ten days before the changes are to become effective.



   (B)   Discretionary determinations. Whenever this subchapter
authorizes the Public Works Director to make a discretionary determination,
all persons affected by that determination shall comply with it within 15
calendar days after receiving written notice of the determination and the
reasons for it. Thereafter, a failure on the part of any person receiving the
notice to comply with the determination shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.



   (C)   Damaging, tampering with wastes, receptacles. No person may
damage, displace or otherwise interfere with solid waste receptacles or solid
wastes stored or prepared for collection, except with the consent of the
owner, lessee or occupant of the premises where those receptacles or solid
wastes are located.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-37)  (Ord. passed 3-14-1984)  Penalty, see § 94.999



ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES



§ 94.060  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Police Department and the Town Code Enforcement Officer shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this subchapter. The
Police Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and
disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public streets and
highways within the town, and on property owned by the town. The Town Code
Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for administering the removal and
disposition of abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles located on
private property. The town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow
truck operators or towing businesses to remove, store and dispose of
abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance
with this subchapter and applicable state laws. Nothing in this subchapter
shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the
Police Department and Fire Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise
carrying out their duties.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.061  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, means
a vehicle that is designed or intended to travel over land or water by
self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle and:



      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of
a law or ordinance prohibiting parking;



      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than
seven days;



      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for
longer than 24 hours; or



      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant or lessee thereof for longer than two hours.



   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department
or the Town Code Enforcement Officer, respectively, are designated to
authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this subchapter.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2,
means a vehicle that does not display a current license plate lawfully upon
that vehicle and that:



      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;



      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which
it originally was intended to move; or



      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less
than $100.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel
over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.



   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance,
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other
insects, rats or other pests;



      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious
vegetation over eight inches in height;



      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;



      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil
or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;



      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be
operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods, and the like;



      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it
falling or turning over;



      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food
waste, animal waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;



      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or
contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or



      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and
safety hazard and a public nuisance by the Town Council.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.062  ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be
abandoned as the term is defined herein.



   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town
may determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle
removed.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.063  NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located, to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a
nuisance vehicle.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the Town Code Enforcement Officer may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a
nuisance vehicle as defined in § 94.061 and order the vehicle removed.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.064  JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner,
lessee or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is
located, to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the
vehicle has been ordered removed.



   (B)   (1)   Upon investigation, the Town Code Enforcement Officer
may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle, as defined in this
subchapter, after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing
the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such
finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent
owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing
community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following, among other
relevant factors, may be considered:



         (a)   Protection of property values;



         (b)   Promotion of tourism and other economic
development opportunities;



         (c)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;



         (d)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the
community; and



         (e)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional
stability of area residents.



      (2)   No vehicle that is used on a regular basis for business
or personal use or that is substantially covered by a tarp or other vehicle
cover in reasonably good condition shall be removed or disposed of pursuant
to this division (B).



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.065  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, NUISANCE OR JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES;
PRETOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Except as set forth in § 94.066, an abandoned, nuisance or
junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after notice to the
registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case
of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the names and mailing
addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the possession of the
vehicle or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which the
vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, the notice shall be given by first-class mail. The person who
mails the notice shall retain a written record to show the name and address
to which mailed and the date mailed. If such names and addresses cannot be
ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle,
notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous
place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by
the town on a specific date (no sooner than seven days after the notice is
affixed). The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the town
on a specified date no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or
mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to
that time.



   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property,
nuisance vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be
given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not
remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle
is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle
that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens,
such appeal shall be made to the Town Council in writing, heard at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council, and further proceedings to
remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.066  EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.



   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in the situation in which the vehicle is
left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee
thereof for longer than two hours and the owner, occupant or lessee has
complied with § 94.071, or in those circumstances where there is a special
need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise
maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in
all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily
records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior
notice include:



   (A)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the
public streets and highways, the Town Council hereby determines that
immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:



      (1)   Obstructing traffic;



      (2)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or
restricting parking;



      (3)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;



      (4)   Parked in loading zones;



      (5)   Parked in bus zones; or



      (6)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions
imposed under Code sections.



   (B)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to other
abandoned or nuisance vehicles, such vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a
special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such
circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to
businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to
pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private
property.



   (C)   Vehicles left parked longer than two hours on private
property. The vehicle has been left on private property without the consent
of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for longer than two hours and the
owner, occupant or lessee has complied with § 94.071.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.067  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been
ordered removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage
or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform
such services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the
authorizing town official shall immediately notify the last-known registered
owner of the vehicle, such notice to include the following:



      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;



      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;



      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;



      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the
vehicle; and



      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a
probable cause hearing on the removal.



   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5)
of this section, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last-known
address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his
or her agent.



   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be
given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice
shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of
the vehicle.



   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is
removed and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates,
the authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts, including
checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last-known
registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information
set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5) of this section.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.068  RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION
OF VEHICLE.



   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is
entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause
existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in
writing with the County Magistrate designated by the Chief District Court
Judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing
within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-222, as amended.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.069  REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.



   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double
the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing
business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of
a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle
shall not allow or engage in further violations of this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.070  SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.



   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by
the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the
tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle.
Disposition of such vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the
town and in accordance with G.S. Ch. 44A, Art. 1 (G.S. §§ 44A-1 through
44A-6.1).



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.071  CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   Except as provided in § 94.064(B), as a general policy, the town will
not remove a vehicle from private property if the owner, occupant or lessee
of such property could have the vehicle removed under applicable state law
procedures. In no case will a vehicle be removed by the town from private
property without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except
in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor
vehicle which has been ordered removed by the Town Code Enforcement Officer
pursuant to § 94.064(B). The town shall require any person requesting the
removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private
property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability
incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.072  PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.



   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.073  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to any vehicle:



   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or
junkyard, as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard
Control Act, G.S. §§ 136-141 et seq.;



   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;



   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the enterprise; or



   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



§ 94.074  UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from
any storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this Code unless and until all towing
and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been
paid.



(Ord. passed 7-14-2015)



PUBLIC NUISANCES



§ 94.080  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot or
other parcel of land within the corporate limits is hereby declared to be
dangerous and prejudicial to the public health or safety and to constitute a
public nuisance:



   (A)   The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or grass to a height
in excess of ten inches causing or threatening to cause a hazard detrimental
to the public health or safety;



   (B)   Any accumulation of rubbish, trash or junk causing or
threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to cause the
accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause the
inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or
may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health;



   (C)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is
offensive by virtue of odors or vapors of by the inhabitance therein of rats,
mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health;



   (D)   The open storage of any abandoned ice box, refrigerator,
stove, glass, furniture, other appliances, building material, building
rubbish, other waste or similar items; and



   (E)   Any condition detrimental to the public health, which violates
the rules and regulations of the County Health Department.



(Ord. passed 9-9-2003)



§ 94.081  INVESTIGATION.



   The Town Code Enforcement Officer, upon notice from any person of the
possible existence of any of the conditions described in § 94.080, shall
cause to be made by the appropriate County Health Department official or town
official, the investigation as may be necessary to determine whether
conditions exist which may constitute a public nuisance as declared in §
94.080.



(Ord. passed 9-9-2003)



§ 94.082  NOTICE.



   (A)   If it appears that the conditions exist, the Town Code
Enforcement Officer shall cause to be delivered or mailed to the owner of the
property upon which the conditions exist, by certified mail return receipt
requested, a notice stating the reasons why the conditions constitute a
violation and that the property owner has the right to a hearing to be held
before the Town Code Enforcement Officer at a place fixed in the notice, not
less than five, nor more than 30, days after the delivery or mailing of the
notice.



   (B)   The notice period shall be such as is reasonable given:



      (1)   The nature of condition in question;



      (2)   The likelihood that the condition will become
significantly worse if not addressed promptly; and



      (3)   The action reasonably required to remedy the condition.



   (C)   The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to
file an answer to the notice with the Town Code Enforcement Officer, and to
appear and give evidence at the place and time fixed in the notice. Any
person desiring to do so may attend the hearing and give information relevant
to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence applicable to the courts of
law or equity shall not apply at the hearings. If the notice is not contested
either in writing or in person, then no hearing shall be required.



   (D)   If the condition alleged to exist is a “recurrent”
condition, then the Town Code Enforcement Officer need not comply with the
notice requirements of division (C) above, and the town shall be entitled to
proceed under § 94.084 below without further notice. A “recurrent”
condition is a condition which continues or reoccurs after three notices of
the condition have been mailed to or served on the property owner as required
by division (C) above.



(Ord. passed 9-9-2003)



§ 94.083  ABATEMENT ORDER.



   If the property owner does not contest the allegations concerning the
condition of the property as set forth in the notice, or if a hearing is held
and a determination is made that the conditions constituting a public
nuisance exist, the Town Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the property
owner in writing of the conditions constituting the public nuisance and shall
order the prompt abatement thereof within five days from the mailing or
delivering of the written notice.



(Ord. passed 9-9-2003)



§ 94.084  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   If the owner, having been ordered to abate a public nuisance, fails,
neglects or refuses to abate or remove the condition constituting the
nuisance within five days from mailing or delivery of the order, the Town
Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the condition to be removed or otherwise
remedied by having employees of the town to go upon the premises and remove
or otherwise abate the nuisance under the supervision of an officer or
employee designated by the Town Code Enforcement Officer. Any person who has
been ordered to abate a public nuisance may within the time allowed by this
subchapter request the town in writing to remove the condition, the cost of
which shall be paid by the person making the request.



(Ord. passed 9-9-2003)



§ 94.085  COST.



   (A)   The actual cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance shall he charged to the owner of the lot or
parcel of land, and it shall be the duty of the Town Tax Collector to
forward, by certified mail-return receipt requested, a statement of the
charges to the owner or other person in possession of the premises with
instructions that the charges are due and payable within 30 days from the
receipt thereof.



   (B)   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public
nuisance are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of
charges as provided for in division (A) above, the charges shall become a
lien upon the land or premises where the public nuisance existed and shall be
collected as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.



(Ord. passed 9-9-2003)



§ 94.086  “OWNER” DEFINED.



   For purposes of notice to be given pursuant to this subchapter, the
owner of a property shall be the owner most readily ascertainable by the Town
Code Enforcement Officer from the public, records, together with the owner in
actual possession of the property.



(Ord. passed 9-9-2003)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 94.100  SUMMARY ABATEMENT OF CONDITIONS DANGEROUS OR PREJUDICIAL TO THE
PUBLIC HEALTH.



   If the Town Council concludes, after notice and hearing as provided in
this subchapter, that any condition or situation prohibited by this
subchapter or any other condition or situation is dangerous or prejudicial to
the public health or safety, it may order town officials to summarily remove,
abate or remedy everything so found within the town limits or within one mile
thereof.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-56)  (Ord. passed 9-11-1990)



§ 94.101  NOTICE REQUIRED.



   Before the action authorized by § 94.100 is taken, notice shall be
sent to the respondent, informing him or her:



   (A)   What condition or situation is alleged to be dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health or safety;



   (B)   When and where the Town Council will meet to hold a hearing on
the issue of whether the condition cited is dangerous or prejudicial to
public health;



   (C)   If the Town Council determines that the cited condition is
dangerous or prejudicial to public health or safety, it may order town
officials to summarily abate, remedy or correct the offending condition; and



   (D)   The expenses incurred by the town in connection with the
actions described in division (C) of this section, if not paid by the
respondent, shall become a lien upon the land where the offending condition
is located, to be collected as unpaid taxes. If after due diligence, the
respondent’s address cannot be determined, then the notice required by this
section shall be posted conspicuously on the offending property not later
than three days before the scheduled hearing. This notice shall be sent by
mail (certified, deliver to addressee only, return receipt requested) not
later than five calendar days prior to the scheduled hearing or delivered to
the respondent by a town officer or employee, not later than three days prior
to the scheduled hearing. For purposes of this division (D), the RESPONDENT
is the person who is responsible for the offending condition, as well as the
owner of the property where the offending condition is located, if different
from the former.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-57)  (Ord. passed 9-11-1990)



§ 94.102  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   At the hearing held pursuant to this subchapter, the town
administration shall be responsible for presenting sufficient evidence to the
Town Council to substantiate a finding that a condition exists that is
dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety. The Town Council may
consider all reliable evidence and need not be bound by the strict rules of
evidence applicable to courts of law, but all witnesses shall be sworn. The
respondent may be represented by counsel and may present evidence. All
parties may cross-examine adverse witnesses. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Town Council shall make findings of fact, state its conclusions
and enter an appropriate order. The Town Council’s findings of fact,
conclusion and order shall be reduced to writing and a copy sent by mail or
delivered to the respondent within three days following the hearing.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-58)  (Ord. passed 9-11-1990)



§ 94.103  ORDER.



   If the Town Council concludes that a situation or condition exists that
is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety, it may:



   (A)   Order appropriate town officials or employees to summarily
remove, abate or remedy everything so found and to assess the cost of this
action against the respondent in accordance with § 94.999(B)(2); or



   (B)   Order the respondent to correct the situation within a
specified time period and order town officials to abate, correct or remedy
the offending condition if the respondent fails to act within the prescribed
time limits.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-59)  (Ord. passed 9-11-1990)



§ 94.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   (a) A violation of any of the following provisions of
this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S.
§ 14-4: §§ 94.020 through 94.025 (except § 94.021) and §§ 94.040
through 94.045.



         (b)   A violation of any of the provisions specified in
division (B)(1)(a) above (as well as § 94.021) shall also subject the
offender to a civil penalty of an amount as set by the Town Council. If the
offender fails to pay this penalty within 15 calendar days after being cited
for a violation, the penalty may be recovered by the town in a civil action
in the nature of debt.



         (c)   Each day that any violation continues after a
person has been notified that the violation exists and that he or she is
subject to the penalties specified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) above shall
constitute a separate offense.



         (d)   This chapter may also be enforced by an
appropriate equitable action, including injunctions or orders of abatement.



         (e)   The town may enforce this chapter by any one or
any combination of the foregoing remedies.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-51)



      (2)   (a)   Whenever a violation of §§ 94.020 through
94.025 and §§ 94.040 through 94.045 results from a continuing condition
rather than a discrete event, a written notice shall be sent to the last
known address of the responsible person, specifying the nature of the
violation and what must be done to correct it, requiring the responsible
person to correct the violation within ten calendar days after delivery of
the notice, and informing the responsible person of the possible consequences
of his or her failure to comply.



         (b)   Whenever a violation of §§ 94.020 through 94.025
and §§ 94.040 through 94.045 results from a continuing condition rather
than a discrete event, the penalties and remedies provided for in division
(B)(1) above may not be invoked until after the ten-day correction period
specified in the section has expired.



(Prior Code, § 20.5-52)



   (C)   The procedure set forth in §§ 94.080 through 94.086 shall be
in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law
for the abatement of public nuisances and §§ 94.080 through 94.086 shall
not prevent the town from proceeding in a criminal action against any person,
firm or corporation violating the provisions of §§ 94.080 through 94.086 as
provided in G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. passed 3-14-1984; Ord. passed 9-9-2003)



CHAPTER 95:  TOWN DOCKS



Section



   95.01   Establishment



   95.02   Statement of policy



   95.03   Operation



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   All that part of the waterfront between Colonial Park and Edenton Bay
specifically maintained by the town for boat docking facilities shall be
known as the “Edenton Town Docks” and is hereby set apart for the purpose
of this section to be used as a public wharf for recreational boat docking.



(Ord. passed 3-14-2001)



§ 95.02  STATEMENT OF POLICY.



   The town has established the Edenton Town Docks for the primary purpose
of attracting transient recreational boaters to the town for short-term
stays. The Town Docks are not intended to compete with private marina or
docking facilities. All existing local, state and federal ordinances,
statutes and rules shall apply to the use of the Town Docks. Areas adjacent
to the Town Docks and protected by human-made barriers shall be designated
“No-Wake” zones.



(Ord. passed 3-14-2001)



§ 95.03  OPERATION.



   (A)   The Town Manager, or the Town Manager’s designee, shall
administer the provisions of this chapter. The Town Manager may establish
rules and a fee schedule for the use and operation of the Town Docks
consistent with the provisions of this chapter. An owner shall remove any
vessel from the Town Docks if the owner or vessel remains in willful
violation of any of the use and operation rules established by the Town
Manager or, if in the judgement of the Town Manager, the continued mooring of
a vessel during inclement weather could damage the docks.



   (B)   The mooring of vessels at or adjacent to the Town Docks shall
be in locations designated by the Town Manager. The Town Manager may also
designate certain docking areas to be available for the short-term daily
docking of vessels in lengths which may be governed by the rules. Anchoring
in areas enclosed by the breakwater surrounding the Town Docks is prohibited.



   (C)   The Edenton Town Docks are reserved for the mooring of
recreational boats only. The Town Manager may, in her or his discretion and
as deemed appropriate, issue a mooring permit for certain commercial vessels
engaged in activities such as passenger transportation (cruise vessels),
historical displays, maritime training, government research, law enforcement
and aids to navigation maintenance. The Town Manager may allow passenger
“water taxi” enterprises to moor on a short-term basis for the purpose of
loading and unloading passengers at the Town Docks.



   (D)   No vessel engaged in private commercial enterprise, including
commercial fishing of any type, shall be allowed to moor, or load and unload
equipment or catch, at the Town Docks. No person shall operate a commercial
enterprise sale of goods from any boat moored at the Town Docks.



   (E)   No person shall swim or dive from the Town Docks or from any
vessel moored at the Town Docks. Fishing shall not be permitted in those
areas of the Town Docks reserved for the mooring of boats.



   (F)   Areas of the Town Docks exclusively maintained as boat-mooring
areas shall be accessible only by boat owners and their guests. No person
shall climb into or upon any vessel moored, docked or anchored at the Town
Docks without the consent of the owners or other person having charge thereof.



   (G)   No person shall willfully or carelessly destroy, damage,
disturb, deface or interfere with any buoy, float, life preserver,
navigational marker, light, sign, lines, bumpers or dock appurtenance, in the
jurisdiction of the town.



   (H)   Mooring at the Town Docks shall be limited to a period of
seven days. The first 48 hours of a stay shall be free of charge. A vessel
shall be limited to a single free of charge period for any stays within a
30-day period. The Town Manager may issue a special permit for mooring
periods beyond seven days as deemed appropriate due to exigent circumstances.



   (I)   Any vessel moored at the Town Docks which is not seaworthy, or
is not in overall good condition, or which constitutes a fire hazard or a
threat to the environment or public health and safety shall immediately be
removed by the owner. If a vessel shall sink at the Town Docks, the owner
thereof shall immediately remove the submerged vessel at his or her own
expense.



   (J)   If a vessel owner remains in willful violation of established
rules, or if a vessel remains beyond a period of seven days without a special
permit from the Town Manager, or is abandoned, or is not removed upon a
finding of any of the conditions herein, or remains submerged after sinking,
then the Town Manager may cause the vessel to be removed and stored. The cost
of the removal and storage and the cost of any damages and cleanup of the
Town Docks, shoreline and waters within the town’s jurisdiction shall be
the responsibility of the boat owner. The costs shall attach as a lien
against the vessel as may be allowed by federal and state law.



   (K)   The Town Manager, in her or his discretion and based on
circumstances benefiting the public, may suspend portions of this chapter and
rules governing the operation of the Edenton Town Docks for the purpose of
accommodating special events, appropriate holidays, emergencies including
force majuere or safe harbor courtesies or other warranting circumstances.



(Ord. passed 3-14-2001)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor as
provided by G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. passed 3-14-2001)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Naming streets



   96.02   Removal of snow and ice



   96.03   Playing and roller skating



   96.04   House moving



   96.05   Deposits on streets generally



   96.06   Burning trash and the like



   96.07   Street addresses



Obstructions



   96.20   Generally



   96.21   Construction



   96.22   Hanging gates



   96.23   Sheds and awnings



   96.24   Tree limbs



   96.25   Plantings and the like



   96.26   Displays; goods generally; animals



Excavations, Repairs and the Like



   96.40   Permits



   96.41   Protection of excavations



   96.42   Restoration



 



   96.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to establish and control streets, see G.S. § 160A-296



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  NAMING STREETS.



   (A)   The Town Council shall designate the names of town streets.



   (B)   A record of the designation shall be made in the minutes of
the meeting of the Town Council.



   (C)   The Town Manager shall be responsible for maintaining an
official and up-to-date map of the town showing names of streets as so
designated and shall be responsible for maintaining a file of a copy of the
minutes of the Town Council showing the designation of all names of town
streets.



(Prior Code, § 21-1)



§ 96.02  REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.



   Every occupant of a store building in front of which the sidewalk is
paved with stone, brick, asphalt or cement shall remove snow, ice or other
obstruction from the sidewalk at the earliest possible time and as soon as
the weather permits.



(Prior Code, § 21-2)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  PLAYING AND ROLLER SKATING.



   (A)   No person shall play on any of the streets or sidewalks of the
town.



(Prior Code, § 21-3)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to skate on any of the
streets of the town; provided that, persons may skate on the sidewalks in any
place except the business section.



(Prior Code, § 21-4)



Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.04  HOUSE MOVING.



   No person shall move any house or building upon or across the public
streets or sidewalks without the written consent of the Town Council and the
deposit of a good and sufficient bond in the sum as to cover damages done to
the street or sidewalk or to any property of any person during the move.



(Prior Code, § 21-5)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.05  DEPOSITS ON STREETS GENERALLY.



   (A)   None of the following shall be thrown, swept, dumped or
deposited on any street or sidewalk of the town:



      (1)   Lemon peel, banana peel, watermelon rind, grape skins or
orange peel;



      (2)   Scrap paper, straw, rags, feathers, building material
scraps, liquid wastes, lubricating or fuel oil or any other flammable or
combustible wastes;



      (3)   Bottles, cans or glass;



      (4)   Tree trimmings or shrubbery, except in accordance with
regulations adopted by the town for the collection of the trimmings; and



      (5)   Samples of medicines or drugs.



   (B)   If any person, while transporting or hauling or causing to be
transported or hauled, any rubbish or waste material, earth excavation, coal
or other material, shall throw, drop or deposit or cause to be thrown,
dropped or deposited, the rubbish or material from the body of the vehicle,
the person shall, upon conviction thereof, daily clean up and remove the
rubbish or material in a manner satisfactory to the town. If the persons
fails to remove the rubbish and the like, the town may clean up and remove
the rubbish and material, and the town may collect the cost of the cleaning
up and removal from the person.



(Prior Code, § 21-6)  (Ord. passed 4-10-1973)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.06  BURNING TRASH AND THE LIKE.



   No trash, refuse or rubbish shall be burned on any street or sidewalk
of the town.



(Prior Code, § 21-7)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.07  STREET ADDRESSES.



   (A)   Applicability. This section shall apply to the incorporated
areas of the town.



   (B)   Duty of owner to display number. It shall be the duty of each
owner of a residential, institutional, industrial or commercial building to
clearly display the proper street address number on the assigned building so
as to be visible from the nearest public vehicular area, as defined in G.S.
§ 20-4.01.



   (C)   Display, visibility, size and placement of numbers. Within 60
days of adoption of this section, the owner or occupant of the building shall
display or cause to be displayed the assigned address. The displayed street
number shall be no less than three inches high on single and duplex
buildings, no less than six inches high on multi-unit buildings, attached to
the principle use structure and clearly legible from the nearest public
vehicular area. Should the structure be too far from the public vehicular
area for the numerals to be seen, the property owner shall also display an
additional set of numerals legible from vehicles traveling at the prevailing
speed on the roadway. The numbers shall be located where the main driveway to
the building intersects the nearest public or private street.



   (D)   Removal and incorrect display prohibited; violation and
penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to remove or
deface a street address which is displayed in accordance with division (C)
above. It shall also be unlawful to allow an incorrect street address to
remain on a building.



(Prior Code, § 21-7.1)  (Ord. passed 11-14-1989)  Penalty, see § 96.99



OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 96.20  GENERALLY.



   No brick, stone, wood or other substance obstructing the free passage
of persons and vehicles shall be placed or suffered to lie in any of the
alley ways, streets or other routes of the town, nor shall any person place
on or in any of the streets, sidewalks or alley ways of the town any boxes,
crates, casks or barrels of any description or any other obstruction of any
kind; provided that:



   (A)   The owner of any property not having a rear entrance suitable
for loading and unloading merchandise may use the sidewalk immediately in
front of the place of business for the purpose of loading and unloading
merchandise, but the merchandise shall in no instance remain on the sidewalk
for a period exceeding one hour, and at all times during the period of
loading and unloading, a safe and suitable passageway shall be provided for
pedestrians using the sidewalk; and/or



   (B)   Any person erecting a building may, with permission, place
building material for immediate use on the streets in a way as not to
interfere with usual traffic.



(Prior Code, § 21-8)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.21  CONSTRUCTION.



   Before building or remodeling at any place where the same is in close
proximity to the sidewalk, a passageway shall be constructed so as to leave
the sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage.



(Prior Code, § 21-9)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.22  HANGING GATES.



   It shall be unlawful to hang any gate to swing across the sidewalk, but
all gates shall be hung so as to swing inside of the lot which they are
intended to enclose.



(Prior Code, § 21-10)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.23  SHEDS AND AWNINGS.



   No person shall erect or repair over any sidewalk any wooden shed or
awning or any wooden shed for the support of an awning or erect upon any
street or sidewalk any post for the support of any awning; provided that,
this section shall not be construed to prevent the erection over the sidewalk
of cloth or metal awnings supported upon metallic frames firmly suspended
from the building and at least seven and one-half feet above the level of the
sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 21-11)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.24  TREE LIMBS.



   No person shall permit the limbs from any tree growing on his or her
land to grow or hang as to obstruct or interfere with the free passage of
persons along sidewalks or streets.



(Prior Code, § 21-12)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.25  PLANTINGS AND THE LIKE.



   No plantings or obstruction may be made on the right-of-way between the
curb and sidewalks 50 feet from the corner of the intersections or more than
30 inches high, without town approval.



(Prior Code, § 21-13)  (Ord. passed 4-10-1973)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.26  DISPLAYS; GOODS GENERALLY; ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall place for display or sale any goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind upon any of the sidewalks of the town when the
display would extend out on the sidewalk, except as follows.



      (1)   Any person shall be permitted to use two and one-half
feet of the sidewalk in front of his or her place of business, immediately
adjoining and next to the building used as a place of business, for the
purpose of exhibiting goods, wares and merchandise, but for no other purpose.



      (2)   Any goods, wares or merchandise displayed under this
section shall be removed from the sidewalks at the closing hour each night
and no portion of the goods, wares or merchandise shall be left on the
sidewalks for a longer period.



   (B)   The Town Council may allow, by application of encroachment,
the placement of street furniture, canopy support post, sandwich-board type
signs and restaurant encroachments for dining purposes within the
right-of-way of the Downtown Business District. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owners or tenant, as applicable, to remove the
same within one weeks notice by the Public Work Director to facilitate
right-of-way repairs. Failure to comply with the rules on the encroachment
application may result in the revocation of the encroachment permit.



(Prior Code, § 21-14)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display or have
displayed on sidewalks or streets any animal.



(Prior Code, § 21-15)



(Ord. passed 11-27-2000)  Penalty, see § 96.99



EXCAVATIONS, REPAIRS AND THE LIKE



§ 96.40  PERMITS.



   (A)   Excavations. It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any
hole, ditch or excavation of any kind whatsoever on any street or sidewalk in
the town without first securing a permit therefor from the Town Manager.
Permits for any excavation shall not be issued unless and until the person
desiring the permit demonstrates that signs of the type required by the
Police Department are on hand and will be placed at or near the excavation in
accordance with Police Department instructions.



   (B)   Sidewalk construction. No sidewalk of any description shall be
constructed by any person without a written permit from the Town Manager.



(Prior Code, § 21-16)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.41  PROTECTION OF EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person making any excavation for
any purpose whatsoever in any of the streets or sidewalks to fail to securely
cover the excavations with planks or place ropes or other barricades around
the excavation three feet from the ground or fail to place a sufficient
number of lights around the excavation before dark and to keep the light
burning all night every night the excavation shall be open.



   (B)   In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person making any
excavation to fail to place the required signs at or near the excavation as
required by the Police Department.



(Prior Code, § 21-17)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.42  RESTORATION.



   It shall be the duty of every person who shall open or dig a ditch,
trench or hole in any street, public alley or sidewalk of the town to put the
street, public alley or sidewalk in as good condition, in all respects, as it
was before the excavation was undertaken.



(Prior Code, § 21-18)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any violation of § 96.07 shall subject the offender to a
civil penalty of $50. Violators will be issued a written citation. Each
day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.



(Prior Code, § 21-7.1)  (Ord. passed 11-14-1989)



CHAPTER 97:  TREES



Section



   97.01   Purpose



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Town Tree Committee



   97.04   Operation



   97.05   Acceptable tree species



   97.06   Location and spacing of street trees



   97.07   Public tree care



   97.08   Tree protection during construction



   97.09   Tree topping



   97.10   Removal of stumps



   97.11   License and bond



   97.12   Review by Town Council



   97.13   Enforcement and appeal



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees on municipally-owned public property and
rights-of-way within the town and on municipally-owned property wherever
located. In order to protect and conserve trees on public property and
rights-of-way, this chapter provides for the pruning, treatment and removal
of trees and shrubs as is deemed necessary by the Town Council or a person
acting under the authority of the Town Council. This chapter is also intended
to provide for the trimming or removal of trees on public or private land
when they obscure street light, interfere with utility lines, constitute a
hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise endanger the public
health, safety or welfare.



   (B)   Another purpose of this chapter is to encourage the protection
of trees and express the town’s intent to use trees to create a more
natural and amendable human environment. This chapter is not intended to be
punitive nor to cause hardship to any person who uses the utmost care and
diligence to protect trees within the town or on town property.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the town, or to
which the public has free access as a park. (Note: Industry-owned public
parks.)



   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying within rights-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the town.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 97.03  TOWN TREE COMMITTEE.



   (A)   (1)   There is hereby created and established a Town Tree
Committee for the town, which shall consist of seven members, citizens and
residents of the town who shall be recommended by the Mayor and approved by
the Town Council.



      (2)   Residents of the town’s extra territorial jurisdiction
(ETJ), who are not residents of the town, but who can contribute relevant
knowledge and expertise to the Tree Committee may serve in a non-voting,
advisory capacity to the Committee subject to their approval by the Town
Council.



      (3)   The Mayor shall designate a member of the Town Council
to serve as liaison to the Tree Committee. The Town Manager and the Landscape
Supervisor shall serve as ex-officio members of the committee. Other
ex-officio members may be designated as necessary.



   (B)   The term of the five persons to be appointed shall be three
years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first
Committee shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first
Committee shall be for two years. At the expiration of a member’s term of
office, a successor shall be recommended to the Mayor by the committee for
approval by the Town Council. A member may succeed himself or herself. In the
event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, the successor
shall be appointed (as specified above) for the unexpired portion of the term.



   (C)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Committee
to study, investigate, counsel, develop and/or update annually, and
administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along
streets and in other public areas. The plan will be presented annually to the
Town Council and, upon its acceptance and approval, shall constitute the
official comprehensive tree plan for the town.



      (2)   The Landscape Supervisor shall present to the Tree
Committee by their March meeting itemized budget requests for plant
replacement, maintenance and repair items and capital expenditures. The Tree
Committee shall review these requests in developing the annual plan according
to division (C)(1) above and forward them to the Town Manager for his or her
budget processing.



      (3)   The Tree Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity
on all town-initiated construction projects in an effort to plan for and
manage the town’s vegetative resources.



      (4)   The Tree Committee when requested by the Town Council,
snail consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any
special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or
interfere with the Town Tree Committee or any of its agents, while engaging
in and about the planting, cultivation, mulching, pruning, spraying or
removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on public grounds, as
authorized in this chapter.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.04  OPERATION.



   The Tree Committee shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business and a majority vote
of those present shall be required to constitute action of the Committee.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 97.05  ACCEPTABLE TREE SPECIES.



   (A)   (1)   An official list of species approved for use as
street trees in the town and a list of those species whose use is prohibited
due to their poor quality and potential hazard as street trees is available
in the town office.



      (2)   Trees that are neither included on this list, nor
specifically prohibited by it, may be utilized as street trees only upon the
consent of the Tree Committee.



      (3)   This list may be amended as necessary by the Tree
Committee.



   (B)   Landscape plans for municipal parks or other publicly-owned
areas, and the plant species proposed for use therein, shall be approved on a
case by case basis with consideration given to the specific location and
proposed use.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 97.06  LOCATION AND SPACING OF STREET TREES.



   (A)   From the date of enactment of this chapter trees on
rights-of-way and other town property shall be planted according to the
following specifications to allow for proper development of the trees,
minimize the obstruction of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and avoid
excessive interference with public utilities. Exceptions to these
specifications require approval of the Tree Committee.



   (B)   Street tree species belonging in the “small” size class
(less than 30 feet tall at maturity) shall be spaced a minimum of 25 feet
apart, trees in the “medium” size class (30 feet to 50 feet tall at
maturity) shall be spaced a minimum of 35 feet apart, and trees in the
“large” size class (over 50 feet tall at maturity) shall be spaced a
minimum of 50 feet apart. Exceptions to these spacings may be made for trees
with columnar or fastigiate crowns with the approval of the Tree Committee.



   (C)   The minimum width of tree lawn (curb to sidewalk distance)
required for each size group of trees shall be: four feet for “small”
trees; six feet for “medium” trees, eight feet for “large” trees.
Tree lawns of less than four feet in width are generally unsuitable for
long-term plant growth.



   (D)   No street tree shall be sited closer than 25 feet from an
intersection or within ten feet of a driveway, fire hydrant, utility pole or
street light or five feet from a water meter.



   (E)   Street trees shall be planted at least two feet from a
sidewalk, curb or shoulder of the road.



   (F)   The location of street trees relative to overhead and
underground water lines, sewer lines, transmission lines or other utilities
shall be determined jointly by the Tree Committee and appropriate Town
Utility Department to minimize potential hazards and interference. The use of
small trees is recommended in areas of heavy interference from utilities.



   (G)   The location of street trees within paved areas shall require
a planting area with minimal dimensions of four feet square.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 97.07  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public
grounds.



   (B)   The Town Tree Committee may remove or cause or order to be
removed, any publicly-owned tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe
condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric
power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is
affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. No tree on any
public property will be removed, destroyed, pruned or treated with chemicals,
including the root system without the prior approval of the Town Tree
Committee. In the event a tree poses an immediate danger to public safety or
welfare or is likely to cause immediate disruption of public services, and as
such requires pruning or removal without delay, authorization may be given by
the Town Manager.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the Town Street Department
to provide for the planting, pruning, maintenance and removal of all street
trees (except as noted below) and for all cemetery plantings coming under the
jurisdiction of this chapter according to the regulations and recommendations
of this chapter and the recommendations of the Tree Committee. It shall be
the responsibility of the Department of Parks and Recreation to plant, prune,
maintain and remove as directed all Park Trees and for those Street Trees
located on Broad Street from Church Street south to the waterfront according
to the regulations and recommendations of this ordinance and the Tree
Committee.



   (D)   This section does not prohibit planting of street trees on
rights-of-way by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and
location of the trees is in accordance with §§ 97.05 and 97.06, and the
property owners accepts the following conditions:



      (1)   The individual shall furnish all plant materials and
provide all services to plant them;



      (2)   The town shall not be responsible for any damage
whatsoever to the plants caused or brought about by any person, firm or
natural cause; and



      (3)   The town shall retain the right to remove, relocate or
prune the plants in the future for the needs as street construction, utility
maintenance or safety.



   (E)   Trees, vines, shrubbery or flowers standing in or upon any lot
or land adjacent to any public street or place shall be kept trimmed by the
owner or occupant of the property on which the plants are growing so as not
to interfere with the free and safe passage along the public way by
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (F)   If the owner or occupant of the property does not keep this
growth from interfering with public passage, the town shall have the
authority to order its removal by notice sent by registered mail, return
receipt requested, or hand delivered. If, after 15 days, the owner has not
responded or acted to remove the projecting growth, the town agents shall
have the authority to enter upon the owner’s property to perform the work.
The cost of the actions may be charged against the property owner.



   (G)   Recommended planting, pruning and routine annual maintenance
practices for street trees are  outlined in a manual available at the town
offices, and at the Offices of the Street Department and Parks and Recreation
Department.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.08  TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Construction plans for public or private property which pose a
hazard to existing publicly- owned trees or other plantings must comply with
the following protective measures and are subject to approval by the Tree
Committee.



   (B)   Changes in grade, trenching, storage of equipment or spillage
of chemicals are prohibited within the drip-line of plants located on town
property unless specific approval is obtained by the Tree Committee.



   (C)   Location of new driveways across the right-of-way shall be in
compliance with § 97.06(D).



   (D)   Publicly-owned trees and other plantings must be protected
from soil compaction and mechanical injury during construction by a fence or
other similar protective barrier with a dimension of at least 15 feet square
with the tree in the center or by a similar suitably sized barrier for shrub
plantings. It shall be the responsibility of the person in charge of the
construction to provide the protection.



   (E)   If branches are to be pruned from publicly-owned plants to
make room for equipment or structures, the pruning must be approved by the
Tree Committee and shall be performed by agents of the town or other suitably
licensed person or firm (see § 97.11) according to recommended procedures.
Cost of approved pruning of publicly-owned plantings for the purpose of
private construction, renewal or renovation projects shall be borne by the
person in charge of the project.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.09  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful as normal practice, except as described below, for
any person, firm or town Department to top any street tree, park tree or
other tree on public property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back
of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s
crown to a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
Trees are to be pruned according to recommended practices (see § 97.07), to
maintain the natural form and good health of the tree.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.10  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.11  LICENSE AND BOND.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business
or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within
the town without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee
shall be an amount as set by the Town Council annually in advance; provided,
however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or
town employee doing the work in the pursuit of his or her public service
endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first
file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of
$50,000/100,000 for bodily injury and $10,000 property damage indemnifying
the town or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of the
endeavors as herein described.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.12  REVIEW BY TOWN COUNCIL.



   The Town Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Town Tree Committee. Any person may appeal from any ruling
or order of the Town Tree Committee to the Town Council who may hear the
matter and make final decision.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 97.13  ENFORCEMENT AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be notified by the Town Manager of the specific violation by registered
mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery. The notice shall set
forth the nature of the violation, the measures required to comply with this
chapter, if compliance is at all practicable, and a reasonable time period
within which compliance must be had.



   (B)   In the event any person is dissatisfied with the decision of
the Town Manager adversely affecting the person involving the application of
this chapter, the person may request a hearing before the Town Council within
five working days of the receipt of the violation. The request must be in
writing and directed to the Town Manager who shall schedule the hearing at
the next Town Council meeting. At least one member of the Tree Committee
shall be present at the hearing. The Council shall either affirm, overrule or
modify the decision of the Town Manager.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, which
results in damage to or loss of town-owned plantings, shall be subject to a
civil penalty assessed by the Town Manager, taking into consideration the
amount that the violator would be required to spend to repair the damage,
including replacement of the planting. Plant value may be determined by a
competent appraiser at the request of the Manager. Notice of the violation
shall be in accordance with § 97.13(A). Upon failure of the violator to
appeal as set forth in § 97.13(B) or pay the assessed penalty within 30
days, an action in the nature of debt in the name of the town in the
appropriate division of the general courts of justice may be instituted by
the town for the recovery of the penalty. The violation subjects the offender
to a civil penalty, pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. § 160A-175,
and does not subject the offender to the penalty provisions of G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)   Violations related to any other provision of this chapter
shall constitute a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. passed 8-9-1988)



CHAPTER 98:  PARKS



Section



General Provisions



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Hours of operation



   98.03   Vehicles in recreation areas



   98.04   Advertising, billposting and the like



   98.05   Shows, exhibitions and entertainment



   98.06   Firearms



   98.07   Destruction of or damage to property



   98.08   Animals running at large



   98.09   Molesting animals



   98.10   Selling, peddling and the like



   98.11   Alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs and the like



   98.12   Games, sports



   98.13   Excavations



   98.14   Fires



   98.15   Dumping and littering



   98.16   Revocation of privileges



   98.17   Concealed handguns



Reservation of Facilities



   98.30   Parks, playgrounds and open spaces



   98.31   Application for reservation of indoor and outdoor facilities



   98.32   Standards for making reservations



   98.33   Approval or denial of application



   98.34   Conflict of use; priority



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK ACTIVITIES. Those activities which fall within the general
classification areas of: arts and crafts; athletics; sports and games;
dances; hobbies; music; nature and outing; reading; writing and speaking;
social recreation; patriotic and fraternal events and activities; and
volunteer services.



   PARK AREAS.



      (1)   Colonial Park is that property located in the south
section of town of South Broad Street and on West Water Street. The park is
located on the Edenton Bay near the Council chambers and across from the
Barker House.



      (2)   Queen Anne Park is that property located on the left off
of South Broad Street on East Water Street. The park is adjacent to the Old
Hayes Bridge with the Edenton Bay directly behind it.



      (3)   Hollowell Park is that property located on West Queen
Street extended. Filbert Creek runs beside it.



      (4)   Paxton Playground is that property located in the
northeast section of town off of Old Hertford Road on Paxton Lane, located
six lots down off of Old Hertford Road.



      (5)   Morgan Park Playground is that property located in the
southwest section of town off of West Queen Street extended, bordered by
Douglas Avenue, Robbin Lane and Barker Street. The playground is adjacent to
the Immanuel Baptist Church and School.



      (6)   West Gale Playground is that property located in the
west section of town off of Twiddy Avenue, left on West Gale extended, and
bordered by Edenton Housing Authority and the town water tower.



      (7)   Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue Playground is that
property located in the west section of town on Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Avenue across from Valentine Avenue and adjacent to the Albermarle Street
Community Building.



      (8)   Griffin Playground is that property in the northeast
section of town located on East Freemason Street and North Oakum Street and
adjacent to Hicks Football Field.



      (9)   Filberts Creek Park is that property in the west section
of town on Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue.



      (10)   Miscellaneous areas and facilities used by the town for
recreational activities, wherever located.



   RECREATION AREAS AND FACILITIES.  The outdoor and indoor properties
and/or facilities on, in or from which people derive their opportunity for
the pursuit of happiness or engage in recreation activities that are owned,
controlled, operated or leased by the town within or without the corporate
limits of the town.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-1)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)



§ 98.02  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Town parks and playgrounds shall be open to the public between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on each day, except when activities are
scheduled by the town, at which time the parks will be closed 45 minutes
after the scheduled activity ends. It shall be unlawful for any person to use
or go upon a town park or recreation area or facility at any other time
except during the hours of operation herein presented and when the same is
being operated under the direct supervision of the town, or when the same is
being used by written authorization of the Town Manager.



   (B)   Neighborhood parks shall close at 9:00 p.m.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-3)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981; Ord. passed 11-14-2006) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.03  VEHICLES IN RECREATION AREAS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any unlicensed
vehicle or other vehicle in, over or through any recreation area and it shall
be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any motor vehicle or other
vehicle in, or operate over or through any recreation area, except along and
upon designated recreation area drives, parking lots and recreation area
boulevards. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to be
parked any vehicle anywhere in any recreation area except upon designated
parking areas authorized by the Town Manager.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-4)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.04  ADVERTISING, BILLPOSTING AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any structure,
sign, bulletin board, post, pole, or advertising device of any kind whatever
in any recreation area or facility, or to attach any notice, bill, poster,
sign, wire, rod, or cord to any tree, shrub, fence, railing, post or
structure within any recreation area or facility, except as authorized by the
Town Manager.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-5)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.05  SHOWS, EXHIBITIONS AND ENTERTAINMENT.



   No shows, exhibitions or entertainment for which the condition of
admission is the payment of money or any other thing of value, except shows,
exhibitions or entertainment sponsored or cosponsored by the town shall be
permitted on or in any recreation area or facility, except as shall be
authorized by the Town Manager in an area designated by him or her.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-6)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.06  FIREARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except duly authorized law
enforcement officers in the course of their official duties, to discharge,
shoot, fire or explode, or cause to be discharged, shot, fired or exploded
any firearm, including, but not limited to, any type of arms, device or toy
designed to forcibly hurl a projectile or missile at any time or under any
circumstances within any recreation area or facility, or to carry any
firearms in any recreation area or facility. Archery equipment, air rifles,
slingshots, or other similar devices may be shot or discharged only on those
areas, if any, within the recreation areas or facilities, which may be
specifically set aside and designated for such purposes and so posted and
only then under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Town
Manager.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-7)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   Storage and display of firearms and ammunition during emergency
conditions, see §§ 31.55 and31.56



§ 98.07  DESTRUCTION OF OR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, damage, destroy,
mutilate or deface any structure, monument, statue, planter, sign, fountain,
wall, fence, railing, vehicle, bench, trees, plants or any other property in
any recreation area or facility. It shall be unlawful for any person to dig,
cut, bruise, mutilate or cause to be transplanted, cut, bruised, debarked or
mutilated, any plant material of all and any description within any town
recreation area or facility without permission of the Town Manager.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-8)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   Damaging  property, generally, § 130.04



§ 98.08  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner thereof to allow or permit any
horses, dogs or other animals to run at large in any park and it shall be
unlawful to ride horses in any park.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-9)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.09  MOLESTING ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, catch, wound or kill, or
cause to be injured, treat cruelly, or tease, or attempt to trap, catch,
wound, kill, injure, or tease any bird or animal, or molest or rob any nest
of any bird or any lair, den or burrow of any animal in or upon any park or
recreation area owned by the town.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-10)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.10  SELLING, PEDDLING AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in soliciting, peddling,
begging or selling, or ply the vocation of a solicitor, agent, peddler,
beggar, or salesman of any description on or in any recreation area or
facility, and it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, hawk, or vend any
type of food or beverage or any type of merchandise within any recreation
areas or facilities unless written authority be given by the Town Manager.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-11)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.11  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, NARCOTIC DRUGS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume or display
publicly any alcoholic beverages or narcotic drugs on or in any town
recreation area or facility, and it shall be unlawful for any person under
the influence of intoxicating beverages or narcotic drugs to enter or remain
on or in any town recreation area or facility.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-12)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross reference:



   Consumption, sale and the like of alcoholic beverages in public places,
§ 130.01



§ 98.12  GAMES, SPORTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to play or practice football, golf,
baseball or other games or activities of like character in any area in any
town recreation area or facility except in areas specifically designed and
designated for such game or activity. At no time and under no circumstances
shall such games or activities be played in such proximity to playground
equipment or park structures as to threaten bodily harm to persons using the
park or cause damage to park structures.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-13)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.13  EXCAVATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make an excavated in any
recreation area or facility for any purpose without permission from the Town
Manager.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-14)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.14  FIRES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or kindle a fire in any
recreation area or facility, except in a regularly constructed fireplace or
grill. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any fire unattended, or
to fail to completely extinguish a fire and all the embers thereof before
leaving the fire.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-15)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)



§ 98.15  DUMPING AND LITTERING.



   Except in containers provided for same, no person shall deposit, dump,
throw, cast, lay or place, or cause to be deposited, dumped, thrown, cast,
laid or placed, any ashes, trash, rubbish, soil, earth, paper, garbage,
refuse, debris, plant clippings or limbs or leaves in or upon any town park
area or facility or in any watercourse, waterfront or slough within any
recreation area.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-16)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.16  REVOCATION OF PRIVILEGES.



   The town reserves the right, at any time, to revoke the right to use
the park areas or facilities, to individuals or groups not conforming with
the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-17)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)



§ 98.17  CONCEALED HANDGUNS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall carry a concealed handgun on or
within any town-owned building and/or its appurtenant premises or in any
town-owned park.



      (2)   An appropriate notice of the prohibition shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in each town-owned building and in each park notifying
persons of the prohibition against carrying a concealed handgun therein.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to law enforcement or other
government personnel acting within the scope of their employment.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-18)  (Ord. passed 2-22-1996)



RESERVATION OF FACILITIES



§ 98.30  PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND OPEN SPACES.



   These park areas may be used by the public for recreation activities,
but are not rented. They are open to the public on a first-come first-served
basis. Because of the nature of these areas, they are not subject to rental.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-21)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)



§ 98.31  APPLICATION FOR RESERVATION OF INDOOR AND OUTDOOR FACILITIES.



   (A)   These park facilities will be used by the public for
recreation activities subject to the provisions of this chapter and other
applicable ordinances of the town and under the general supervision,
direction and control of the town. An individual, organization, corporation,
association, society, club, order or group of whatsoever kind or nature
desiring to use a portion of any park facility for a recreation activity or
activities may, by application made to the Supervisor, request a reservation
of the park facility or facilities.



   (B)   The application for reservation shall state:



      (1)   The name and address of the person, persons, corporation
or other body sponsoring the activity. Whether this group is a profit or
nonprofit organization;



      (2)   The day and hours for which the reservation is desired;



      (3)   The area and facilities desired to be reserved;



      (4)   An estimate of the anticipated attendance;



      (5)   The nature, character and scope of the proposed
recreation activity or activities for which the area and facilities are
requested to be reserved. Whether the use is for profit or nonprofit
activity; and



      (6)   Any other information which the Supervisor shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a reservation
should be made.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-22)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)



§ 98.32  STANDARDS FOR MAKING RESERVATIONS.



   The Supervisor shall make the reservation requested if he or she finds:



   (A)   The proposed activity or use of the area and/or facilities
desired to be reserved will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from
the general public enjoyment of the adjacent recreation area and facilities
not reserved;



   (B)   The proposed activity and use in a recreation activity as
herein defined and will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the
promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;



   (C)   The area and facilities desired have not been previously
reserved for other use on the day and hours requested in the application;



   (D)   The area and facilities requested to be reserved are
sufficient to accommodate the activity and the expected attendance;



   (E)   The area and facilities requested to be reserved are not in
excess of those required for the reasonable conduct of the activity or
activities for which the area and facilities are requested to be reserved;
and/or



   (F)   The proposed activity or activities will take place during the
hours of operation of the area as herein set forth.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-23)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)



§ 98.33  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   If, after consideration of the application for reservation, the
Supervisor determines that the foregoing standards are met, then and in that
event, he or she shall make the requested reservation. If the Supervisor,
after consideration of the application for reservation, determines that the
foregoing standards are not met in one or more particulars, he or she shall
inform the applicant wherein the application is deficient, and the reasons
therefor. If the deficiency is remedied or the application is revised to meet
all the foregoing standards, then and in that event, the Supervisor shall
make the requested reservation; otherwise, the application shall be denied.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-24)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)



§ 98.34  CONFLICT OF USE; PRIORITY.



   (A)   Use. No person or group of persons shall use any town park
area or facility for a scheduled recreation activity or activities or other
use or activity which will interfere with or detract from any recreation
activity or activities under the general supervision, direction and control
of the Department of Public Works. All scheduled activities of the County’s
Recreation Department shall take precedence over all other requests and use
of any facility.



   (B)   Priority. Priority for use of park facilities, both indoor and
outdoor, parks, playgrounds and open spaces will be as follows:



      (1)   Chowan County Recreation Department sponsored activities;



      (2)   Activities cosponsored by the Public Works Department
and other groups or agencies;



      (3)   Edenton-Chowan School system activities;



      (4)   Public nonprofit community/service organization
activities; and



      (5)   All others.



(Prior Code, § 17.5-26)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1981)



CHAPTER 99:  FOOD TRUCKS



Section



   99.01   Definition



   99.02   Intent



   99.03   Permit



   99.04   General requirements



   99.05   Location requirements



   99.06   Penalties and enforcement



§ 99.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FOOD TRUCK. A readily movable trailer or motorize wheeled vehicle,
currently registered with the N.C. Division of Motor Vehicles, designed and
equipped to serve items that provide nourishment. This shall not include
alcoholic beverages.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2017)



§ 99.02  INTENT.



   (A)   The Town of Edenton finds that allowing food trucks to operate
in Edenton would promote diversification of the town's economy and employment
opportunities and would support the incubation and growth of
entrepreneurial/start-up businesses.



   (B)   G.S. § 160A-174 grants cities the power to define, prohibit,
regulate, acts, omissions, or conditions, detrimental to the health, safety
or welfare of its citizens and the peace and dignity of the city through the
creation of ordinances.



   (C)   Food trucks bring benefits to communities; however, they also
bring unique regulations challenges.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2017)



§ 99.03  PERMIT.



   (A)   A food truck permit shall be required prior to the operation
of a food truck. A $50 fee will be assessed to cover the costs associated
with regulation of food trucks.



   (B)   A food truck permit is valid through December 31 of the year
upon which the permit was issued.



   (C)   A food truck permit allows permittee to operate up to ten
different properties. An applicant may apply for more than one such permit.



   (D)   A food truck permit does not include peddler, solicitor, or
transient vendor as defined by the Town Code.



   (E)   No permit issued shall authorize a food truck to operate on or
from a public street.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2017)



§ 99.04  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Food trucks shall provide documentation of approval from the
North Carolina Department of Health. A valid health permit must be maintained
for the duration of the food truck permit and shall be placed in a
conspicuous location for public inspection.



   (B)   A food truck permit shall be placed in a conspicuous location
for public inspection.



   (C)   Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. All
plumbing and electrical connections shall be in accordance with the State
Building Code.



   (D)   No liquid, grease or solid wastes may be discharged from the
food truck. Absolutely no waste may be disposed of in tree pits, storm
drains, the sanitary sewer system or public streets.



   (E)   All areas within five feet of the food truck must be kept
clean.



   (F)   Trash receptacles shall be provided for customers to dispose
of all waste associated with the food truck. The food truck shall be
responsible for removing all trash, litter, and refuse from the site at the
end of each 24 hour period. This includes all waste improperly discarded by
customers. Public trash receptacles shall not be used for compliance with
this section.



   (G)   The noise level from the food truck shall comply with the
municipality's noise ordinance (§ 130.10).



   (H)   No signage shall be allowed other than signs permanently
attached to the movable trailer or motorized vehicle and a portable menu sign
no more than six square feet in display area on the ground in the customer
waiting area.



   (I)   No vendor shall remain on site at one property for more than
48 consecutive hours, with exception of a holiday weekend if the holiday
falls on Friday or Monday.



   (J)   A food truck shall not operate as a drive-through.



   (K)   Food trucks shall not connect to electric receptacles that are
owned by the Town of Edenton.



   (L)   Food trucks must have the following fire extinguisher on board
during hours of operation: minimum Class 2A, 10B, and C rated extinguisher.
If food preparation involves deep frying, a Class K fire extinguisher must
also be on the truck. Fire extinguishers shall be maintained pursuant to
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standard 10.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2017)



§ 99.05  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Food trucks may only conduct business in the following
locations:



      (1)   On all privately owned property in the following zoning
districts: Downtown Commercial (CD); Neighborhood Commercial (CN); Highway
Commercial (CH), Shopping Center (SC); Medical Arts (MA); and Industrial
Warehouse (IW) subject to the approval of the property owner.



      (2)   On any zoning lot, when performing a solely catering
function for the owner and not selling food to the general public.



      (3)   On any zoning lot, when authorized by the owner, and
when participating in a special event or specialty market when such activity
is authorized as an accessory use to the property's current use.



      (4)   Location requirements shall not apply in any respect to
food vending at any non-profit fundraising event, a market, festival, or
activity, arts and crafts, exhibit or event sanctioned by the town.



   (B)   A food truck may locate on a vacant lot or on a lot with
another principal use.



   (C)   The food truck shall not block drive aisles, other access to
loading/services areas, or emergency access and fire lanes. Food trucks shall
be positioned at least three feet away from any fire hydrants, any fire
department connection, utility box or vault. The food truck shall not locate
within any area of the lot that impedes, endangers, or interferes with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic. A food truck shall not impede ingress and
egress from driveway entrances, handicapped parking spaces and ramps,
building entrances and exits.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2017)



§ 99.06  PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any violations of §§ 99.02—99.05 shall be subject to
penalties enumerated in § 10.99.



   (B)   A food truck permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked for
fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit or in the
conduct of the business, or constitute a danger to the public health, safety,
welfare, or morals, or for conduct which is contrary to the provision of this
division. Notice of revocation shall be made in writing to the permit holder.



(Ord. passed 6-13-2017)



2018 S-5



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   LICENSES GENERALLY





         111.   AMUSEMENTS





         112.   ADVERTISING





         113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS





         114.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE




CHAPTER 110:  LICENSES GENERALLY



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Imposition of tax; transfer; amendment of schedule and the
like



   110.03   Engaging in or carrying on business without license



   110.04   Term; proration of tax



   110.05   Required for every separate business



   110.06   Required for every separate place of business; exceptions;
effect of moving or selling business



   110.07   Display



   110.08   Abatement or refund of tax



   110.09   Schedule



Gross Receipts



   110.20   Tax levied; payment; forms; failure to make return;
confidentiality of information



 



   110.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to impose license taxes, see G.S. §§ 160A-194,
160A-211



   Schedule B license taxes, see G.S. §§ 105-33 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENT. The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or
distributor.



   BUSINESS. Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or
calling of any kind subject by the provisions of this chapter to a license
tax.



   ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS. Engaged in the business as owner or operator.



   FISCAL YEAR. The period beginning with July 1 and ending with June 30
next following.



(Prior Code, § 14-1)



§ 110.02  IMPOSITION OF TAX; TRANSFER; AMENDMENT OF SCHEDULE AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   In addition to the tax on property and polls, as otherwise
provided for, and under the power and authority conferred by state law, there
shall be levied and collected annually, or more often where provided for, a
privilege license tax on trades, professions, business operations,
exhibitions, circuses and all subjects authorized to be licensed, as set out
by the license tax schedule.



   (B)   All licenses shall be a personal privilege and shall not be
transferable.



   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the
Town Council from imposing from time to time, as it may see fit, the license
taxes as are not specifically herein defined, or from increasing or
decreasing the amount of any special license tax, or from prohibiting or
regulating the business or acts licensed. All licenses are granted subject to
the provisions of existing laws or ordinances thereafter enacted.



(Prior Code, § 14-2)



§ 110.03  ENGAGING IN OR CARRYING ON BUSINESS WITHOUT LICENSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or his or her agent or servant to
engage in or carry on a business in the town for which there is a required
license, without first having paid the license tax and obtained the license.
For the purpose of this section, the opening of a place of business or
offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing
in furtherance of the business shall be construed to be engaging in or
carrying on the business. Each day that the person shall engage in or carry
on the business, as aforesaid, shall be construed as a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 14-3)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.04  TERM; PRORATION OF TAX.



   All taxes provided for and fixed in this chapter and the schedule of
privilege license taxes shall be for 12 months, unless otherwise specified,
and shall so remain for 12 months beginning July 1 and ending June 30;
provided that, where the license is issued after January 1, then the licensee
shall be required to pay one-half the tax prescribed, except where otherwise
specifically provided for.



(Prior Code, § 14-4)



§ 110.05  REQUIRED FOR EVERY SEPARATE BUSINESS.



   The payment of any particular tax imposed by this chapter shall not
relieve the person paying the same from the payment of any other tax imposed
by this chapter for any other business he or she may carry on, unless so
provided by the section imposing the tax, it being the intent of this chapter
that the license taxes prescribed by various sections of this chapter
applicable to any business shall be cumulative, except where otherwise
specifically provided.



(Prior Code, § 14-5)



§ 110.06  REQUIRED FOR EVERY SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS; EXCEPTIONS; EFFECT
OF MOVING OR SELLING BUSINESS.



   A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business is only
valid for the business conducted at the place and by the licensee named
therein. Every person doing business in more than one factory, mill,
warehouse or store, stall or stand or other place of business shall secure a
separate license for each place of business, unless the places of business
are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with an opening into each
other and are operated as a unit. If the business is moved or if the licensee
sells to another, then a new license is necessary unless a special permit to
continue business under the original license is obtained from the Town
Council.



(Prior Code, § 14-6)



§ 110.07  DISPLAY.



   Every license shall be kept prominently displayed at the place of
business named in the license or, if the licensee has no fixed place of
business, the licensee shall keep the same wherever the business is being
operated and where it can be inspected at any time by the proper municipal
official.



(Prior Code, § 14-7)



§ 110.08  ABATEMENT OR REFUND OF TAX.



   No license tax shall be abated nor shall any refund of any part thereof
be made in any case where the licensee discontinues his or her business
before the end of the period for which the license was issued.



(Prior Code, § 14-8)



§ 110.09  SCHEDULE.



   The amount of tax levied on each trade, profession or business
operation shall be as established from time to time by the Town Council. A
copy of the schedule shall be maintained in the office of the Town Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 14-9)



GROSS RECEIPTS



§ 110.20  TAX LEVIED; PAYMENT; FORMS; FAILURE TO MAKE RETURN;
CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.



   All merchants and dealers of whatever kind of the town, except those
paying a license tax specifically prescribed in other sections of this
chapter, shall be subject to a special tax or license privilege annually as
follows.



   (A)   All merchants or dealers whose gross receipts are $4,000 or
less shall be required to pay a tax of an amount as set by the Town Council.



   (B)   All merchants and dealers whose gross receipts are in excess
of $4,000 shall be required to pay a tax of an amount as set by the Town
Council for the first amount of $4,000 gross receipts, and 0.1% on gross
receipts in excess of $4,000.



   (C)   Blank forms and printed instructions will be placed in the
hands of each person liable to this tax during the month of June of each
year, which must be returned to the town, properly filled, showing the amount
of gross receipts on or before July 15 of each year.



   (D)   If any person who is liable to this tax shall neglect or
refuse to make a return at the time specified or shall make a false or
fraudulent return, the person shall be liable to a fine of an amount as set
by the Town Council.



   (E)   All information given in the above-mentioned forms shall be
held secret by those in charge of the above tax, and if any of those in
charge shall give out any information contained in the above forms, they
shall upon conviction be fined an amount as set by the Town Council and be
removed from office.



   (F)   All of the above-mentioned taxes shall be paid by July 25 of
each year, provided the town informs the person before the time of the amount
of tax he or she is liable for, or if the amount is not fixed before this
time, it shall be paid within five days after the assessment of the amount of
tax by the Committee and information given to the person.



   (G)   Gross receipts as mentioned above shall include all cash
received and all collections made on accounts from June 30 of the preceding
year to July 1 of the present year.



   (H)   On all retail merchants and dealers, who are beginning
business and all who have not a year’s previous business upon which to base
the estimates required by the foregoing sections there shall be levied and
collected the sum of an amount as set by the Town Council, plus 0.1% on gross
sales exceeding $4,000 for the part of year which had expired prior to June 1
of the year in which tax is paid.



   (I)   For each wholesale dealer not otherwise specifically taxed in
other sections of this act, the following scale will apply: all dealers whose
gross receipts are less than $10,000 shall pay an annual tax of an amount as
set by the Town Council; $10,000 and less than $25,000, the tax shall be an
amount as set by the Town Council; $25,000 and less than $50,000, the tax
shall be an amount as set by the Town Council; $50,000 and less than
$100,000, the tax shall be an amount as set by the Town Council; $100,000 and
less than $150,000, the tax shall be an amount as set by the Town Council;
$150,000 and less than $250,000, the tax shall be an amount as set by the
Town Council; $250,000 and less than $500,000, the tax shall an amount as set
by the Town Council; and above $500,000, the tax shall be an amount as set by
the Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 14-11)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   If any person shall commence to exercise any privilege or to promote
any business, trade or profession or to do any act requiring a town license
under §§ 110.01 through 110.09 without the town license, the person shall
pay an additional tax of 10% of the amount of the town license tax which was
due and payable at the commencement of the business, trade, employment or
profession or doing the act, in addition to the town license tax imposed by
§§ 110.01 through 110.09 for each and every 30 days that the town license
tax remains unpaid from the date that same was due and payable. The
additional tax shall be assessed by the Tax Collector and paid with the town
license tax and shall become a part of the town license tax.



(Prior Code, § 14-10)



CHAPTER 111:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Billiard Rooms, Bowling Alleys and the Like



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   License required; intent of subchapter



   111.03   Applications; term



   111.04   Grounds for denial



   111.05   Contents; display



   111.06   Revocation



   111.07   Conduct on licensed premises



Statutory reference:



   Presence of minors in billiard rooms, see G.S. § 14-317



BILLIARD ROOMS, BOWLING ALLEYS AND THE LIKE



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENT. The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or
distributor.



   BUSINESS. Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or
calling of any kind subject by the provisions of this subchapter to a license
tax.



   ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS. Engaged in the business as owner or operator.



   FISCAL YEAR. The period beginning with July 1 and ending with June 30
next following.



(Prior Code, § 5-11)



§ 111.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; INTENT OF SUBCHAPTER.



   No person shall maintain or operate any pool or billiard table, bowling
alley or any other table or alley for any game or play for which a charge is
made directly or indirectly without a license therefor issued by the Town
Council. It is the intent of this subchapter that the tables and alleys,
except those in private homes, shall not be operated unless licensed by the
Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 5-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.03  APPLICATIONS; TERM.



   Applications for the license required by § 111.02 shall be made to the
Town Council on blank forms prepared and furnished by the Town Council and
shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The forms shall so prepared as to furnish
all the information necessary to enable the Town Council to act intelligently
on the applications. The applications shall be accompanied by the license tax
required by the town. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year.



(Prior Code, § 5-13)



§ 111.04  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.



   The Town Council shall not issue a license required by this subchapter
to:



   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of unlawfully selling
intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs;



   (B)   Any person who is not a citizen and resident of this state;
and/or



   (C)   Any person who is of immoral character or who is an habitual
user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs.



(Prior Code, § 5-14)



§ 111.05  CONTENTS; DISPLAY.



   Every license required by this subchapter shall specify the premises
where the business is to be carried on, the number of tables authorized to be
operated thereunder and the day on which the license shall begin and expire.
The license shall be posted on the premises at all times.



(Prior Code, § 5-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.06  REVOCATION.



   A second conviction for a violation of any provision of this subchapter
shall automatically act as a revocation of any license issued to the person
under this subchapter. The Town Council may, at any other time, for cause,
after a hearing of which reasonable notice shall be given the licensee as the
Town Council may direct, revoke any license issued under this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-16)



§ 111.07  CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   The holder of a license issued under this subchapter shall not:



      (1)   Suffer or permit any gambling on any game played on the
premises;



      (2)   Suffer or permit the licensed premises to become
disorderly;



      (3)   Permit any intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs to be
sold on the premises;



      (4)   Suffer or permit any person under 18 years of age to
enter or remain on the licensed premises; and/or



      (5)   Employ in the licensed business any person who has been
convicted of unlawfully selling whiskey or narcotic drugs.



   (B)   The acts and conduct of the agents and employees of a licensee
under this subchapter in the conduct of the business shall be deemed the acts
and conduct of the licensee.



(Prior Code, § 5-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  ADVERTISING



Section



General Provisions



   112.01   Posting on public property



   112.02   Scattering of handbills



Loudspeakers on Vehicles and the Like



   112.20   Governmental agencies exempted



   112.21   Permit required



   112.22   Prerequisites; issuance



   112.23   Appeal of denial



   112.24   Revocation



   112.25   Interference with lawful use



   112.26   Certain acts prohibited



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate, restrict or prohibit use of loudspeakers
and the like, see G.S. § 160A-184



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 112.01  POSTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach, place, paint, write,
stamp, paste, tack or nail or cause to be attached, placed, painted, written,
tacked or nailed any sign, advertisement or other matter upon any lamp post,
electric light, railway, telephone or telegraph pole, shade tree, fire
hydrant, bridge, pavement, portion of any sidewalk or crosswalk, public
building or any other property belonging to the town unless the person is an
employee of the town or of the company owning the telephone pole, railway and
the like.



(Prior Code, § 3-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.02  SCATTERING OF HANDBILLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to, throw, drop or scatter or cause
to be, dropped or scattered in any street or public place in the town any
poster, handbills, advertising cards or other substances used for the purpose
of advertising. No person shall scatter handbills or other advertising matter
at houses, stores or other places of business, other than by putting same
inside the screen doors, under doors or in the jamb of doors. When so
scattered, no bell connected with the houses, stores or places of business
shall be rung and no alarm of any kind shall be sounded.



(Prior Code, § 3-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LOUDSPEAKERS ON VEHICLES AND THE LIKE



§ 112.20  GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES EXEMPTED.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any governmental
agency acting within the scope of its functions.



(Prior Code, § 3-3)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 112.21  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a loudspeaker or amplifier
on a vehicle in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other
public grounds or places within the town unless a permit therefor has been
issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-4)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.22  PREREQUISITES; ISSUANCE.



   The Town Manager or his or her designee shall issue permits between the
hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. The issuing
authority may issue a permit to a person who applies for a permit to use a
loudspeaker or amplifier on a vehicle; provided that, he or she may issue
only one permit during each 24-hour period. In the issuance of all permits,
the issuing authority shall:



   (A)   Require a written application for permit, signed by the
applicant, to be filed not less than 24 hours in advance, which application
shall specify the time and place for commencement, the driver of the vehicle,
the route by street names, a brief description of the message to be broadcast
and the duration, which duration shall not exceed one hour for any 24-hour
period. The applicant shall be an adult 18 years of age or older;



   (B)   Refuse to issue permits to commence before 8:30 a.m. or
terminate after 6:00 p.m.; and



   (C)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and
the permit shall designate the person in charge of the activity. The person
shall be an adult 18 years of age or older. The permit shall not be valid in
the possession of any other person.



(Prior Code, § 3-5)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 112.23  APPEAL OF DENIAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the denial of a permit shall have a right of
appeal to the Town Council, but the appeal notice must be filed with the Town
Collector within five days after the denial. The appeal, upon the notice,
will be heard by the Councilors at their next regular meeting or at any
special meeting called by the Councilors for the appeal.



(Prior Code, § 3-6)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 112.24  REVOCATION.



   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for the use of a
loudspeaker or amplifier on a vehicle for any of the following causes:



   (A)   The violation by any participant of § 112.26 or of any law of
the United States or of the state in the course of the use of a loudspeaker
or amplifier on a vehicle; and/or



   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit.



(Prior Code, § 3-7)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



§ 112.25  INTERFERENCE WITH LAWFUL USE.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct or interfere with the use of a
loudspeaker or amplifier on a vehicle when the use is being conducted under
authority of a permit duly issued by the issuing authority.



(Prior Code, § 3-8)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.26  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.



   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken by any
participant in conjunction with or as a part of the use of a loudspeaker or
amplifier on a vehicle, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:



   (A)   The carrying on or about the person or vehicle any firearm or
any weapon or article, including, but not limited to, blackjacks, nightsticks
or flashlights, which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon;



   (B)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal,
whether leashed or unleashed;



   (C)   The use of any profane, indecent, abusive or inflammatory
language; and



   (D)   The use of the volume on the mechanical loudspeaker or
amplifier as shall make it audible at a distance greater than three city
blocks or 1,200 feet, whichever is the least distance.



(Prior Code, § 3-9)  (Ord. passed 8-6-1973)



CHAPTER 113:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   113.01   Periodicals



   113.02   Exemptions from chapter



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate businesses generally, see G.S. § 160A-194



   Authority of town to regulate solicitation campaigns and itinerant
merchants, see G.S. § 160A-178



§ 113.01  PERIODICALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to go in or upon, or permit his or
her representative to go in or upon, any private residence or premises in the
town as solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant or transient vendor of
periodicals, not having been requested or invited so to do by the occupants
of the private residence or having secured their permission so to do for the
purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of periodicals, or for the purpose
of distributing, disposing of, peddling or hawking the same. Each day’s
violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 18-1)  (Ord. passed 10-8-1974)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.02  EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale or
solicitation of farm or dairy products by the producer or to organizations or
representatives of organizations organized and operating exclusively for
educational, benevolent, religious, fraternal, charitable or civic purposes
and not operating for profit and where the solicitation or sales are made
without remuneration to the solicitor.



(Prior Code, § 18-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 114:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



Short-Term Lease or Rental of Vehicles



   114.01   Tax on gross receipts



   114.02   Administration



   114.03   Payment of taxes and filing of returns



   114.04   Effective date



Taxicabs



   114.20   Rates



   114.21   Tax on owners or operators



   114.22   Parking



   114.23   Certificates of convenience and necessity required



   114.24   Application; filing; investigation; hearing



   114.25   Issuance; conditions



   114.26   Term; renewal



   114.27   Failure to begin operations



   114.28   Substitution of vehicles



   114.29   Transferability of certificate



   114.30   Revocation of certificate



   114.31   Driver’s permit required



   114.32   Application; contents; investigation



   114.33   Issuance of permit



   114.34   Display of permit



   114.35   Suspension of permit



   114.36   Revocation of permit



 



   114.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to license and control taxicab drivers, see G.S. §
20-37



   Authority of town to regulate taxicabs, see G.S. § 160A-304



   Financial responsibility of taxicab operators, see G.S. § 20-280



   General taxicabs provisions, see G.S. §§ 20-37, 20-87, 20-97



SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL OF VEHICLES



§ 114.01  TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS.



   The town hereby imposes and levies a tax of 1.5% of the gross receipts
from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the general
public, as authorized by G.S. § 153A-156.



(Ord. passed 11-10-2008)



§ 114.02  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The town, through its Tax Collector, will administer and
collect from operators of leasing and rental entities the tax levied hereby.



   (B)   The Town Tax Collector may promulgate additional lawful rules
and regulations necessary for implementation and collection of the tax.



(Ord. passed 11-10-2008)



§ 114.03  PAYMENT OF TAXES AND FILING OF RETURNS.



   The taxes levied hereby are due and payable to the town in monthly
installments on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the month
in which the tax accrues. Every entity required to collect the tax shall, on
or before the fifteenth day of each month, prepare and render a return to the
town.



(Ord. passed 11-10-2008)



§ 114.04  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall become effective immediately.



(Ord. passed 11-10-2008)



TAXICABS



§ 114.20  RATES.



   (A)   Rates for taxicabs in the town and within five miles of the
town limits are fixed and shall be established by the Town Council as it may
deem best. A current schedule of taxicab rates shall be kept on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.



   (B)   Every taxicab operated within the corporate limits or within a
distance of five miles thereof shall, at all times, have prominently
displayed and posted in the taxicab so as to be visible to the passengers
therein the rates and fares for the use of the taxicab.



(Prior Code, § 23-1)



§ 114.21  TAX ON OWNERS OR OPERATORS.



   Taxicab owners or operators shall pay to the town the sum of an amount
as set by the Town Council annually for each taxicab operated in the town.
The tax shall be due and payable June 1 of each year.



(Prior Code, § 23-2)



§ 114.22  PARKING.



   Not more than two taxicabs owned by the same company shall be parked in
one block at the same time; except that, taxicabs may be parked in taxi
stands as established and shown on the official traffic maps of the town.



(Prior Code, § 23-3)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.23  CERTIFICATES OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon or over
the streets of the town without having first applied for and secured a
certificate of convenience and necessity from the Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 23-4)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.24  APPLICATION; FILING; INVESTIGATION; HEARING.



   (A)   Application; filing. Every person desiring to operate a
taxicab upon and over the streets of the town shall file, on forms supplied
by the Town Clerk, an application for a certificate of convenience and
necessity.



(Prior Code, § 23-5)



   (B)   Investigation.



      (1)   In determining whether the public convenience and
necessity require the franchising of the taxicab or taxicabs, the Town
Council shall, among other things, take into consideration the following
factors:



         (a)   Whether or not the public convenience and
necessity requires the proposed or additional taxicab service within the town;



         (b)   The financial responsibility of the applicant and
the likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible and
satisfactory;



         (c)   The amount and condition of equipment;



         (d)   The schedule of proposed rates to be charged;



         (e)   The number of taxicabs already in operation; the
demand for increased service, if any; whether or not the safe use of the
streets by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved; and
whether or not adequate provision has been made for off-street parking of the
taxicabs;



         (f)   The experience of the applicant in the taxicab
business; and



         (g)   Other relative facts as may be deemed necessary
and advisable.



      (2)   Before making any decision with respect to the issuance
of a certificate of convenience and necessity, the Town Council or a
committee thereof shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts
and may, if it so desires, subpoena witnesses and utilize the services of the
Chief of Police or any other officer or employee of the town.



(Prior Code, § 23-6)



   (C)   Hearing.



      (1)   Each application for a certificate of convenience and
necessity shall be scheduled for a hearing not later than 20 days after the
application is filed and the applicant shall be notified by the Town Clerk by
mail to the business address set forth in the application of the date and
time of the hearing, the notification to be sent at least ten days before the
date set for the hearing. The Town Clerk shall also, within the same time,
notify all persons who at that time hold certificates of convenience and
necessity for the operation of taxicabs within the municipality of the date
and time of the hearing and the name of the applicant. In addition, the Town
Clerk shall cause to be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation at least ten days before the hearing a notice setting forth the
date, time, place and purpose of the hearing. Publication costs for the
notice shall be paid by the applicant.



      (2)   The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to
establish the existence of public convenience and necessity for the operation
of the taxicab or taxicabs specified in his or her application and all other
facts required for the granting of a certificate.



(Prior Code, § 23-7)



§ 114.25  ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS.



   The Town Council shall have the power and it shall be its duty to order
certain certificates issued or to refuse to issue certain certificates or to
issue certificates for a partial exercise only of the privileges sought. The
Town Council may attach to the exercise of the rights granted by the
certificate the terms and conditions as, in its judgment, the public
convenience and necessity may require.



(Prior Code, § 23-8)



§ 114.26  TERM; RENEWAL.



   A certificate shall constitute a franchise from the town for the
operation of taxicabs within the town subject to the provisions of this
subchapter for one year, unless a shorter period of time is specified in the
certificate. Applications for renewal shall be filed annually and hearings
conducted as provided in § 114.24.



(Prior Code, § 23-9)



§ 114.27  FAILURE TO BEGIN OPERATIONS.



   If a certificate is granted to an applicant and the applicant shall
fail, in accordance with the provisions of the certificate, to begin
operations within 60 days after the date of the certificate, the certificate
shall become null and void.



(Prior Code, § 23-10)



§ 114.28  SUBSTITUTION OF VEHICLES.



   The person to whom a certificate of convenience and necessity has been
issued may, by appropriate endorsement thereon by the Town Clerk, substitute
other vehicles for the vehicles for which the certificate was granted. In
such instance, the liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to
the substitute vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 23-11)



§ 114.29  TRANSFERABILITY OF CERTIFICATE.



   A certificate of convenience and necessity is not transferable without
the consent of the Town Council. Applications for a permit to transfer shall
be filed in the same manner as an application for a certificate of
convenience and necessity. The proceedings upon the application for a
transfer shall be the same as those described for the issuance of a
certificate; except that, the question of public convenience and necessity
need not be proved.



(Prior Code, § 23-12)



§ 114.30  REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.



   The Town Council may, at any time after a public hearing, revoke a
certificate of convenience and necessity for any of the following causes:



   (A)   Conviction of a felony;



   (B)   Violation of any federal or state law relating to the use,
possession or sale of intoxicating liquors or narcotic or barbiturate drugs;



   (C)   Addiction to or habitual use of intoxicating liquors or
narcotic or barbiturate drugs;



   (D)   Violation of any federal or state law relating to prostitution;



   (E)   Noncitizenship in the United States; and/or



   (F)   Habitual violation of traffic laws or ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 23-13)



§ 114.31  DRIVER’S PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire from
place to place within the town or within a distance of five miles thereof
unless the person shall have first applied to and secured from the Town
Council a permit to operate a taxicab.



(Prior Code, § 23-14)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.32  APPLICATION; CONTENTS; INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The application required of applicants to drive a taxicab
shall be made upon forms furnished by the town for such purposes and shall,
among other things, state the name, address, physical condition, physical
description, former employer, court record and state chauffeur’s license
number of the applicant. The application shall be signed and sworn to by the
applicant. The applicant shall further appear at the office of the Police
Department for the purpose of having his or her fingerprints taken and shall
also furnish a recent photograph, both of which shall constitute a part of
his or her application.



(Prior Code, § 23-15)



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the facts stated in the
application and shall report his or her findings and recommendations to the
Town Council.



(Prior Code, § 23-16)



§ 114.33  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   If the Town Council finds that the applicant has not been convicted of
a felony, a violation of any federal or state statute relating to the use,
possession or sale of intoxicating liquors, any federal or state statute
relating to prostitution or any federal or state statute relating to the use,
possession or sale of narcotic drugs and that the applicant is a citizen of
the United States and is not a habitual violator of traffic laws, the Town
Council shall issue a permit to the applicant to drive a taxicab.



(Prior Code, § 23-17)



§ 114.34  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   The driver of every taxicab shall, at all times while operating the
taxicab, prominently display in the taxicab so as to be visible to the
passengers therein his or her permit to drive a taxicab.



(Prior Code, § 23-18)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.35  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Town Council may suspend a taxicab driver’s permit for
such time as it may deem proper for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Any grounds sufficient for a revocation of the permit;



      (2)   The licensee is found to have made a false statement in
his or her application for driver’s permit;



      (3)   The licensee is found to have in his or her possession
or custody any quantity of intoxicating liquor within his or her cab or on
his or her person while on duty as a taxicab driver; or



      (4)   The licensee has violated any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   Before any suspension of any driver’s permit shall be
ordered by the Town Council, the person whose driver’s permit is sought to
be suspended shall be given five days’ written notice by the Mayor of the
time and place of hearing before the Town Council, at which hearing the
holder of the driver’s permit shall be given an opportunity to show cause
why the permit should not be suspended, to present evidence pertinent to the
question before the Town Council and to be represented by counsel.



(Prior Code, § 23-19)



§ 114.36  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   At any time after the issuance of a permit to any person to drive a
taxicab, the Town Council may revoke the permit if the person holding the
permit is convicted of:



   (A)   A felony;



   (B)   A violation of any federal or state statute relating to the
use, possession or sale of intoxicating liquors;



   (C)   A violation of any federal or state statute relating to the
use, possession or sale or narcotic drugs;



   (D)   Repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances; and/or



   (E)   Habitual use of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs.



(Prior Code, § 23-20)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   In case of failure or refusal to file a return or pay
the tax, pursuant to G.S. § 153A-156(f), the penalties and remedies that
apply to local sales and use taxes under G.S. Ch. 105, Subch. VIII, apply to
a tax levied under §§ 114.01 through 114.03. The Town Council, for good
cause shown, may consider appeals and adjust any penalty or additional tax
imposed hereunder.



      (2)   Any person, firm, corporation or association who
willfully attempts in any manner to evade a tax imposed herein or who
willfully fails to pay the tax shall, in addition to the penalties provided
by law and herein, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law.



(Ord. passed 11-10-2008)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Public consumption, sale and the like of alcoholic beverages



   130.02   Begging



   130.03   Bridges; fishing and the like



   130.04   Damage to property



   130.05   Docks



   130.06   Drainage ditches, creeks and the like; dumping in or
obstructing



   130.07   Firearms; discharging



   130.08   Flags; desecration and the like



   130.09   Loitering prohibited



   130.10   Noises enumerated



   130.11   Projectiles



   130.12   Parks and playgrounds; minibikes prohibited



   130.13   Railroads



   130.14   Spitting on sidewalks and the like



   130.15   Weed removal



   130.16   Swimming from public property



   130.17   Skateboards



   130.18   Graffiti



   130.19   Possession of dangerous weapons



   130.20   Human waste



Alcoholic Beverages



   130.35   Definitions



   130.36   Consumption prohibited



   130.37   Possession of open containers prohibited



   130.38   Possession during special events prohibited



   130.39   Exemptions



Curfew



   130.50   Purpose



   130.51   Definitions



   130.52   Offenses



   130.53   Exceptions



   130.54   Enforcement



 



   130.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   State criminal law, see G.S. Ch. 14



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION, SALE AND THE LIKE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume,
offer to consume, give away, display or have in his possession in an open
container any alcoholic beverage as defined by G.S. § 18B-101(4), on any
property owned or controlled by the town, upon any public vehicular area, in
any athletic stadium, parking lot, public park or building in the town;
provided, however, that, this section shall not apply to the premises of
those establishments that have an “on-premises” ABC permit as prescribed
under G.S. § 18B-1001.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. In addition to the definition provided by
G.S. § 18B-101(4), include any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 0.5% alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage
purposes.



      PUBLIC VEHICULAR AREA. Any drive, driveway, road, roadway,
street, sidewalk, alley, parking area or other space open for the purpose of
vehicular traffic or operation upon the grounds or premises of:



         (a)   Any public or private hospitals, school, orphanage
or church or any institution maintained and supported by the state or the
town; and/or



         (b)   Any service station, car wash, supermarket, store,
restaurant, amusement center, lounge, shopping center or office building or
any other business or municipal establishment or groups of the
establishments, providing parking space for customers, patrons, employees or
the public.



(Prior Code, § 16-1)  (Ord. passed 1-14-1975; Ord. passed 6-10-1980) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Alcoholic beverages generally, see G.S. Ch. 18B



§ 130.02  BEGGING.



   (A)   lt shall be unlawful for any person to ask, beg, canvass, or
solicit alms or contributions, including money and other items of value, for
the private benefit of the solicitor or any other person, in any place open
to the general public including sidewalks, streets, alley/driveways, plazas,
parking lots, parks, buildings, doorways and entrances to buildings, and the
groundways which enclose buildings.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ask, beg, canvass or
solicit alms or contributions, including money and other items of value, for
the private benefit of the solicitor or any other person in an aggressive
manner, in any public transportation vehicle, or at any bus stop.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ask, beg, canvass or
solicit alms or contributions, including money and other items of value, for
the private benefit of the solicitor or any other person, in exchange for
cleaning (including windows), protecting, watching, washing, repairing,
painting a motor vehicle that is in traffic or parked on a public street.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ask, beg, canvass or
solicit alms, or contributions, including money and other items of value, for
the private benefit of the solicitor or any other person, on private
[property].



(Prior Code, § 16-2)  (Ord. passed 3-8-2016)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate begging, see G.S. § 160A-179



§ 130.03  BRIDGES; FISHING AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful to fish from any bridge within the corporate
limits of the town. It shall further be unlawful to jump from any bridge or
to conduct oneself in any manner which would be of danger to any pedestrian
or vehicle operator.



(Prior Code, § 16-3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate fishing from bridges, see G.S. §
160A-302.1



§ 130.04  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   (A)   Generally. No person shall write, draw or carve any letter or
letters, word or words or device or in any way mutilate any church, public
building, private house, fence or wall or write obscene words, letters,
characters or drawings on any wall, fence, house, building or other public
place. It shall also be unlawful to injure, damage, deface or trespass upon
any property belonging to the town.



(Prior Code, § 16-4)



   (B)   Bridges; culverts. No person shall injure or deface any part
of a bridge, culvert, ditch, drain or other property belonging to or used by
the town or shall place any obstruction in any culvert, ditch or drain to
prevent the free flow of water on or over the streets of the town.



(Prior Code, § 16-5)



   (C)   Lights; signs. No person shall injure, tamper with, remove or
paint upon or deface any sign, sign post, street light, traffic signal or
bulletin board or other municipal property upon the streets and sidewalks,
except employees of the town in performance of their duty.



(Prior Code, § 16-6)



   (D)   Shade trees and shrubbery.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or cause
to be attached, or to fasten or cause to be fastened, any wire, cable, rope,
band or any other thing to any shade tree growing on or near the streets and
sidewalks, except employees of the town and the owners of the property on
which the trees are growing.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to climb or throw
sticks or missiles in trees or in any manner damage any tree or shrubbery
growing on any property in the town whether owned by the town or an
individual.



(Prior Code, § 16-7)



   (E)   Streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run or
cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or
tool, which shall be liable in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof,
upon any street or to damage or injure any street in any other manner.



(Prior Code, § 16-8)



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  DOCKS.



   (A)   Commercial boats in certain areas. It shall be unlawful to
store, land, dock, anchor or tie any commercial type boat or vessel exceeding
30 feet in length within town waters which abut any residential district.



(Prior Code, § 16-9)



   (B)   Use of town docks. It shall be unlawful for any person to dock
or moor any ship, boat, barge, vessel or other water craft, other than water
craft of the “rowboat” class not interfering with navigation or docking
facilities, at or to the dock at the foot of Broad Street and known as the
“town dock” for a period of more than five consecutive days within a
period of 30 consecutive days, or to store or leave on the dock for a period
of more than 24 consecutive hours any goods, wares, merchandise or other
property, without first applying for and obtaining permission from the Town
Manager who may, in his or her discretion for good cause, extend the time
upon payment by the person to the town of the sum of an amount as set by the
Town Council per day for each day the ship, boat, barge, vessel or other
water craft may be docked or moored at or to the dock, or the goods, wares,
merchandise or other property may be stored or left thereon during the
extension.



(Prior Code, § 16-10)



Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Town Docks, see Ch. 95



§ 130.06  DRAINAGE DITCHES, CREEKS AND THE LIKE; DUMPING IN OR OBSTRUCTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause to be
obstructed the free flow of water in, over, along, upon or through any
drainage ditch, street gutter, culvert or other drainage way in any public
street or other public way or in any creek, stream or other natural drainage
course within the corporate limits by depositing any trash, refuse, tree or
shrubbery trimmings, building material scraps or other matter therein.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit or
cause any gasoline, fuel oil, naphtha or other flammable liquid or any liquid
wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance or any lubricating oil,
grease or detergent to drain into any drainage ditch, street gutter, culvert
or other drainage way in any public street or other public way or in any
creek, stream or other natural drainage course within the corporate limits.



(Prior Code, § 16-11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  FIREARMS; DISCHARGING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol or
other firearm within the corporate limits of the town, unless the person is a
peace officer discharging the firearm in the performance of his or her duty,
or unless the discharge is on a firing range or in legally established
shooting galleries or ranges.



(Prior Code, § 16-12) (Ord. passed 3-13-2012)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Carrying concealed handgun, see § 130.19



Statutory reference:



   Carrying concealed weapons, see G.S. § 14-269



   Discharging into occupied property, see G.S. § 14-34.1



   Regulation of firearms, see G.S. § 160A-189



§ 130.08  FLAGS; DESECRATION AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully and knowingly to tamper
with any flag placed on display by authority of the Town Council on the
municipal building or immediately in front of the municipal building in that
area known as the Town Square whereon rests the memorial monument to dead
soldiers of the Confederate States of America by public acts of physical
contact including, but not limited to, mutilation, defiling, defacing,
trampling, burning or the unauthorized removal of the flag or flags from the
staffs upon which they are displayed.



(Prior Code, § 16-13)  (Ord. passed 5-29-1973; Ord. passed 8-6-1973) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Desecration of state and U.S. flags, see G.S. § 14-381



§ 130.09  LOITERING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACES means any
street, sidewalk, bridge, alley, or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking
lot or transportation facility or the doorways and entranceways to any
building that fronts on any of these places, or a motor vehicle in or on any
of these places, or any property owned by the town.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about in
a public place and:



      (1)   Repeatedly beckon to, stop or attempt to stop passer-by
or repeatedly attempt to engage passer-by in conversation;



      (2)   Repeatedly stop or attempt to stop motor vehicles;



      (3)   Repeatedly interfere with the free passage of other
persons; or



      (4)   Repeatedly pass to or receive from passers-by, whether
on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects for the purpose of violating any
provision of G.S Chapter 90, Article 5.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander about in
a public place and:



      (1)   Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of
the peace;



      (2)   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or
annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person, including the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which
are circulated to annoy or disturb the person to whom, or in whose hearing,
they are made;



      (3)   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or



      (4)   Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully
in any public place.



   (D)   Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of
reasonable judgment, decides that the presence of any person in any public
place is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in
divisions (B) or (C), the police officer is authorized, if deemed necessary
for the preservation of the public peace and safety, to order that person to
leave that public place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being
ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
section prohibiting loitering.



(Prior Code, § 16-14)  (Ord. passed 5-13-2003; Ord. passed 10-12-2010) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  NOISES ENUMERATED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to create or assist in creating any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of a
character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the public health,
welfare and peace is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   The following acts, among others, are hereby declared to be
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but the
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so
as to create any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of the
device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, or the use of any
gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency
vehicle;



      (2)   Unless permitted by an amplified permit issued by the
town, the use of any electronic devices which project sound that is clearly
audible at a distance of not less than 30 feet.



      (3)   The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing
frequent or long continuous noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of
any person in the vicinity;



      (4)   The use of any bicycle, skateboard or similar vehicle
which creates an unreasonably loud, annoying, disturbing or frightening
noises. The use of any motor vehicle, motorcycle or other vehicle (a)
equipped with special or custom muffler, exhaust or other noise control
equipment/system; or (b) not equipped with normal, factory issue muffler,
exhaust or other noise control equipment/system in good repair; or (c) in
jackrabbit starts, spinning tires, racing engines, or other operations so as
to create unreasonably loud, annoying, disturbing or frightening noises.



      (5)   The blasting of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler or engine, except to give notice of the time to begin or
stop work or as a warning of danger;



      (6)   The sounding of any bell, gong or any type horn or
siren, attached to any building or premises which disturbs the quiet or
repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;



      (7)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage
or service station in any residential area so as to cause loud or offensive
noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays or on Sundays;



      (8)   The erection of any excessive noise on any street
adjacent to any school or institution of learning while the same is in
session which unreasonably and unnecessarily interferes with the working of
the institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets
indicating that the area is in a school area;



      (9)   The erection of any excessive noise on Sundays on any
street adjacent to any church, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in
the streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;



      (10)   The erection, including excavation, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6;00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday and 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, except in the case of
urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with the
permit from the Building Inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period
of three days or less while the emergency continues;



      (11)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed
air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;



      (12)   The shouting and crying of peddlers barkers, hawkers
and vendors which disturb the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;



      (13)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale or display of merchandise;



      (14)   The use of any mechanical loudspeaker or amplifiers on
trucks or other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes
except where specific license is received from the city manager; and/or



      (15)   Shouting, fighting or creating noise through loud or
boisterous speech or singing so as to be audible off the premises upon which
the activities and noise occur if so loud as to disturb the peace and
tranquility of persons  occupying residences, motel, hotels, rest homes,
nursing homes or hospitals in the vicinity.



   (C)   This section shall not apply during any period directly after
the announcement of any potential, impending disaster.



(Prior Code, § 16-17)  (Ord. passed 12-11-1990; Ord. passed 6-10-2014) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate noise, see G.S. § 160A-184



§ 130.11  PROJECTILES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or project any stone,
rock, shot or other hard substance by means of sling shot, bean shooter, air
rifle, pip-gun, bow or other similar contrivance, except on archery ranges,
firing ranges or in legally established shooting galleries or ranges.



(Prior Code, § 16-18) (Ord. passed 3-13-2012)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate pellet guns and the like, see G.S. §
160A-190



§ 130.12  PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS; MINIBIKES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a minibike, moped,
motorcycle or any other type of motorized vehicular equipment within any
public park or playground.



(Prior Code, § 16-18)  (Ord. passed 5-8-1979)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.13  RAILROADS.



   (A)   Speed limit for trains. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any locomotive engine or train or railroad car within the corporate
limits of the town at any speed in excess of 35 mph.



(Prior Code, § 16-19)



   (B)   Improvement of crossings. Every railroad company or
corporation and every person owning, maintaining, using, leasing or operating
any railroad track across any street shall cause the track for the full width
of the street crossed to be improved, both between the tee-irons and for a
suitable distance outside thereof on each side of the track, so that all
crossings shall afford easy and comfortable passage for vehicles and the
persons thereafter shall keep and maintain the crossings in such condition.



(Prior Code, § 16-20)



   (C)   Blocking crossings. It shall be unlawful for any person to
stop any railroad car or any railroad engine or hand car on any of the
streets of the town for a longer period than five minutes continuously.



(Prior Code, § 16-21)



Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.14  SPITTING ON SIDEWALKS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful to spit on any paved sidewalk or upon any paving
or platform connected with any railroad or bus passenger station or upon the
floor or wall of any public building.



(Prior Code, § 16-22)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.15  WEED REMOVAL.



   (A)   Every person or owner in possession of any lot shall cut down
within four inches of the ground all weeds, grass or other noxious growth
from the lot or lots whenever the growth reaches ten inches.



   (B)   If the weeds, grass or other noxious growth are not cut down
whenever height reaches ten inches, the town may cause the weeds, grass or
other noxious growth to be cut down at the rate of $250, plus the town’s
actual costs. These fees and charges will be collected as in the manner for
other town taxes (per G.S. § 160A-193). The property owners shall be
notified prior to cutting of their respective lots.



   (C)   Costs to repair town equipment that may be damaged as a result
of the town abating noxious growths on private property shall be charged to
the property owner and collected as in the manner for other city taxes.



(Prior Code, § 16-23)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1970; Ord. passed 4-10-1973; Ord.
passed 6-29-1992; Ord. passed 10- -1999)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.16  SWIMMING FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim from any public property of
the town including streets, parks or piers.



(Prior Code, § 16-24)  (Ord. passed 4-13-1976)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.17  SKATEBOARDS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a skateboard on sidewalks
within park areas of the town, on sidewalks within the central business
district and on any public streets.



(Prior Code, § 16-25)  (Ord. passed 4-13-1976)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.18  GRAFFITI.



   The Town Council hereby declares graffiti, as defined herein, to be a
nuisance by undermining the quality of urban attractiveness and the aesthetic
appearance of the town, the protection of property values, the preservation
of the livability and attractiveness of neighborhoods and the promotion of
opportunities for economic development of the town. In addition, the Town
Council finds that the graffiti is frequently a means of communication by
street gangs engaging in unlawful activity and is thereby injurious to the
public welfare and safety.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GRAFFITI. Any inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn,
painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property, natural or human-made and that is exposed to public view,
without the prior written consent of the property owner delivered to the
person placing the graffiti on the property. GRAFFITI does not include
temporary, easily removable chalk or other water-soluble makings on public or
private sidewalks, streets, natural surfaces or other paved or cemented
surfaces which are used in connection with traditional children’s
activities such as drawings of bases for stickball, kickball, handball,
hopscotch or similar activities, nor shall it include similar easily
removable markings used in connection with any lawful business activity or
public purpose.



      GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. Any aerosol paint container, broad tipped
marker, stick on label, paint stick, paint, etching equipment, brush or other
device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or
human-made surface.



      PERPETRATOR OF GRAFFITI. Any person or persons who unlawfully
place graffiti upon any public or private property.



      PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any privately owned real property located
within the town’s jurisdiction, including any fixtures or improvements to
the property and any personal property located on the real property which is
exposed to the view of the public.



      PROPERTY OWNER. The record owner of private or public property,
the owner’s manager or agent, or any other person or entity in lawful
control or possession of the property.



      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any publicly owned real property located within
the town’s jurisdiction whether owned by the town, the county, the state,
the United States Government or any other public entity, including any
fixtures or improvements to the property and any personal property located on
the real property which is exposed to the view of the public.



      REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI. The use of any method that has the effect of
obscuring, erasing or otherwise removing the graffiti from public view.



   (B)   Placing graffiti unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person
to place graffiti upon any public or private property.



   (C)   Failure to remove graffiti unlawful. It shall be unlawful for
any property owner or perpetrator of graffiti to fail to remove, or fail to
cause the removal of graffiti in accordance herewith. No property owner shall
be penalized when the property owner meets the time requirements hereof by
either removing the graffiti or authorizing the town to do so.



   (D)   Possession of graffiti implement by minor unlawful. It shall
be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to possess any graffiti
implement upon any public or private property of which they are not a
resident or guest or customer, unless the person can establish to the
reasonable satisfaction of the police that the possession of the implement
was part of a school project, home project or some other lawful activity.



   (E)   Procedures for removal of graffiti.



      (1)   By the perpetrator. Within 15 days after a perpetrator
of graffiti places graffiti upon public or private property or within five
days after the perpetrator receives written notice from the town by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service requesting removal of the graffiti, whichever event occurs earlier,
the perpetrator of graffiti shall remove or cause the graffiti to be removed.
The removal shall be at the sole expense of the perpetrator of graffiti and
the graffiti shall be removed to the extent necessary to restore the area
where the graffiti is removed to the area’s original condition (i.e., exact
color, textures and the like). In the event the town or the property owner
remove graffiti from public or private properly, the perpetrator of graffiti
shall be liable in the nature of a debt to the party removing the graffiti
for the actual cost of the removal including reasonable administrative and
labor costs. If the graffiti is applied by a person under the age of 18, the
parents or legal guardians of the minor shall be responsible for any and all
obligations and may receive notice as if they were the perpetrator of
graffiti, except that only the actual perpetrator of graffiti may be subject
to a criminal misdemeanor for failure to comply with this division.



      (2)   By the property owner. Within 45 days after the property
owner discovers the existence of graffiti on his or her property or within 30
days after the property owner receives the second of two written notices of
the existence of graffiti on the owner’s property from the town by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal
service, whichever event occurs earlier, the properly owner shall either
remove the graffiti at the owner’s sole expense or authorize the town to
remove the graffiti at the town’s expense by signing an authorization of
removal on a form prescribed by the Town Manager.



      (3)   By authorization to the town. In the event the property
owner authorizes the town to remove the graffiti at the town’s expense in
accordance herewith, the town shall not be required to rectify any area
defaced by the graffiti more extensively than where the graffiti itself is
located and shall not be required to restore the area from where the graffiti
is removed to the area’s original condition (i.e., exact color, textures
and the like). Execution of the authorization form required hereby is a
representation by the property owner that it agrees to completely release and
hold harmless the town, its agents and assigns from any liability to the
property owner on account of the town’s removal of the graffiti accordance
with the removal method specified in the authorization of removal and for any
unintentional damage caused by the town, its agents or assigns during their
entry upon the property. Additionally, the execution of the authorization
form is a representation by the property owner that the method specified in
the authorization of removal is acceptable to the owner and that any damage
caused to the owner’s property or property value thereby is expected and
agreed to by the owner.



      (4)   On town owned property. Graffiti shall be removed by the
town from all town owned property within 30 days of its discovery. The
removal shall be at the town’s expense and subject to the direction and
control of the Town Manager.



   (F)   Emergency removal. If the town determines that any graffiti is
an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, the town
may remove or cause the graffiti to be removed or obscured at its expense
either after providing personal service of a notice describing the danger to
the property owner; or after failing to provide notice by personal service on
at least two occasions, and upon 48 hours following the mailing of the notice
by certified and first class mail or the posting of the notice in a
conspicuous place on the property.



   (G)   Appeals.



      (1)   Any property owner or perpetrator of graffiti who
receives a notice to remove graffiti may appeal the notice within five
business days of receipt of notice to the Town Manager. The appeal shall be
in writing and shall state with specificity the reasons for the appeal
(“appeal notice”). The manager or designee shall set a hearing date
within ten days of receipt of the appeal notice, and shall render a decision
within a reasonable time after the hearing date.



      (2)   If, on appeal, the manager or designee determines that
the graffiti is a public nuisance and must be removed, the manager shall
establish a new date for the removal or obscuring.



(Ord. passed 6-12-2007)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.19  POSSESSION OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, it shall
be unlawful for any person to display or willfully or intentionally possess
or have immediate access to any deadly weapon within any park, bus, or
building owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the
town, including any portion thereof or appurtenant premises. Deadly weapon as
used in this division includes, but is not limited to any bowie knife, dirk,
dagger, slingshot, loaded cane, brass iron or metallic knuckles, razor,
shuriken, pistol, shotgun, rifle, handgun or other weapon of like kind.



   (B)   The provisions of division (A) shall not apply to:



      (1)   Persons authorized under state or federal law to carry
deadly weapons in the performance of their duties;



      (2)   Persons expressly authorized by the Chief of Police to
display, possess, or control such deadly weapons at a town sponsored event,
program, display, or activity involving deadly weapons; or



      (3)   Persons holding a concealed handgun permit under G.S. §
14-415.11.



   (C)   It also shall be unlawful for any person to possess,
discharge, or otherwise use any deadly weapon, as defined in division (A) of
this section, while under the influence of an intoxicating beverage, or
controlled substance, as defined in G.S. § 90-86 et seq. which was not
prescribed for that person by a licensed practitioner.



(Ord. passed 3-13-1996; Ord. passed 9-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Concealed weapons, see G.S. § 14-269



   Selling weapons to minors, see G.S. § 14-315



   Permitting children to use firearms, see G.S. § 14-316



   Sale of certain weapons without permit forbidden, see G.S. § 14-402



   Permit to carry concealed handgun; scope of permit, see G.S. §
14-415.11



§ 130.20  HUMAN WASTE.



   No person shall urinate or deposit any human waste of any kind on any
street, lot or premises except in approved sanitary facilities.



(Ord. passed 3-14-2017)



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 130.35  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MALT BEVERAGE. Beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter and any other
brewed or fermented beverage containing at least 0.5% and not more than 60%
alcohol by volume.



   OPEN CONTAINER. A container whose seal has broken or a container other
than the manufacturer’s unopened original container.



   PUBLIC STREET. Any highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, alley,
bridge or other way within and/or under the control of the town and open to
public use, including the sidewalks of any street.



   UNFORTIFIED WINE. Wine that has an alcoholic content produced only by
natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beet or dextrose sugar,
and that has an alcoholic content of not more than 17% alcohol by volume.



(Prior Code, § 16-26)  (Ord. passed 6-11-1996)



§ 130.36  CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public
streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt
beverages and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or
outside the corporate limits, owned occupied or controlled by the town
including, but not limited to, public buildings and the grounds appurtenant
thereto, municipal parking lots, public parks, playgrounds, recreational
areas, tennis courts and other athletic fields.



(Prior Code, § 16-27)  (Ord. passed 6-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.37  POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified
wine on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person
to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any
property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned,
occupied or controlled by the town including, but not limited to, public
buildings and the grounds appurtenant thereto, municipal parking lots, public
parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, tennis courts and other athletic
fields.



(Prior Code, § 16-28)  (Ord. passed 6-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.38  POSSESSION DURING SPECIAL EVENTS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess malt beverages and/or
unfortified wine on public streets, alleys or parking lots which are
temporarily closed to regular traffic for special events, unless the
governing body adopts a resolution making other provisions for the possession
of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine at the special event.



(Prior Code, § 16-29)  (Ord. passed 6-11-1996)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.39  EXEMPTIONS.



   Possession and consumption of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine
shall be permitted within a building or premises on town owned property where
appropriate permits have been obtained as required by law for the possession
and consumption of alcoholic beverages for the period of time permitted
thereunder.



(Prior Code, § 16-30)  (Ord. passed 6-11-1996)



CURFEW



§ 130.50  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect juveniles from
victimization and exposure to criminal activity by establishing a curfew for
juveniles under the age of 18 years in the town.



   (B)   This subchapter is intended to reinforce and promote the
health, safety and welfare of both juveniles and adults by creating an
environment offering better protection and security for all concerned.



(Ord. passed 8- -1997)



§ 130.51  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DIRECT ROUTE. The shortest reasonable path of travel or a commonly used
route to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way.



   EMERGENCY. An unforseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster and automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or death. This
term also shall include any action that is reasonably necessary in order to
respond to the medical needs of a family member of the juvenile regardless of
whether the juvenile’s action is taken in order to prevent death or serious
injury.



   GUARDIAN. A person who is court-appointed to be the guardian of a
juvenile.



   JUVENILE. Any person who has not reached his or her eighteenth birthday
and is not married, emancipated or a member of the armed services or1 the
United States.



   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster
parent or stepparent of another person or a person to whom legal custody has
been given by court order.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place that is generally open to and used by the
public or a substantial group of the public, whether it be publicly or
privately owned, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, highways,
alleys, rights-of-way, public vehicular areas and parking lots,
transportation facilities, theaters, restaurants, ships, bowling alleys,
schools and school grounds, places of business and amusement, playgrounds,
parks, similar areas that are open to the public, and other common areas open
to or accessible to the public.



   REMAIN. To linger or stay in a public place, or to fail to leave the
premises when requested to do so by a police officer, or to fail to leave the
premises of an establishment when requested to do so by the owner/operator or
employee of the premises.



   RESTRICTED HOURS. The time of night referred to herein is based upon
the prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern Standard Time or Eastern
Daylight Savings Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the
town. RESTRICTED HOURS shall mean:



      (1)   11:00 p.m. on Sunday until 6:00 a.m. on Monday, 11:00
p.m. on Monday until 6:00 a.m. on Tuesday, 11:00 p.m. on Tuesday until 6:00
a.m. on Wednesday, 11:00 p.m. on Wednesday until 6:00 a.m. on Thursday, and
11:00 p.m. on Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on Friday; and



      (2)   12:00 a.m. on Saturday until 6:00 a.m. on Saturday and
12:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday.



(Ord. passed 8- -1997)



§ 130.52  OFFENSES.



   (A)   A juvenile commits an offense by being present in or remaining
in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town
during the restricted hours.



   (B)   A parent or guardian of a juvenile commits an offense if he or
she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control, allows the juvenile to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
town during the restricted hours. The term KNOWINGLY includes knowledge that
a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of
a juvenile in that parent’s legal custody. This requirement is intended to
hold a neglectful or careless parent up to a reasonable community standard of
parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no
defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct
or whereabouts of the juvenile.



   (C)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person 18
years of age or older to aid or abet a juvenile in the violation of division
(A) above.



   (D)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a parent or
guardian to refuse to take custody during the restricted hours of a juvenile
for whom the parent or guardian is responsible, within a reasonable period of
time.



(Ord. passed 8- -1997)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.53  EXCEPTIONS.



   A juvenile who is in a public place or establishment during the
restricted hours shall not be in violation of this subchapter if:



   (A)   The juvenile is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or
other adult person 21 years of age or older authorized by the parent or
guardian of the juvenile and having the lawful care and custody of the minor;



   (B)   The juvenile is upon an emergency errand directed by his or
her parent, guardian or other adult person 21 years of age or older having
the lawful care and custody of the minor, or is reacting to or responding to
an emergency;



   (C)   The juvenile is engaged in a lawful employment activity or
using a direct route to or from a place of employment;



   (D)   The juvenile is attending or traveling directly to or from an
activity involving the exercise of the First Amendment rights of free speech,
freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion;



   (E)   The juvenile is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for
normal travel with interstate and intrastate travel through the town being
excepted in all cases from this subchapter;



   (F)   The juvenile is attending or traveling to or from, by direct
route, an official school, religious or recreational activity that is
supervised by adults and sponsored by a public or private school, the town or
other governmental entity, a civic organization or another similar entity
that accepts responsibility for the juvenile; and



   (G)   The juvenile is married or emancipated or is a member of the
armed services of the United States.



(Ord. passed 8- -1997)



§ 130.54  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Before taking any enforcement action under this subchapter, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s name, age and reason for
being in the public place or establishment during the restricted hours.



   (B)   The officer shall not prepare a juvenile arrest report, issue
a citation, or make an arrest under this ordinance unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any
response and other circumstances, no exception or defense in § 130.53 is
present.



(Ord. passed 8- -1997)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   If any person shall violate § 130.10, he or she shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined an amount as set by the Town
Council or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



(Prior Code, § 16-17)



   (C)   (1)   (a)   A violation of any provision of § 130.18
shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of up to $100 with a minimum
penalty of $15. If the offender fails to pay this penalty within ten days
after being cited for a violation, the town may seek to recover the penalty
by filing a civil action in the nature of a debt. If the violator of §
130.18(B), (C) or (D) is a person under the age of 18, the parents or legal
guardians of the minor shall be subject to the civil penalties referenced
herein as if they are the offender.



         (b)   The town may seek to enforce this section through
any appropriate equitable action.



         (c)   Each day that a violation continues after the
offender has been notified of the violation shall constitute a separate
violation and each violation shall be subject to an additional civil penalty.



         (d)   The town may seek to enforce this section by using
any one or a combination of the foregoing remedies.



      (2)   In addition to or in lieu of civil penalties or other
remedies, each violation of § 130.18(B) or (D) or failure to comply with
division (E)(1) shall constitute a separate misdemeanor. Any person convicted
of a violation shall be fined not less than $250 for a first offense and $500
for each subsequent offense. In addition to any other remedy, the court shall
order any person convicted of a violation to make restitution to the property
owner and/or to the town for the damage or loss suffered as a result of the
offense. The court may determine the amount, terms and conditions of the
restitution.



   (D)   (1)   Any person other than a juvenile charges with
violation of §§ 130.50 through 130.54 for the first time shall be given a
warning citation. Upon subsequent violation, the person shall be charged with
the violation and, if found guilty, the person shall be subject to punishment
as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



      (2)   A juvenile who violates any provision of §§ 130.50
through 130.54 is subject to being adjudicated delinquent. The court may, in
its discretion, impose any dispositional alternative(s) that are provided in
the State Juvenile Code for any juvenile who is delinquent.



(Ord. passed 12-11-1990; Ord. passed 8- -1997; Ord. passed 6-12-2007)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION





         151.   MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MOBILE HOMES




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION



Section



General Provisions



   150.001   Scope of chapter



   150.002   Oversights and dereliction of duty not to legalize
violation



   150.003   Contractors; registration; bond



   150.004   Certificates of occupancy



Regulatory Codes



   150.020   Building Code; general construction



   150.021   Residential Building Code



   150.022   Plumbing Code



   150.023   Heating Code



   150.024   Electrical Code



   150.025   Amendments



   150.026   Compliance



   150.027   Copies



Inspection Department



   150.040   Composition; appointment of Department head



   150.041   Duties generally



   150.042   Conflicts of interest



   150.043   Records; reports



   150.044   Inspection procedure



   150.045   Powers of inspection officials



Permits



   150.060   Permits required



   150.061   Applications



   150.062   Plans and specifications



   150.063   Issuance generally; limitations



   150.064   Revocation



   150.065   Time limitations on validity



   150.066   Change in work after issuance



   150.067   Fees



Unsafe Buildings



   150.080   Declaration by Building Inspector



   150.081   Removal after condemnation



   150.082   Notice; hearing



   150.083   Order to remedy or demolish



   150.084   Appeals; finality of order not appealed



   150.085   Report when owner fails to comply



   150.086   Orders by Town Council



   150.087   When posting and publication of notice required



   150.088   Presumption of public danger



   150.089   Failure to comply with orders and the like; penalties;
continuing violations



Insulation



   150.100   Authority



   150.101   Licenses required



   150.102   Application



   150.103   Procedure for issuance



   150.104   Bond required



   150.105   Termination and renewal



   150.106   Suspension; revocation



   150.107   Change of location



   150.108   Required permit; fee



Housing Code



   150.120   Findings; purpose



   150.121   Definitions



   150.122   Minimum standards of fitness for dwellings and dwelling
units



   150.123   Minimum standards for structural condition



   150.124   Minimum standards for basic plumbing, heating and
electrical equipment and facilities



   150.125   Minimum standards for ventilation



   150.126   Minimum standards for space, use and location



   150.127   Minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance



   150.128   Minimum standards for control of insects, rodents and
infestations



   150.129   Minimum standards applicable to rooming houses; exceptions



   150.130   Inspections; duty of owners and occupants



   150.131   Powers and duties of Building Inspector



   150.132   Procedure for enforcement



   150.133   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   150.134   In rem action by Inspector; placarding



   150.135   Costs a lien on premises; sale of personal property



   150.136   Civil action; remedies



   150.137   Zoning Board of Adjustments to hear appeals



   150.138   Prevention of demolition by neglect



   150.139   Conflict with other provisions



   150.140   Severability



   150.141   Effective date



 



   150.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  SCOPE OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes herein
adopted shall apply to the following:



   (A)   The location, design, materials, equipment, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal,
use and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances
connected or attached to the building or structure;



   (B)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains,
waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems and all fixtures
and appurtenances thereof;



   (C)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and
appurtenances thereof; and



   (D)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.



(Prior Code, § 7-1)



§ 150.002  OVERSIGHTS AND DERELICTION OF DUTY NOT TO LEGALIZE VIOLATION.



   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any Inspector or
other official or employee of the Inspection Department shall be deemed to
legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any regulatory code herein adopted.



(Prior Code, § 7-2)



§ 150.003  CONTRACTORS; REGISTRATION; BOND.



   (A)   Every person carrying on the business of building contractor,
plumbing contractor, heating-air conditioning contractor or electrical
contractor within the town shall register at the office of the Inspection
Department, giving his or her name and place of business.



(Prior Code, § 7-3)



   (B)   Every person required to register at the office of the
Inspection Department under the preceding division (A) shall also give a good
and sufficient bond in the sum of $1,000 to be approved by the Town Attorney,
conditioned upon faithful performance of duty in doing any work which he or
she may have contracted to do and to indemnify the town against loss in any
manner whatsoever for any unskillful or negligent work or conduct in the
performance of the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter or any
regulatory code herein adopted, or any damage to any utility lines, streets
or sidewalks in the town or for the use of defective or improper material in
the work, or for any damage which may accrue to any person by reason of any
default of the contract, or for the payment of any inspection or other fees
required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-4)



§ 150.004  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No new building or part thereof shall be occupied, and no
addition or enlargement of any existing building shall be occupied, and no
existing building after being altered or moved shall be occupied, and no
change of occupancy shall be made in any existing building or part thereof,
until the Inspection Department has issued a certificate of occupancy
therefor.



   (B)   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a
portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final
completion and occupancy of the entire building.



   (C)   Application for a certificate of occupancy may be made by the
owner or his or her agent after all final inspections have been made for new
buildings or, in the case of existing buildings, after supplying the
information and data necessary to determine compliance with this chapter, the
appropriate regulatory codes and the Zoning Ordinance for the occupancy
intended.



   (D)   The Inspection Department shall issue a certificate of
occupancy when, after examination and inspection, it is found that the
building in all respects conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the
regulatory codes and the Zoning Ordinance for the occupancy intended.



(Prior Code, § 7-5)



REGULATORY CODES



§ 150.020  BUILDING CODE; GENERAL CONSTRUCTION.



   The State Building Code, Volume I, General Construction, as adopted by
the State Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as fully as though set forth herein as the Building Code of the
town to the extent the code is applicable for safe and stable design, methods
of construction, minimum standards and use of materials in buildings or
structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or otherwise
constructed or reconstructed.



(Prior Code, § 7-6)



§ 150.021  RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE.



   The State Uniform Residential Building Code, as adopted by the State
Building Inspectors Association, and as published by the State Building Code
Council is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as
the Residential Building Code for one- and two-family residential buildings
in the town.



(Prior Code, § 7-7)



§ 150.022  PLUMBING CODE.



   The State Plumbing Code (State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing) as
adopted and published by the State Building Code Council and as amended, is
hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the
Plumbing Code for the town.



(Prior Code, § 7-8)



§ 150.023  HEATING CODE.



   The State Heating Code (State Building Code, Volume III, Heating) as
adopted and published by the State Building Code Council and as amended, is
hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the
Heating Code for the town.



(Prior Code, § 7-9)



§ 150.024  ELECTRICAL CODE.



   The State Electrical Code (State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical),
adopting by reference the 1975 edition of the National Electrical Code of the
National Fire Protection Association as adopted by the State Building Code
Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set
forth herein as the Electrical Code for the town.



(Prior Code, § 7-10)



§ 150.025  AMENDMENTS.



   Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference herein which
are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations
referred to herein shall be effective in the town at the time the amendments
are filed with the Town Clerk as provided in § 150.027.



(Prior Code, § 7-11)



§ 150.026  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards and other
provisions of either the State Building Code, General Construction, Volume I
or the State Uniform Residential Building Code, whichever is applicable , or
of both if both are applicable.



   (B)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation,
occupancy or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed in
accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of
the State Plumbing Code (State Building Code, Volume II, Plumbing).



   (C)   All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other
provisions of the State Heating Code (State Building Code, Volume III,
Heating).



   (D)   All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall
be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the State Electrical
Code (State Building Code, Volume IV, Electrical).



(Prior Code, § 7-12)



§ 150.027  COPIES.



   (A)   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted in this
subchapter and official copies of all amendments thereto shall be kept on
file in the office of the Town Clerk.



   (B)   The copies shall be the official copies of the codes and the
amendments.



(Prior Code, § 7-13)



INSPECTION DEPARTMENT



§ 150.040  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT HEAD.



   The Inspection Department shall consist of a Building Inspector, a
Plumbing Inspector, a Heating-Air Conditioning Inspector, an Electrical
Inspector and such other Inspectors or deputy or assistant Inspectors as may
be authorized by the Town Council. The Town Manager may, subject to approval
of the Town Council, designate a Department head.



(Prior Code, § 7-14)



§ 150.041  DUTIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Inspection Department to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted
herein and to make all inspections necessary to determine whether or not the
provisions of this chapter and the codes are being met.



   (B)   The State Building Code, Volume II, General Construction, and
the State Uniform Residential Building Code shall be enforced by the Building
Inspector. The State Plumbing Code shall be enforced by the Plumbing
Inspector. The State Heating Code shall be enforced by the Heating-Air
Conditioning Inspector. The State Electrical Code shall be enforced by the
Electrical Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 7-15)



§ 150.042  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   No officer or employee of the Inspection Department shall be
financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for
the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or any part
thereof, or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless he or
she is the owner of the building. No officer or employee of the Inspection
Department shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his or her
duties or with the interests of the town.



(Prior Code, § 7-16)



§ 150.043  RECORDS; REPORTS.



   The Inspection Department, and each Inspector, shall keep complete,
permanent and accurate records in convenient form of all application
received, permits issued, inspections and reinspections made and all other
work and activities of the Inspection Department. Periodic reports shall be
submitted to the Town Manager and to other agencies, as required.



(Prior Code, § 7-17)



§ 150.044  INSPECTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Inspection required. The Inspection Department shall inspect
all buildings and structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind
has been issued as often as necessary in order to determine whether the work
complies with this chapter and the appropriate codes.



   (B)   Inspection of materials at point of manufacture and the like.
When deemed necessary by the appropriate Inspector, materials and assemblies
may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication, or inspections
may be made by approved and recognized inspection organizations; provided
that, no approval shall be based upon reports of the organizations unless the
same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of the
organization.



   (C)   Required inspections and notices therefor. All holders of
permits, or their agents, shall notify the Inspection Department and the
appropriate Inspector at each of the following stages of construction so that
approval may be given before work is continued:



      (1)   Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are
excavated and the necessary reinforcement and forms are in place and before
concrete is placed. Drilled footings, piles and similar types of foundation
shall be inspected as installed;



      (2)   Framing inspection. To be made after all structural
framing is in place and all roughing-in of plumbing and electrical and
heating has been installed and after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing and
vents are installed, but before any of the structure is enclosed or covered.
Poured in place concrete structural elements shall be inspected before each
pour of any structural member;



      (3)   Fireproofing inspection. To be made after all areas
required to be protected by fireproofing are lathed, but before the
plastering or other fireproofing is applied; and



      (4)   Final inspection. To be made after building or structure
has all doors hung, fixtures set and ready for occupancy, but before the
building is occupied.



   (D)   Calls for inspection. Request for inspections may be made to
the Office of the Inspection Department or to the appropriate Inspector. The
Inspection Department shall make inspections as soon as practicable after
request is made therefor; provided that, the work is ready for inspection at
the time the request is made. Reinspections may be made at the convenience of
the Inspector.



   (E)   Uncovering work; notice of approval or rejection. No work
shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed condition ready for
inspection. All work which has been concealed before the inspection and
approval shall be uncovered at the request of the Inspector and placed in
condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the work shall be
furnished by the appropriate Inspector in the form of a notice posted on the
building or given to the permit holder or his or her agent.



   (F)   Failure to call for inspection; proceeding without approval.
Failure to call for inspections or proceeding without approval at each stage
of construction shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



   (G)   Street lines and the like. Where the applicant for a permit
proposes to erect any building or structure on the line of any street, alley
or other public place, he or she shall secure a survey of the line of the
street, alley or other public place adjacent to the property upon which the
building or structure is to be erected before proceeding with construction of
the building or structure. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
see that the building does not encroach upon the street, alley or other
public place.



(Prior Code, § 7-18)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.045  POWERS OF INSPECTION OFFICIALS.



   (A)   Authority. Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered and
directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the regulatory
codes herein adopted.



   (B)   Right-of-entry. Inspectors shall have the right-of-entry on
any premises within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes herein adopted
at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the
requirements of this chapter and the regulatory codes, upon presentation of
proper credentials.



   (C)   Stop orders. Whenever any building or structure or part
thereof is being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired
in a hazardous manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or
any other town ordinance or in violation of any provision of any regulatory
code herein adopted, or in violation of the terms of the permit or permits
issued therefor, or in a manner as to endanger life or property, the
appropriate Inspector may order the work to be immediately stopped. The order
shall be in writing to the owner of the property, to his or her agent or to
the person doing the work and shall state the reasons therefor and the
conditions under which the work may be resumed.



(Prior Code, § 7-19)



PERMITS



§ 150.060  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Building. No person shall commence or proceed with the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of
any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written
permit therefor from the Building Inspector; provided that, no building
permit shall be required for work the total cost of which does not exceed
$100 and which does not involve any change of the structural parts or the
stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of egress of the building
or the structure in question. Local Board of Health approval of property for
septic tank is required where sewage system cannot be connected to city
sewer. In all cases of removal or demolition of a building or structure, a
good and sufficient bond in the sum of $500 shall be posted by the property
owner or by his or her contractor at the time of application for a permit, to
ensure complete removal or demolition, including all rubble and debris.
Failure on the part of the property owner or his or her contractor to
completely demolish, remove and clear the premises, after 30 days’ notice
by the Building Inspector, shall be cause for forfeiture of the bond.



   (B)   Plumbing. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension or general repair of any plumbing system without a
written permit therefor from the Plumbing Inspector; provided that, no permit
shall be required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of a
trap to an installed system of plumbing if the repairs or replacements do not
disrupt the original water supply or the waste or ventilating systems. Local
Board of Health approval of property for septic tank is required where sewage
system cannot be connected to the sewer system of the town.



   (C)   Heating-air conditioning. No person shall commence or proceed
with the installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any heating
or cooling equipment system without a written permit from the Heating-Air
Conditioning Inspector; provided that, no permit shall be required for minor
repairs or minor burner services or filter replacements of warm air furnaces
or cooling system.



   (D)   Electrical. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any electrical
wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without a written permit therefor
from the Electrical Inspector; provided that, no permit shall be required for
minor repair work such as the replacement of lamps or the connection of
portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently
installed; and, provided that, no permit shall be required for the
installation, alteration or repair of the electrical wiring, devices,
appliances and equipment installed by or for an electrical public utility
corporation for the use of the corporation in the generation, transmission,
distribution or metering of electrical energy or for the use of the
corporation in the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence.



(Prior Code, § 7-20)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.061  APPLICATIONS.



   Written application shall be made for all permits required by this
chapter and shall be made on forms provided by the Inspection Department. The
application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure affected
or by his or her authorized agent or representative and, in addition to other
information as may be required by the appropriate Inspector to enable him or
her to determine whether the permit applied for should be issued, shall show
the following:



   (A)   Name, residence and business address of the owner;



   (B)   Name, residence and business of the authorized representative
or agent, if any; and



   (C)   Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with
evidence that he or she has obtained a certificate from the appropriate state
licensing board for the contractors, if it be required for the work involved
in the permit for which application is made.



(Prior Code, § 7-21)



§ 150.062  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for
permit when the estimated total cost of the building or structure is in
excess of $20,000, and for any other building or structure where plans and
specifications are deemed necessary by the appropriate Inspector in order for
him or her to determine whether the proposed work complies with the
appropriate regulatory codes. Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient
clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and the plans
and specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate
that the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this chapter and the
appropriate regulatory codes. Where plans and specifications are required, a
copy of the same shall be kept at the work until all authorized operations
have been completed and approved by the appropriate Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 7-22)



§ 150.063  ISSUANCE GENERALLY; LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   When proper application for a permit has been made and the
appropriate Inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work
comply with the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory
codes, he or she shall issue the permit, upon payment of the proper fee or
fees as hereinafter provided in § 150.067.



(Prior Code, § 7-23)



   (B)   (1)   No building permit shall be issued for any building
or structure the estimated total cost of which is more than $45,000 unless
the work is to be performed by a licensed general contractor.



      (2)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or
structure, other than a one- or two-family dwelling, the estimated total cost
of which is more than $45,000 unless the plans bear the state seal of a
registered architect or a registered engineer.



      (3)   Where any provision of the general statutes of the state
or any provision of this code or other town ordinance requires that work be
done by a licensed specialty contractor of any kind, no permit for the work
shall be issued unless it is to be performed by the licensed specialty
contractor.



      (4)   Where detailed plans and specifications are required
under this chapter, no building permit shall be issued unless the plans and
specifications have been provided.



(Prior Code, § 7-24)



§ 150.064  REVOCATION.



   The appropriate Inspector may revoke and require the return of any
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the
approved application, plans or specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with proper orders of the Inspector; for refusal or failure to comply
with requirements of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit.



(Prior Code, § 7-25)



§ 150.065  TIME LIMITATIONS ON VALIDITY.



   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire by limitation six
months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has
not been commenced. If, after commencement, the work is discontinued for a
period of 12 months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire. No work
authorized by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed
until a new permit therefor has been secured.



(Prior Code, § 7-26)



§ 150.066  CHANGE IN WORK AFTER ISSUANCE.



   After a permit has been issued, changes or deviations from the terms of
the application and permit or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter or
of any regulatory code adopted herein shall not be made until specific
written approval of the changes or deviations has been obtained from the
appropriate Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 7-27)



§ 150.067  FEES.



   Fees for permits shall be based upon the total estimated cost of the
proposed work, including all subcontracts if any, but in no case shall the
total estimated cost be less than the market value of similar completed work
in the town as determined by the appropriate Inspector or Inspectors. Permit
fees shall be as established by the Town Council. A schedule of the fees
shall be maintained by the Inspection Department and be available for public
inspection during the normal office hours of the Inspection Department.



(Prior Code, § 7-28)



UNSAFE BUILDINGS



§ 150.080  DECLARATION BY BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   (A)   Any building or structure or part thereof, partially destroyed
or otherwise, which is found by the Building Inspector to be in a dilapidated
state of disrepair or other substandard condition as to be dangerous to life,
health or other property, or to constitute a fire or safety hazard or a
public nuisance shall be declared by the Building Inspector to be unsafe.



   (B)   The unsafe condition may be caused by defective construction,
overloaded structural parts, decay, susceptibility to fire, exits or any
other hazardous conditions or circumstances.



   (C)   The Building Inspector shall have authority, and it shall be
his or her duty, to declare all such buildings or structures unsafe and to
take appropriate action to have the conditions corrected or removed.



   (D)   The declaration by the Building Inspector shall constitute an
order of condemnation for the purposes of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-29)



§ 150.081  REMOVAL AFTER CONDEMNATION.



   (A)   Duty of owner. Whenever any building or structure has been
condemned by the Building Inspector and the existence of the building or
structure in a dilapidated state of disrepair or other substandard condition
is found and determined by the Building Inspector or, upon appeal from or
report by the Building Inspector as hereafter provided, by the Town Council
to be dangerous to life, health or other property, or is in a condition as to
constitute a fire or safety hazard or a public nuisance, the owner or owners
of the building or structure shall be required to demolish and remove the
same and remedy the conditions under the regulations and procedures herein
provided.



   (B)   Authority of town on failure of owner. In the event the owner
fails or refuses so to do within the time directed by the Building Inspector
or by the Town Council, as hereinafter provided, the Town Council may, in its
judgment, cause the same to be demolished and removed or other steps taken as
it may find to be necessary to suppress and abate the nuisance and remove the
fire or safety hazard and the danger to life, health or other property found
to exist, and specially assess the cost and expense of doing the work against
the lot or parcel of land on which the building or structure is located.



(Prior Code, § 7-30)



§ 150.082  NOTICE; HEARING.



   Before any building or structure may be ordered to be demolished and
removed as provided in § 150.081, the Building Inspector shall notify the
owners thereof, in writing, by certified or registered mail to the last known
address of the owner, or by personal service of the notice by the Building
Inspector or his or her assistant or by posting notice as hereinafter
provided, that the building or structure is in a condition as appears to
constitute a fire or safety hazard or dangerous to life, health or other
property, or to be a public nuisance, and that a hearing will be held before
the Building Inspector at a designated place at a time not less than ten days
after the date of the written notice, at which time and place the owner shall
be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel upon all legal or factual
questions relating to the matter and shall be entitled to offer the evidence
as he or she may desire which is relevant or material to the questions sought
to be determined or the remedies sought to be effected. If the name or
whereabouts of the owner cannot, after due diligence, be discovered, the
notice herein referred to shall be considered properly and adequately served
if a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building or structure in
question at least ten days prior to the date fixed for the hearing and a
notice of the hearing is published one time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town at least one week prior to the date fixed for the
hearing. The notice shall state the address or location of the building or
structure and the time, place and purpose of the hearing.



(Prior Code, § 7-31)



§ 150.083  ORDER TO REMEDY OR DEMOLISH.



   If, upon the hearing, the Building Inspector shall find that the
building or structure in question is in a dilapidated or substandard state of
disrepair as to constitute a fire or safety hazard or to be dangerous to
life, health or other property or is a public nuisance, he or she shall make
an order in writing, directed to the owner of the building or structure,
requiring the owner to remedy the conditions so found to exist by demolishing
and removing the buildings or structure or taking other steps as may be
necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, within the period,
not less than 60 days, as the Building Inspector may prescribe.



(Prior Code, § 7-32)



§ 150.084  APPEALS; FINALITY OF ORDER NOT APPEALED.



   (A)   The owner of any building or structure ordered by the Building
Inspector to be demolished and removed, or who is directed by the Building
Inspector to take any other steps to abate a nuisance or remove hazards found
by the Building Inspector to exist, shall have the right of appeal from the
orders to the Town Council; provided that, the owner gives notice of appeal
to the Building Inspector at the time of the hearing at which the order is
made, or, within ten days after the order is made, files with the Building
Inspector a written notice of the appeal.



   (B)   Notice of appeal shall state the grounds therefor. Unless an
appeal is taken within the time and in the manner herein prescribed, the
action of the Building Inspector shall be deemed final, subject only to
action as the Town Council may take as herein elsewhere provided. Where an
appeal has been properly taken and notice thereof given in accordance with
the provisions of this section, it shall be the duty of the Building
Inspector to report the same to the Town Manager who shall cause the matter
to be placed on the agenda for action by the Town Council at its next ensuing
regular meeting.



   (C)   The Town Council shall have the right to continue the hearing
of the appeal from time to time, in its discretion.



(Prior Code, § 7-33)



§ 150.085  REPORT WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY.



   In the event the owner does not appeal from the final order or
direction of the Building Inspector requiring that the building or structure
be demolished and removed or the taking of other steps as may be required to
abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, and fails or refuses to comply
with the order and direction, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector
to file a written report thereof with the Town Manager, who shall cause the
report to be placed on the agenda for action by the Town Council at its next
ensuing regular meeting or to some subsequent meeting to which the Town
Council may continue the same. The Building Inspector shall mail a copy of
the report by certified or registered mail to the owner at his or her last
known address or have a copy of the report delivered to the owner. The report
shall specify the date of the meeting of the Town Council for which the
matter will be docketed for action.



(Prior Code, § 7-34)



§ 150.086  ORDERS BY TOWN COUNCIL.



   In all cases referred to in this subchapter which reach the Town
Council for action, either upon appeal of the owner from the ruling of the
Building Inspector or upon report of the Building Inspector that the owner
fails or refuses to comply with his or her order or direction, the Town
Council shall hear the matter, and if it finds and determines that the
building or structure in question is in a dilapidated or substandard state of
disrepair as to constitute a fire or safety hazard, or to be dangerous to
life, health or other property, or is a public nuisance, and that the owner
of the building or structure has failed or refused to abate the nuisance and
has failed or refused to have the building or structure demolished and
removed or has failed or refused to take other steps as may be necessary to
abate the nuisance and remove the hazards found to exist, it may cause the
demolition and removal of the building or structure to be done, or effect
other remedies as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the
hazards, and specially assess the cost of the work against the lot or parcel
of land on which the building or structure was situated; and the assessment
shall constitute a specific lien upon the lot or parcel of land, which may be
enforced by an action instituted in the name of the town in the nature of an
action to foreclose a mortgage in the case of ad valorem taxes and local
improvement assessments.



(Prior Code, § 7-35)



§ 150.087  WHEN POSTING AND PUBLICATION OF NOTICE REQUIRED.



   In cases in which the Building Inspector has been unable to give the
owner actual notice of hearing in the manner hereinabove provided, and has
given the notice by posting and publishing the same as authorized in §
150.082, and the owner has failed or refused to comply with the order or
direction of the Building Inspector to demolish and remove the building or
structure, or take other remedial action as will remove the hazards, and the
case is referred to the Town Council for action, the Town Council shall,
before taking the action, cause to be posted on the outside of the building
or structure in question at least ten days prior to the date fixed for the
hearing, and published one time in a newspaper having general circulation in
the town at least one week prior to the date fixed for the hearing, a written
notice stating the address or location of the building or structure involved
and the time, place and purpose of the hearing and other information as the
Town Council may deem advisable.



(Prior Code, § 7-36)



§ 150.088  PRESUMPTION OF PUBLIC DANGER.



   In all cases in which the Town Council, under authority of this
subchapter, causes the demolition and removal of any building or structure to
be carried out, or directs other remedial steps to be taken as may be
necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, it shall be
conclusively presumed that the public nuisance and the fire and safety hazard
and danger to life, health or other property, created and maintained by the
continued presence of the building or structure in a condition as is found to
exist, constitute a clear and present danger amounting to a situation of
emergency involving the public health, safety and general welfare, which
requires entry upon private property for the summary abatement and removal of
the danger, in the public interest.



(Prior Code, § 7-37)



§ 150.089  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDERS AND THE LIKE; PENALTIES;
CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any final order or direction of the Building Inspector or Town
Council made by virtue and in pursuance of this subchapter, and any person
violating this subchapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by
G.S. § 14-4 for the violation of municipal ordinances and, every day, the
person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any final order or
direction of the Building Inspector or Town Council made by virtue and in
pursuance of this subchapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Prior Code, § 7-38)  Penalty, see § 150.999



INSULATION



§ 150.100  AUTHORITY.



   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 7-39)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)



§ 150.101  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   On and after 1-1-1978, no person may, for a consideration, install,
alter or restore within the town any insulation or other materials or energy
utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the State Building Code
requirements for insulation and energy utilization standards who is not
either:



   (A)   Licensed as a contractor to do the proposed work under G.S.
Ch. 87;



   (B)   Working under the supervision of a registered architect or
professional engineer;



   (C)   An owner working upon his or her own building; or



   (D)   Licensed under the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-40)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.102  APPLICATION.



   Every person desiring a license under this subchapter shall submit an
application for the license to the Building Inspector, conforming to the
following requirements.



   (A)   Form of application. Each application shall be a written
statement upon forms provided by the Building Inspector.



   (B)   Contents of application. Each application shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   Name and home address of the applicant if an individual
or home office address if a corporation or partnership;



      (2)   Names and home addresses of the partners, if a
partnership;



      (3)   Names and home addresses of the officers and directors,
if a corporation;



      (4)   Place where the proposed business is to be located;



      (5)   Complete record of all convictions of felonies or acts
involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit by the applicant or any employee,
partner, officer or director of the applicant, whether in this or any other
state or jurisdiction;



      (6)   Complete record of all licenses held by the applicant or
any employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant authorizing
activities of the type authorized herein or other activities involving
construction, alteration or modification of buildings and structures; and



      (7)   Information as to the circumstances in which any local,
state or federal government or agency has refused, suspended or revoked a
license of the type described in division (B)(6) to the applicant or any
employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant.



   (C)   Fees. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount as set by the Town Council for the license, the amount to be for the
fiscal year and prorated by quarters to the end of the year.



   (D)   False statements. False statements on any application for a
license shall be grounds for immediate revocation or denial of the license.



(Prior Code, § 7-41)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)



§ 150.103  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Review by town officers. Each application received by the
Building Inspector shall be promptly reviewed by the Inspection Department or
Town Manager and, if no derogatory information is found, approved for
issuance of license.



   (B)   Licensing agency. The application upon approval shall then be
turned over to the Finance Officer, who shall then issue the license pursuant
to the following standards.



   (C)   Standards. The Finance Officer shall issue the license unless
he or she shall find that the applicant or any employee, partner, officer or
director of the applicant:



      (1)   Has been convicted within the last three years of a
felony or an act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit, whether in this or
any other state or jurisdiction;



      (2)   Has been refused a license to do the type of work
authorized herein or has had such a license suspended or revoked by any
local, state or federal government or agency and the government or agency has
not subsequently granted or restored the license;



      (3)   Has knowingly made a false statement in the application;
and/or



      (4)   Has failed to post the bond or other security required
by § 150.104.



(Prior Code, § 7-42)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)



§ 150.104  BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   Before a license shall be issued to any applicant, the
applicant shall post a bond with the town in the amount of $1,000. In lieu of
posting a bond, the applicant may deposit a cashier’s check or cash in the
same amount.



   (B)   The security required by division (A) shall be available to
indemnify any person for any damage which may accrue by reason of the
applicant’s failure to properly provide or install insulation, energy
utilization equipment or other materials designed or intended to meet the
State Building Code standards for insulation and energy utilization.



(Prior Code, § 7-43)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)



§ 150.105  TERMINATION AND RENEWAL.



   All licenses issued hereunder shall terminate on the last day of the
fiscal year for which issued. Renewal of the licenses shall be pursuant to
the same procedures and requirements set forth for initial issuance.



(Prior Code, § 7-44)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)



§ 150.106  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Town Manager may suspend or revoke any license issued
hereunder at any time upon a showing that the applicant or any employee,
partner, officer or director of the applicant has:



      (1)   Knowingly made a false statement in the application for
a license;



      (2)   Violated the State Building Code requirements as to
insulation or energy utilization equipment or materials, whether in this or
any other jurisdiction; or



      (3)   Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud or
deceit with respect to any contract entered into for work requiring this
license.



   (B)   (1)   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked
may appeal the suspension or revocation to the Town Council.



      (2)   After reasonable notice to the licensee, the Town
Council shall afford the licensee an opportunity to show why its license
should not be suspended or revoked.



(Prior Code, § 7-45)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)



§ 150.107  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   The location of any licensed business may be changed, provided ten
days’ notice thereof is given to the town and operation at the new location
does not violate any applicable state or local law, ordinance or regulation.



(Prior Code, § 7-46)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)



§ 150.108  REQUIRED PERMIT; FEE.



   On and after 1-1-1978, no person licensed under this subchapter may,
for a consideration, install, alter or restore any insulation or other
materials or energy utilization equipment designed or intended to meet the
State Building Code requirements for insulation and energy utilization
without first securing a permit from the Building Inspector for each item of
work. There shall be a fee as set by the Town Council for each permit issued.



(Prior Code, § 7-47)  (Ord. passed 12-13-1977)  Penalty, see § 150.999



HOUSING CODE



§ 150.120  FINDINGS; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby declared that there
exist in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other
calamities; lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities; and other
conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous and
detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the town.



   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the town as authorized by G.S. § 160A-174, it is the purpose of
this subchapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and
continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as expressly
authorized by G.S. § 160A-444.



(Prior Code, § 7-49)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)



§ 150.121  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      BASEMENT. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly
underground, having direct access to light and air from windows located above
the level of the adjoining ground.



      CELLAR. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly or wholly
underground having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.



      DETERIORATED. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and
can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum
standards established by this subchapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of
its value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.



      DILAPIDATED. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and
cannot be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum
standards established by this subchapter, except at a cost in excess of 50%
of its value, as determined by finding of the Inspector.



      DWELLING. Any building, structure or part thereof which is wholly
or partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping or habitation by
human occupants, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging
thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. Temporary housing, as hereinafter
defined, shall not be regarded as a DWELLING. The term shall include, within
its meaning, the terms rooming house and rooming unit, as hereinafter defined.



      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as
their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Inspector.



      GARBAGE. The organic waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



      GENDER. Words having a masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter genders.



      HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.



      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests in a number as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.



      INSPECTOR. The Building Inspector of the town or any authorized
agent of the Inspector.



      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.



      OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit.



      OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



      OWNER. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:



         (a)   Shall have title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;



         (b)   Shall be a mortgagee of record for any dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit; or



         (c)   Shall have charge, care or control of any
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, as owner or agent of the actual
owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the actual owner. Any person thus representing the
actual OWNER shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this subchapter,
and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as
if he or she were the owner.



      PARTY OR PARTIES IN INTEREST. All persons who have interests of
record in a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and any persons who are
in possession thereof.



      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization or other legal entity.



      PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal
units (mechanical sink grinders), sewage disposal pipes, water closets,
sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed
clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.



      PUBLIC AUTHORITY. The officer in charge of the Town Inspection
Department relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities
concerning dwellings in the town.



      ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or
operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or
daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.



      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not
for cooking or eating purposes.



      RUBBISH. Non-organic waste materials. The term shall include
paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches,
yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass and dust.



      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the
control of, the owner or operator.



      TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached
to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



      UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. That conditions exist in a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit which violate or do not comply
with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the
requirements established by this subchapter.



   (B)   Whenever the words “dwelling”, “dwelling unit”,
“rooming house”, “rooming unit”, “premises” are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof”.



(Prior Code, § 7-50)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)



§ 150.122  MINIMUM STANDARDS OF FITNESS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation,
or held out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the
minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements
of §§ 150.123 through 150.128.



   (B)   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another
for occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit
which does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human
habitation and all of the requirements of §§ 150.123 through 150.128.



(Prior Code, § 7-51)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.123  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURAL CONDITION.



   The following standards shall constitute the minimum standards for
structural condition of a dwelling or dwelling unit.



   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists,
rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall
not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks
which might admit rodents.



   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.



   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation
supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged.



   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in a condition that they will not fail or
collapse.



   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall
be provided.



   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways
shall be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable
household methods promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained
in a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy
between various spaces.



   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors
and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be weather- and water-tight.



   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are
defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling or in such condition or
location as to constitute a fire hazard.



   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors
on the ground.



(Prior Code, § 7-52)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.124  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC PLUMBING, HEATING AND ELECTRICAL
EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Plumbing system.



      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water
supply and to a public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.



      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen
sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and adequate supply of both cold
water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.



      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the
State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in
good working order.



      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within
the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water
closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording
privacy to the user.



   (B)   Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have
facilities for providing heat in accordance with the following.



      (1)   Central and electric heating systems. Every central or
electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity to heat all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to
which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured at a point
three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.



      (2)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric
heating system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be
provided with sufficient fireplace, chimneys, flues, gas vents or other
facilities to which heating appliances may be connected to heat all habitable
rooms with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured three feet above the floor
during ordinary winter conditions.



   (C)   Electrical system.



      (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for
electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall
contain at least two floor- or wall-type electric convenience receptacle,
connected in a manner as determined by the State Electrical Code. There shall
be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace
room at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In
the event wall or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable
room, then each habitable room shall contain at least three floor- or
wall-type electric convenience receptacles.



      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when
natural daylight is not sufficient.



      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be
maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and
installed in accordance with the State Electrical Code.



(Prior Code, § 7-53)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)



§ 150.125  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR VENTILATION.



   (A)   General. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the
floor area of the room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window or any room and the light-obstructing structures are located less than
five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in
the top of the room, the total window area of the skylight shall equal at
least 15% of the total floor area of the room.



   (B)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window or skylight which can easily be opened or other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size
or minimum skylight-type window size as required, or shall have other
approved, equivalent ventilation.



   (C)   Bathroom and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements
for habitable rooms, except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.



(Prior Code, § 7-54)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)



§ 150.126  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.



   (A)   Room sizes.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum
room size in each habitable room as required by the State Residential
Building Code.



      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square
feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet
of additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at
least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional
occupant.



      (3)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of
floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (B)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet and
six inches.



   (C)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the
basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the
dwelling unit may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable floor
area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less
than four and one-half feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area
for the purpose of determining maximum permissible occupancy.



   (D)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.



   (E)   Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes
unless:



      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially water-tight;



      (2)   The total window area, total openable window area and
ceiling height are equal to those required for habitable rooms; and



      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room
is entirely above the grade adjoining the window area, except where the
window or windows face a stairwell, window well or accessway.



(Prior Code, § 7-55)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)



§ 150.127  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall,
exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weather-tight and
rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be
capable of affording privacy; and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use would cause to be placed thereon. Every
exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to
prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.



   (B)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior
wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use would cause to be placed thereon.



   (C)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or
cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather-tight, water-tight
and rodent proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.



   (D)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every outside and inside
stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use would cause to be placed thereon and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (E)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so that it will
be reasonably impervious to water and will permit the floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this subchapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (G)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded in order to
obtain thorough drainage and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.



   (H)   Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property areas
shall be kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health.



   (I)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate
means of egress as required by the State Residential Building Code.



(Prior Code, § 7-56)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)



§ 150.128  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND
INFESTATIONS.



   (A)   Screens. In every dwelling unit, for protection against
mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a
dwelling unit to outdoor space shall be equipped with screens and a
self-closing device. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor
space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be
equipped with screens.



   (B)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or
intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be equipped with screens or
other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.



   (C)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a
dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the
only one infested. Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to
maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonably insect proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.



   (D)   Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for
storage of rubbish as required by town ordinances, and the owner, operator or
agent in control of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the removal of rubbish.



   (E)   Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility,
which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink
grinder) in each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can as
required by town ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 7-57)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.129  MINIMUM STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ROOMING HOUSES; EXCEPTIONS.



   All of the provisions of this subchapter, and all of the minimum
standards and requirements of this subchapter, shall be applicable to rooming
houses, and to every person who operates a rooming house, or who occupies or
lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except
as provided in the following divisions.



   (A)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one
water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an
approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be
supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house wherever these facilities
are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the residence
building served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or
passageway and shall be not more than one story removed from any of the
persons sharing the facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. The required
facilities shall not be located in a cellar.



   (B)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor area and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area
for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (C)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall
be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and
ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming
house. He or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of
the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the
rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.



   (D)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by division (A) of this section
shall be located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which
afford privacy, are separate from the habitable rooms, are accessible from a
common hall, and are accessible without going outside the rooming house or
through any other room therein.



(Prior Code, § 7-58)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.130  INSPECTIONS; DUTY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   For the purpose of making inspections, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and the premises
associated therewith. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house or rooming unit or the person in charge thereof shall give the
Inspector free access to the dwelling and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of the inspection, examination and survey.



   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee,
access to any part of the dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making the repairs or alterations as are necessary
to effect compliance with the provisions of this subchapter or with any
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-59)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.131  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.



   The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to enforce
the provisions of this subchapter and to exercise the duties and power herein
prescribed. The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise the powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and
provisions of this subchapter. The Building Inspector shall have the
following powers and duties:



   (A)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect
dwellings and dwelling units located in the town, in order to determine which
dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the
purpose of carrying out the objectives of this subchapter with respect to the
repair, closing or demolition of the dwellings and dwelling unit;



   (B)   To take such action, together with other appropriate
departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect
rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated;



   (C)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
subchapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness herein prescribed;



   (D)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence;



   (E)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations
and inspections; provided, the entries shall be made in accordance with §
150.130 and state law, and shall be made in a manner as to cause the lease
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;



   (F)   To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents and
employees as he or she deems necessary to assist in carrying out the purposes
of this subchapter, and to delegate any of his or her functions and powers to
the officers, agents and employees; and



   (G)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein or by
the governing body.



(Prior Code, § 7-60)  (Ord. passed 3-13-1979; Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.132  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a
petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority or by at least
five residents of the town charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is
unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Inspector, upon
inspection, that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation
he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation disclosed a basis
for the charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner or any parties
in interest in the dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges
and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector at a
place therein fixed, not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of the complaint. Notice of the hearing shall also be given to at
least one of the persons signing a petition relating to the dwelling. Any
person desiring to do so may attend the hearing and give evidence relevant
thereto. Rules of evidence in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Inspector.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing. After notice and hearing, if the
Building Inspector determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit
for human habitation, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of
fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof an order.



      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling
requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve
the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation.  The order may
require that the property be vacated and closed only if continued occupancy
during the time allowed for repair will present a significant threat of
bodily harm, taking into account the nature of the necessary repairs,
alterations, or improvements; the current state of the property; and any
additional risks due to the presence and capacity of minors under the age of
18 or occupants with physical or mental disabilities. The order shall state
that the failure to make timely repairs as directed in the order shall make
the dwelling subject to the issuance of an unfit order under division (C) of
this section; or



      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling
requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or
demolish the dwelling. However, notwithstanding any other provision of law,
if the dwelling is located in a historic district of the city and the
Historic District Commission determines, after a public hearing as provided
by ordinance, that the dwelling is particular significance or value toward
maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been
condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and
closed consistent with G.S. § 160A-400.14(a).



   (C)   Repair, vacation and closure. If the owner fails to comply
with an order to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the
dwelling, the Building Inspector may cause the dwelling to be repaired,
altered or improved or to be vacated and closed; that the public officer may
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed, a placard
with the following words: “This building is unfit for human habitation; the
use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and
unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a Class 1
misdemeanor.  The duties of the Building Inspector set forth in this
division shall not be exercised until the Town Council shall have by
ordinance ordered the Building Inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose
of this Housing Code with respect to the particular property or properties
which the Building Inspector shall have found to be unfit for human
habitation and which property or properties shall be described in the
ordinance. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds in the county wherein the property or properties are located and shall
be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.



   (D)   Removal or demolition. If the owner fails to comply with an
order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the Building Inspector may cause
the dwelling to be removed or demolished. The duties of the Building
Inspector set forth in this division shall not be exercised until the Town
Council shall have by ordinance ordered the Building Inspector to proceed to
effectuate the purpose of this Housing Code with respect to the particular
property or properties which the Building Inspector shall have found to be
unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be
described in the ordinance.  No such ordinance shall be adopted to require
demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable
opportunity to bring it into conformity with this Housing Code.  The
ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in the
county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in
the name of the property owner in the grantor index.



(Prior Code, § 7-61)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007; Ord. passed - -)  Penalty,
see § 150.999



§ 150.133  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the
whereabouts of the persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by
the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Inspector shall
make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of the complaint or order
upon the person may be made by publishing the same at least once no later
than the time at which personal service would be required under the
provisions of this subchapter in a newspaper having general circulation in
the town. Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending
proceeding shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by
the compliant or order.



(Prior Code, § 7-62)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.134  IN REM ACTION BY INSPECTOR; PLACARDING.



   (A)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to
comply with an order of the Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter, and upon adoption by the Town Council of an ordinance
authorizing and directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S. §
160A-443(5) and § 150.137, the Inspector shall proceed to cause the dwelling
or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with the
minimum standards of fitness established by this subchapter, or to be vacated
and closed and removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the
Town Council and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the
dwelling or dwelling unit a placard with the following words: “This
building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this
building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful.”



   (B)   Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a Class 1
misdemeanor.



   (C)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds in the county wherein the property is located and shall be indexed
in the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S.
§ 160A-443(5).



(Prior Code, § 7-63)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 150.135  COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES; SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall be
a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which lien
shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for
special assessment provided in G.S. Chapter 160A, Article 10. If the dwelling
is removed or demolished by the public officer, he or she shall sell the
materials of the dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against
the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be
deposited in the superior court by the public officer, shall be secured in a
manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or degree if the court.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 7-64)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.136  CIVIL ACTION; REMEDIES.



   (A)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
dwelling, the public officer may file a civil action in the name of the city
to remove the occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the
nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a compliant
naming as parties-defendants any persons occupying the dwelling. The Clerk of
Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before
the magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from
the issuance of the summons to answer the compliant. The summons and
compliant shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be
returned according to it tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been
duly served, and if at the hearing the public officer produces a certified
copy of an ordinance adopted by the governing body pursuant to G.S. §
160A-443(5) authorizing the officer to proceed to vacate the occupied
dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the promises be
vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgment ordering that the
dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for
summary ejectment entered under G.S. § 42-30. An appeal from any judgment
entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. §
7A-228, and the execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S.
§ 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of
the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant
to this section unless the occupant was served with notice at least 30 days
before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding. That the governing
body has ordered the public officer to proceed to exercise his duties under
G.S. § 160A-443(4) and (5) to vacate and close or remove and demolish the
dwelling.



(Prior Code, § 7-65)



   (B)   (1)   Appeals from orders of Inspector.



         (a)   An appeal from any decision of the Inspector may
be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Any appeal from the Inspector shall
be taken within ten days from the rendering the decision or service of the
order and shall be taken filing with the Inspector and with the Zoning Board
of Adjustment a notice of appeal, which shall specify the grounds upon which
the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Inspector
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a
decision of the Inspector refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to
do any act, his or her decision shall remain in force until modified or
reversed. When an appeal is from a decision of the Inspector requiring the
person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of
suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board, unless the
Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeals is filed with
him or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of
which shall be furnished to the appellant), a suspension of his or her
requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
requirement shall not be suspended except for due cause shown upon not less
than one day’s written notice to the Inspector, by the Board, or by a court
of record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(f) and division (A)
above.



         (b)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of all appeals, shall give due notice to all parties, and shall
render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person
or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make the decision
and order as in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end
it shall have all the powers if the Inspector, but the concurring vote of
four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any
decision or order of the Inspector. The Board shall have power also in
passing upon appeals, in any case where there are practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
ordinance, to adapt the application of the ordinance to the necessities of
the case to the end that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done.



         (c)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to
review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days
of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



      (2)   Petition to superior court by owner. Any person
aggrieved by an order issued by the Inspector or a decision rendered by the
Board shall have the right, within 30 days after issuance of the ordering or
rendering of the decision, to petition the superior court for a temporary
injunction restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the
cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f). Hearings shall be had by the court
on a petition within 20 days, and shall be given preferences over other
matters on the court’s calendar. The court shall hear and determine the
issues raised and shall enter the final order or decree as law and justice
may require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before
obtaining a temporary injunction under this division.



      (3)   Severability. If any dwelling is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted, maintained or used in violation of this part or
any ordnance or code adopted under authority of this part or any valid order
or decision of the Inspector or Board made pursuant to any ordinance or code
adopted under authority of this part, the Inspector or Board may institute
any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or use to restrain, correct or abate
the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the dwelling.



(Prior Code, § 7-66)



   (C)   Neither this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or
otherwise, or to enforce this subchapter by criminal process as authorized by
G.S. § 14-4 and division (B) above, and the enforcement of any remedy
provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or
remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.



(Prior Code, § 7-67)



(Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.137  ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS TO HEAR APPEALS.



   (A)   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the
Inspector pursuant hereto shall be heard and determined by the Zoning Board
of Adjustments. As the appeals body, the Board shall have the power to fix
the times and places of its meeting, to adopt necessary rules of procedure
and any other rules and regulations which may be necessary for the proper
discharge of its duties. The Board shall perform the duties prescribed hereby
and shall keep an accurate journal of all of its proceedings.



   (B)   If the Zoning Board of Adjustments consists of more than five
members, the Chairperson shall designate five members to hear appeals under
this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-68)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.138  PREVENTION OF DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT.



   (A)   Demolition by neglect. Demolition by neglect is defined as a
situation in which a property owner or others having legal possession,
custody or control of a property, allow the condition of a property located
in the town’s Historic District to suffer such deterioration, potentially
beyond the point of repair, as to threaten the structural integrity of the
structure or its relevant architectural detail to a degree that the structure
and its character may potentially be lost to current and future generations.



   (B)   Standards. The exterior features of any building or structure
located within the town’s Historic District as identified on the town’s
official zoning map shall be preserved by the owner and/or parties in
interest against decay, deterioration and structural defects. The owner
and/or parties in interest shall upon written request of the town repair such
exterior features if they are found to be deteriorating, or if their
condition is contributing to deterioration, including but not limited to, any
of the following defects:



      (1)   Deterioration of exterior walls, foundations, flooring,
parapet walls, roofs, beams, chimneys and either horizontal or vertical load
bearing supports that causes leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling;



      (2)   Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and
foundations, including broken windows/doors, failed paint leaking roofing,
decayed brickwork or failed siding materials;



      (3)   Rotting, holes and other forms of decay;



      (4)   Damages caused by fire or other calamity;



      (5)   Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails,
window/door frames, cornices, entablatures, wall facings or other
architectural details that causes delaminating, instability, loss of shape or
crumbling;



      (6)   Deterioration of fences, gates, garden walls or
accessory structures;



      (7)   Deterioration of any exterior feature that creates or
permits a hazardous or unsafe condition to life, health or other property; and



      (8)   If painted a similar color to the remaining exterior
facade, boarded up windows, doors and other potential means of entering a
building and street barricades are allowed only in the following
circumstances:



         (a)   Upon the issuance of an emergency permit granted
by the Chief Building Inspector for buildings that are unsecured. The permit
shall expire 30 days from its issuance unless the Chief Building Inspector
specifies an earlier expiration. Building permits shall be obtained and
repairs initiated to permanently secure the building within the time period
for the expiration of any emergency permit issued. The time period for the
emergency permit shall be extended by the Building Inspector upon the
applicant’s petition to the Historic Preservation Commission for a
determination of economic hardship and the Historic Preservation
Commission’s determination of economic hardship pursuant to division (H)
below.



         (b)   For projects which have been issued a valid
building permit and have made and continue to make substantial progress
towards removing the boarded up windows and/or barricades and permanently
securing the building; or



         (c)   Where a building has been damaged by a hurricane
or other calamity. Building permits shall be obtained and repairs shall be
initiated to permanently repair and secure the building within 30 days of the
date the damage was incurred. The time period for the emergency permit shall
be extended by the Building Inspector upon the applicant’s petition to the
Historic Preservation Commission for a determination of economic hardship and
the Historic Preservation Commission’s determination of economic hardship
pursuant to division (H) below.



   (C)   Authority and responsibility of Building Inspector. Authority
to assure compliance with the standards set forth above is vested with the
Chief Building Inspector or his or her designee. The Chief Building Inspector
or his or her designee shall examine the buildings in the Historic District
for the purpose of determining their condition and the enforcement and
administration of this section upon receipt of a petition under division (D)
below or, in the absence of such a petition, periodically.



   (D)   Petition. Property owners or other concerned parties may file
a petition listing the specific defects of a structure located within the
Historic District with the Chief Building Inspector no earlier than six
months after the adoption of this section and may request that he or she act
to require the correction of the deterioration or the making of repairs. The
Chief Building Inspector shall systematically inspect the Historic District
and contact property owners to notify them of any violations during the first
six-month period following the adoption of this section.



   (E)   Notices and complaints. Whenever a petition is filed with the
Chief Building Inspector or whenever it otherwise appears to the Chief
Building Inspector that a building or structure is undergoing demolition by
neglect, the Inspector shall, if his or her preliminary investigation
discovers a basis for such charges, serve a notice of hearing and complaint
upon the owners of the associated property. The notice of hearing and
complaint shall include the following information:



      (1)   The charges and the basis for such charges;



      (2)   The date and time of a hearing to be held before the
Chief Building Inspector in the town hall. The date and time being not less
than ten nor more than 30 days after the issuance of the notice of hearing
and complaint; and



      (3)   That the owner and/or parties of interest shall be given
a right to answer in writing at any time before the hearing and to appear at
the hearing to provide testimony and other evidence.



   (F)   Hearings. At the time and date specified in the notice of
hearing served pursuant to division (E), the Chief Building Inspector shall
hold a hearing at the town hall. The purpose of the hearing is to receive
evidence concerning the charge of demolition by neglect and to consider any
claim of undue economic hardship made by the owner and/or other parties of
interest. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall
not be controlling in hearing before the Inspector.



   (G)   Orders. Within 15 days following a hearing held pursuant to
division(F) of this section, if the Chief Building Inspector determines that
the building or structure is undergoing demolition by neglect according to
the standards listed in this section, the Inspector shall issue a written
order stating his or her determination along with the findings of fact in
support of such determination. The Inspector shall cause his or her order to
be served upon the owner and/or parties in interest. The Inspector’s order
shall require that repairs of those elements of the building or structure
that are deteriorating, contributing to deterioration or deteriorated be made
within a specified time not to exceed 90 days.



   (H)   Undue economic hardship. At any time within 15 days of the
issuance of the Inspector’s order pursuant to division (G), any owner
and/or party in interest may file with the Chief Building Inspector a written
petition claiming that compliance with the order will create an undue
economic hardship for the petitioner. All petitions alleging undue economic
hardship shall be heard by the town’s Historic Preservation Commission. In
the event that a petition all aging undue economic hardship is filed, the
Inspector’s order shall be stayed until after the Historic Preservation
Commission considers the petition’s allegations of economic hardship.



      (1)   Notice of hearing. Within ten days of his or her receipt
of a written petition claiming undue economic hardship, the Chief Building
Inspector shall notify the Historic Preservation Commission of the petition
by forwarding a copy of the petition to the chairman of the Historic
Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall schedule
a hearing on the petition within 15 days of receiving the petition from the
Chief Building Inspector.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall notify
the Chief Building Inspector, the Town Manager and the petitioner of the date
and time of the hearing.



      (2)   Hearing.  The burden of proof shall be upon the party
filing the petition alleging undue economic hardship to provide clear and
convincing evidence during the hearing before the Historic Preservation
Commission that the economic hardship alleged will not allow them to take the
action required by the Chief Building Inspector’s order or that they
require a delay or plan of action to meet the requirements of the order. 
The petitioner shall provide evidence and/or documentation of, at least, all
of the following information describing the circumstances of the alleged
economic hardship:



         (a)   Nature of ownership (individual, business or
nonprofit) or legal possession, custody, control, residency and a description
of the building or structure;



         (b)   Financial resources of the owner and/or parties of
interest;



         (c)   Cost of repairs;



         (d)   Assessed value of the land and improvements;



         (e)   Real estate taxes for the previous two years;



         (f)   Amount paid for the property, date of purchase and
party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship
between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased or
other means of acquisition of title, such as by gift or inheritance;



         (g)   Annual debt service, if any for pervious two years;



         (h)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent,
price asked and offers received, if any;



         (i)   Proof of application status for historic tax
credits as filed with the state;



         (j)   If the property is income producing:



            1.   Annual gross income from the property for
last two years;



            2.   Itemized operating and maintenance expenses
for the previous two years, including proof that adequate and competent
management procedures were followed; and



            3.   Annual cash flow, if any, for the previous
two years.



      (3)   Report from Commission. Within 15 days of the Historic
Preservation Commission’s hearing on the petition, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall report in writing to the Chief Building
Inspector whether or not an undue economic hardship exists and the findings
of fact supporting such determination. Upon finding the existence of an undue
economic hardship, the Historic Preservation Commission may recommend in its
report to the Chief Building Inspector a plan to relieve the economic
hardship. This plan may include, but is not limited to, loans or grants from
the town or other public, private or non profit sources, acquisition by
purchase, changes in applicable zoning regulations or relaxation of the
provisions of this section sufficient to mitigate the economic hardship.



      (4)   Action on report from Commission. Upon receipt of the
report from the Historic Preservation Commission, the Chief Building
Inspector shall issue an order stating the Historic Preservation
Commission’s decision, findings and recommendations. The Inspector’s
order shall require that repairs of those elements of the building or
structure that are deteriorating, contributing to deterioration or
deteriorated be made within a specified time and in a manner consistent with
any recommendations included within the Historic Preservation Commission’s
report. The Inspector shall cause his or her order to be served upon the
owner and/or parties in interest.



   (I)   Appeals. Orders issued by the Chief Building Inspector may be
appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth for appeals pursuant to
the provisions to the town’s Housing Codes. There shall be no direct appeal
from the decision of the Historic Preservation Commission on a petition for
undue economic hardship. Upon an appeal of an order of the Chief Building
Inspector which includes the Historic Preservation Commission’s findings,
decision and recommendations on a petition for undue economic hardship, the
Board of Adjustment may consider the issue of undue economic hardship.



   (J)   Service of notices, complaints and orders. All notices,
complaints and orders of the Chief Building Inspector issued pursuant to this
section shall be served upon the owners and/or parties in interest of the
relevant property in the same manner required by the town’s Housing Code.



   (K)   Remedies. Enforcement of this section may be by any one or
more of the following methods, and the institution of any action under any of
these methods shall not relieve any party from any other civil or criminal
proceeding prescribed for violations and prohibitions:



      (1)   Equitable remedy. The town may apply for any appropriate
remedy to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



      (2)   Order of abatement. The town may apply for and the court
may enter an order of abatement. An order of abatement may direct that
improvements or repairs be made, and that any other action be taken that is
necessary to bring the property into compliance with this subchpater.
Whenever the party is cited for contempt of court and the town executed the
order of abatement, the town shall have a lien, in the nature of a
mechanic’s and materialman’s, on the property for the cost of executing
the order of abatement.



      (3)   Civil penalties. The town may issue civil penalties
against the owners and/or any parties in interest and may collect the
penalties in the same manner as collecting a debt if the penalties are not
paid within 15 days of their issuance. No civil penalty shall be issued
unless and until the Chief Building Inspector shall deliver a written notice
by personal service or by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the person responsible for each violation indicating the nature
of the violation and ordering corrective action. The notice shall also set
forth the time period when corrective measures must be completed. The notice
shall state the failure to correct the violation within the specified time
period will result in the assessment of civil penalties in a certain amount
per day not to exceed $500 and other enforcement action. If any orders issued
by the Chief Building Inspector pursuant to this section include a notice
that civil penalties may be assessed, the order shall meet the requirements
for notice under this subsection. If after the allotted time period has
expired and after the hearing of an appeal, if any, to the Board of
Adjustment corrective action has not been completed, a civil penalty may be
assessed in any amount less than or equal to $500 per day for each day of the
continuing violation.



   (L)   Effect on other provisions. Nothing h this section shall
diminish the town’s authority to declare a building to be unsafe, to be in
violation of the town’s minimum housing ordinance, to be a nuisance or to
be an imminent danger to the public.



(Ord. passed - - ) 



§ 150.139  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS



   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this subchapter
is found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code
of the town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more
stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the town shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 7-69)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.140  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this subchapter is for any reason held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
provision shall be deemed a separate, independent provision and the holding
shall not affect the validity of any other provision hereof, and to that end,
the provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to be severable.



(Prior Code, § 7-71)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.141  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This subchapter shall be effective on 7-10-2007.



(Prior Code, § 7-72)  (Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



§ 150.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§ 150.100 through
150.108 shall be subject to all the applicable punishment, penalties and
equitable relief provided for by state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 7-48)



   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or
dwelling unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the
same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of
the Inspector duly made and served as herein provided, within the time
specified in the order. Each day that any failure, neglect or refusal to
comply with the order continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or
dwelling unit, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to §
150.132, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time
prescribed in order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation
and closing. Each day that the occupancy continues after the prescribed time
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.



      (3)   The violation of any provision of §§ 150.120 through
150.141 shall constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



      (4)   In addition to the penalty established by division
(C)(3) above and the remedies provided by other provisions of §§ 150.120
through 150.141, §§ 150.120 through 150.140 may be enforced by an
appropriate equitable remedy issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 7-70)



(Ord. passed 12-13-1977; Ord. passed 7-10-2007)



CHAPTER 151:  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MOBILE HOMES



Section



   151.01   Purpose



   151.02   Authority



   151.03   Jurisdiction



   151.04   Definitions



   151.05   Permitted structures



   151.06   Amendments



   151.07   Administration



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to regulate allowable manufactured
homes and mobile homes within the jurisdiction of the town in order to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
town.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1998)



§ 151.02  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted under the authority of G.S. § 153-121.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1998)



Editor’s Note:



   G.S. § 153-121 has been repealed



§ 151.03  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   These regulations shall govern each and every manufactured
home and mobile home that is brought into the town or moved from one location
to another within the town, as provided by G.S. § 153-121, Art. 6.



   (B)   This chapter shall regulate all manufactured homes and mobile
homes within the town.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1998)



Editor’s Note:



   G.S. § 153-121 has been repealed



§ 151.04  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (B)   The term “shall” is mandatory and words used in the
singular include the plural and those in the present include the future tense.



      HUD LABEL. A label attached to an individual manufactured home
unit certifying that the unit was built in compliance with the National
Manufactured Housing and Construction and Safety Standards. The label is
approximately two inches by four inches, has a three-letter prefix which
identifies the primary inspection agency and contains a six-digit number. A
sample label reads as follows:



As evidenced by this label No. xxxxxx, the manufacturer certifies to the best
of the manufacturer’s knowledge and belief that this manufactured home has
been inspected in accordance with the requirements of the Department of
Housing and Urban Development and is constructed in the conformance with the
Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety standards in effect on the
date of the manufacture.



      MANUFACTURED HOME. Any family dwelling fabricated in an off site
and manufacturing facility for installing or assembling on the building site
bearing a seal certifying that it was built in compliance with the National
Manufactured Housing and Constructing and Safety Standards Act of 1974 which
became effective 6-15-1976.



      MOBILE HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode is eight feet or more in width or is 40 feet or
more in length or when erected on a site, contains 320 or more square feet of
floor space, is designed to be used as a year-around dwelling and was built
prior to the enactment of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974 which became effective 6-15-1976.



      PERMANENT SET-UP. Any mobile home or manufactured home which is
set up in accordance the State Regulations for Mobile/Manufactured Homes,
1989 addition as amended.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1998)



§ 151.05  PERMITTED STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Mobile homes and manufactured homes that are presently located
within the town may be moved from one location to another within the town for
the purpose of permanent set-up; provided that, each has a valid HUD
inspection label attached to it and the home was not constructed 15 years
prior to today’s date. In addition, to qualify for relocation the mobile
home or manufactured home must be listed in the County Tax Assessor’s
Office and all county ad valorem taxes must be current on the home.



   (B)   (1)   Mobile homes and manufactured homes constructed 15
years prior to today’s date cannot be brought into or moved within the town
to be used as a residence.



      (2)   The mobile home or manufactured home will be allowed to
be used as a residence provided it has passed an inspection performed by a
certified HUD Inspector. This does not include mobile homes or manufactured
homes built before 1-1-1977.



   (C)   Mobile homes and manufactured homes constructed prior to
1-1-1977 cannot be brought into or moved within the town to be used as a
residence.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1998)



§ 151.06  AMENDMENTS.



   The Town Council may, from time to time, amend the terms of this
chapter. When possible, the Planning Board will be consulted for review and
recommendation.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1998)



§ 151.07  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Town Inspection Department will enforce this chapter. The
Department is directed to withhold all permits from any mobile home or
manufactured home which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1998)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable according to G.S. § 14-4. Each day’s failure
to comply with any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation. The town may use any of the enforcement techniques authorized by
G.S. § 153-A-123.



(Ord. passed 9-8-1998)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES




[Reserved]




PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina General Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Section
 
Code Section




1-597
 
51.105


7A-227
 
150.136


7A-228
 
150.136


Art. 9A, Ch. 20
 
70.53


Ch. 14
 
Ch. 130


14-4
 
31.99, 72.01, 90.43, 94.999, 95.99, 97.99, 130.99, 150.089, 150.136, 150.999,
151.99


14-34.1
 
130.07


14-148
 
Ch. 93


14-149
 
Ch. 93


14-269
 
130.07, 130.19


14-286
 
92.09, 92.10


14-288.1
 
31.26


14-288.1 et seq.
 
Ch. 31


14-288.5
 
31.99


14-315
 
130.19


14-316
 
130.19


14-317
 
Ch. 111


14-381
 
130.08


14-399
 
Ch. 94, 94.021


14-402
 
130.19


14-415.11
 
130.19


Ch. 18B
 
130.01


18B-101(4)
 
130.01


18B-1001
 
130.01


19A-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 90, 90.38, 90.45


20-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 70


20-4.01
 
70.50, 96.07


20-4.01(12a)
 
70.50


20-4.01(49)
 
Ch. 73


20-37
 
Ch. 114


20-87
 
Ch. 114


20-97
 
Ch. 114


20-137.6 et seq.
 
Ch. 94


20-140.2
 
Ch. 71


20-141
 
Ch. 71


20-144
 
Ch. 71


20-145
 
Ch. 70, Ch. 71


20-146.1
 
Ch. 71


20-153
 
Ch. 70, Ch. 71


20-155
 
Ch. 71


20-156
 
Ch. 70, Ch. 71


20-157
 
Ch. 70, Ch. 71, Ch. 72, 92.09, 92.13


20-158
 
Ch. 70


20-158.1
 
Ch. 71


20-160
 
Ch. 71


20-161
 
Ch. 72


20-162
 
Ch. 72, 92.13


20-165.1
 
Ch. 71


20-168
 
Ch. 70


20-169
 
Ch. 70, Ch. 71, Ch. 91


20-219.3
 
Ch. 94


20-222
 
94.068


20-280
 
Ch. 114


42-29
 
150.136


42-30
 
150.136


Ch. 44A, Art. 1
 
94.070


44A-1 through 44A-6.1
 
94.070


Ch. 58
 
Ch. 92


Ch. 58, Art. 80
 
Ch. 92


Ch. 58, Art. 82
 
Ch. 92


Ch. 58, Art. 83
 
Ch. 92


Ch. 58, Arts. 84 through 88
 
Ch. 92


63-53
 
30.40


63-57
 
30.40


67-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 90


69-25.1 et seq.
 
Ch. 92


69-39
 
92.08


Ch. 87
 
150.101


Ch. 90, Art. 5
 
130.09


90-86 et seq.
 
130.19


Ch. 105, Subch. VIII
 
114.99


105-33 et seq.
 
Ch. 110


106-385
 
90.37


113-274(1a)
 
90.02


136-18.3
 
Ch. 94


136-143
 
94.073


136-141 et seq.
 
94.073


140-360 to 140-363
 
Ch. 90; 90.38, 90.45


140-366 to 140-368
 
Ch. 90; 90.38, 90.45


153-121
 
151.02


153-121, Art. 6
 
151.03


153A-123
 
151.99


153A-156
 
114.01


153A-156(f)
 
114.99


Ch. 159
 
30.02


159-1 et seq.
 
Ch. 30


159-24 et seq.
 
30.02


Ch. 160A, Art. 10
 
150.135


160A-59 through 160A-111
 
Ch. 30


160A-76
 
92.01


160A-77
 
Ch. 70


160A-147 through 160A-152
 
Ch. 30


160A-171
 
Ch. 30


160A-172
 
Ch. 30


160A-173
 
Ch. 30


160A-174
 
99.02, 150.120


160A-175
 
10.99, 72.01, 90.43, 97.99


160A-178
 
Ch. 113


160A-179
 
130.02


160A-182
 
Ch. 90, 90.38, 90.45


160A-183
 
Ch. 92, 92.02, 92.03


160A-184
 
Ch. 112, 130.10


160A-186
 
Ch. 90


160A-187
 
Ch. 90


160A-188
 
90.01


160A-189
 
130.07


160A-190
 
130.11


160A-192
 
Ch. 94


160A-193
 
Ch. 94, 130.15


160A-206 through 160A-209
 
Ch. 30


160A-211 through 160A-213
 
Ch. 30


160A-211
 
Ch. 110


160A-212
 
90.36


160A-216 to 160A-238
 
Ch. 30


160A-266 to 160A-276
 
Ch. 30


160A-288
 
Ch. 31, 31.01


160A-291
 
Ch. 92


160A-291 through 160A-294
 
Ch. 92


160A-292
 
92.46


160A-293
 
Ch. 92


160A-296
 
Ch. 91, Ch. 96


160A-296 through 160A-308
 
Ch. 70


160A-302.1
 
130.03


160A-303
 
Ch. 94, 94.061


160A-303.1
 
Ch. 94


160A-303.2
 
94.061


160A-304
 
Ch. 114


160A-311 to 160A-338
 
Ch. 30


160A-312
 
Ch. 94


160A-341 to 160A-348
 
Ch. 93


160A-349.1 to 160A-349.13
 
Ch. 93


160A-400.14(a)
 
150.132


160A-417
 
92.63


160A-441
 
150.120


160A-443(4) or (5)
 
150.136


160A-443(5)
 
150.134, 150.136


160A-446(f)
 
150.136


160A-493
 
Ch. 90


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code Section
 
2011 Code Section




2-1
 
30.01


2-23
 
30.02


3-1
 
112.01


3-2
 
112.02


3-3
 
112.20


3-4
 
112.21


3-5
 
112.22


3-6
 
112.23


3-7
 
112.24


3-8
 
112.25


3-9
 
112.26


3.5-21
 
30.40


3.5-22
 
30.41


3.5-23
 
30.42


3.5-24
 
30.43


4-1
 
90.01


4-3
 
90.03


4-5
 
90.05


4-6
 
90.06


4-7
 
90.20


4-8
 
90.20


4-9
 
90.20


4-10
 
90.20


4-11
 
90.20


4-12
 
90.20


4-13
 
90.21


4-14
 
90.22


4-15
 
90.35


4-16
 
90.36


4-17
 
90.36


4-18
 
90.37


4-19
 
90.38


4-24
 
90.39


4-25
 
90.40


4-26
 
90.41


4-27
 
90.42


4-28
 
90.43


4-29
 
90.44


4-30
 
90.45


4-31
 
90.46


5-11
 
111.01


5-12
 
111.02


5-13
 
111.03


5-14
 
111.04


5-15
 
111.05


5-16
 
111.06


5-17
 
111.07


6-1
 
73.01


6-2
 
73.02


6-3
 
73.03


7-1
 
150.001


7-2
 
150.002


7-3
 
150.003


7-4
 
150.003


7-5
 
150.004


7-6
 
150.020


7-7
 
150.021


7-8
 
150.022


7-9
 
150.023


7-10
 
150.024


7-11
 
150.025


7-12
 
150.026


7-13
 
150.027


7-14
 
150.040


7-15
 
150.041


7-16
 
150.042


7-17
 
150.043


7-18
 
150.044


7-19
 
150.045


7-20
 
150.060


7-21
 
150.061


7-22
 
150.062


7-23
 
150.063


7-24
 
150.063


7-25
 
150.064


7-26
 
150.065


7-27
 
150.066


7-28
 
150.067


7-29
 
150.080


7-30
 
150.081


7-31
 
150.082


7-32
 
150.083


7-33
 
150.084


7-34
 
150.085


7-35
 
150.086


7-36
 
150.087


7-37
 
150.088


7-38
 
150.089


7-39
 
150.100


7-40
 
150.101


7-41
 
150.102


7-42
 
150.103


7-43
 
150.104


7-44
 
150.105


7-45
 
150.106


7-46
 
150.107


7-47
 
150.108


7-48
 
150.999


7-49
 
150.120


7-50
 
150.121


7-51
 
150.122


7-52
 
150.123


7-53
 
150.124


7-54
 
150.125


7-55
 
150.126


7-56
 
150.127


7-57
 
150.128


7-58
 
150.129


7-59
 
150.130


7-60
 
150.131


7-61
 
150.132


7-62
 
150.133


7-63
 
150.134


7-64
 
150.135


7-65
 
150.136


7-66
 
150.136


7-67
 
150.136


7-68
 
150.137


7-69
 
150.139


7-70
 
150.999


7-71
 
150.140


7-72
 
150.141


8-1
 
93.01


8-2
 
93.02


8-3
 
93.03


8-4
 
93.04


8-5
 
93.05


8-6
 
93.06


8-7
 
93.07


8-8
 
93.08


8-9
 
93.09


8-10
 
93.10


8-11
 
93.11


8-12
 
93.12


8-13
 
93.13


8-14
 
93.14


9-1
 
31.01


9-2
 
31.20


9-3
 
31.21


9-4
 
31.22


9-5
 
31.23


9-6
 
31.24


9-7
 
31.25


9-8
 
31.26


9-9
 
31.27


9-10
 
31.99


9-11
 
31.28


9-12
 
31.40


9-13
 
31.41


9-14
 
31.99


9-15
 
31.42


9-16
 
31.55


9-17
 
31.56


9-18
 
31.99


11-1
 
92.01


11-2
 
92.02


11-3
 
92.03


11-4
 
92.04


11-5
 
92.05


11-6
 
92.06


11-7
 
92.07


11-8
 
92.08


11-9
 
92.09


11-10
 
92.10


11-11
 
92.11


11-12
 
92.12


11-13
 
92.13


11-14
 
92.14


11-15
 
92.30


11-16
 
92.31


11-17
 
92.32


11-18
 
92.45


11-19
 
92.46


11-20
 
92.47


11-21
 
92.60


11-22
 
92.61


11-23
 
92.62


11-24
 
92.63


11-25
 
92.64


11-26
 
92.65


11-27
 
92.66


11-28
 
92.67


11-29
 
92.99


14-1
 
110.01


14-2
 
110.02


14-3
 
110.03


14-4
 
110.04


14-5
 
110.05


14-6
 
110.06


14-7
 
110.07


14-8
 
110.08


14-9
 
110.09


14-10
 
110.99


14-11
 
110.20


15-1
 
70.01


15-2
 
70.02


15-3
 
70.03


15-4
 
70.04


15-5
 
70.20


15-6
 
70.21


15-7
 
70.22


15-8
 
70.23


15-9
 
70.24


15-10
 
70.25


15-11
 
71.01


15-12
 
71.02


15-13
 
71.03


15-14
 
71.03


15-15
 
71.04


15-16
 
71.05


15-17
 
71.06


15-18
 
71.07


15-19
 
71.08


15-20
 
71.09


15-21
 
71.10


15-22
 
71.11


15-23
 
71.12


15-24
 
71.13


15-25
 
71.14


15-26
 
71.15


15-27
 
71.16


15-28
 
71.16


15-29
 
71.16


15-30
 
71.17


15-31
 
71.18


15-32
 
71.19


15-33
 
71.20


15-34
 
72.01


15-35
 
72.02


15-36
 
72.03


15-37
 
72.04


15-38
 
72.05


15-39
 
72.06


15-40
 
72.07


15-41
 
72.08


15-42
 
72.09


15-44
 
72.10


15-45
 
72.11


15-57
 
70.40


15-58
 
70.41


16-1
 
130.01


16-2
 
130.02


16-3
 
130.03


16-4
 
130.04


16-5
 
130.04


16-6
 
130.04


16-7
 
130.04


16-8
 
130.04


16-9
 
130.05


16-10
 
130.05


16-11
 
130.06


16-12
 
130.07


16-13
 
130.08


16-14
 
130.09


16-17
 
130.10, 130.99


16-18
 
130.11, 130.12


16-19
 
130.13


16-20
 
130.13


16-21
 
130.13


16-22
 
130.14


16-23
 
130.15


16-24
 
130.16


16-25
 
130.17


16-26
 
130.35


16-27
 
130.36


16-28
 
130.37


16-29
 
130.38


16-30
 
130.39


17-1
 
91.01


17-2
 
91.02


17-3
 
91.03


17-4
 
91.15


17-5
 
91.16


17-6
 
91.17


17-7
 
91.18


17-8
 
91.19


17-9
 
91.20


17-10
 
91.35


17-11
 
91.36


17-12
 
91.37


17-13
 
91.38


17-14
 
91.39


17-15
 
91.40


17-16
 
91.41


17.5-1
 
98.01


17.5-3
 
98.02


17.5-4
 
98.03


17.5-5
 
98.04


17.5-6
 
98.05


17.5-7
 
98.06


17.5-8
 
98.07


17.5-9
 
98.08


17.5-10
 
98.09


17.5-11
 
98.10


17.5-12
 
98.11


17.5-13
 
98.12


17.5-14
 
98.13


17.5-15
 
98.14


17.5-16
 
98.15


17.5-17
 
98.16


17.5-18
 
98.17


17.5-21
 
98.30


17.5-22
 
98.31


17.5-23
 
98.32


17.5-24
 
98.33


17.5-26
 
98.34


18-1
 
113.01


18-2
 
113.02


20.5-1
 
94.001


20.5-21
 
94.020


20.5-22
 
94.021


20.5-23
 
94.022


20.5-24
 
94.023


20.5-25
 
94.024


20.5-26
 
94.024


20.5-27
 
94.025


20.5-31
 
94.040


20.5-32
 
94.041


20.5-33
 
94.042


20.5-34
 
94.042


20.5-35
 
94.043


20.5-36
 
94.044


20.5-37
 
94.045


20.5-51
 
94.999


20.5-52
 
94.999


20.5-56
 
94.100


20.5-57
 
94.101


20.5-58
 
94.102


20.5-59
 
94.103


21-1
 
96.01


21-2
 
96.02


21-3
 
96.03


21-4
 
96.03


21-5
 
96.04


21-6
 
96.05


21-7
 
96.06


21-7.1
 
96.07, 96.99


21-8
 
96.20


21-9
 
96.21


21-10
 
96.22


21-11
 
96.23


21-12
 
96.24


21-13
 
96.25


21-14
 
96.26


21-15
 
96.26


21-16
 
96.40


21-17
 
96.41


21-18
 
96.42


23-1
 
114.20


23-2
 
114.21


23-3
 
114.22


23-4
 
114.23


23-5
 
114.24


23-6
 
114.24


23-7
 
114.24


23-8
 
114.25


23-9
 
114.26


23-10
 
114.27


23-11
 
114.28


23-12
 
114.29


23-13
 
114.30


23-14
 
114.31


23-15
 
114.32


23-16
 
114.32


23-17
 
114.33


23-18
 
114.34


23-19
 
114.35


23-20
 
114.36


24-1
 
50.01


24-2
 
50.02


24-7
 
51.001


24-8
 
51.002


24-9
 
51.003


24-10
 
51.004


24-11
 
51.005


24-12
 
51.006


24-13
 
51.020


24-14
 
51.021


24-15
 
51.022


24-16
 
51.023


24-17
 
51.024


24-18
 
51.025


24-19
 
51.040


24-20
 
51.041


24-21
 
51.042


24-22
 
51.043


24-23
 
51.044


24-24
 
51.045


24-25
 
51.046


24-26
 
51.047


24-27
 
51.048


24-28
 
51.049


24-29
 
51.050


24-30
 
51.065


24-31
 
51.066


24-32
 
51.067


24-33
 
51.068


24-34
 
51.069


24-35
 
51.070


24-36
 
51.071


24-37
 
51.072


24-38
 
51.073


24-39
 
51.074


24-40
 
51.075


24-41
 
51.999


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




–
 
- -
 
150.132, 150.138


–
 
4-7-1970
 
130.15


–
 
5-10-1972
 
92.30


–
 
7-1-1972
 
90.35—90.46


–
 
4-10-1973
 
96.05, 96.25, 130.15


–
 
5-29-1973
 
130.08


–
 
8-6-1973
 
91.01—91.03, 91.15—91.20, 91.35—91.41, 112.20—112.26, 130.08


–
 
10-8-1974
 
113.01


–
 
1-14-1975
 
73.01—73.03, 130.01


–
 
5-13-1975
 
51.065—51.075, 51.999


–
 
4-13-1976
 
130.16, 130.17


–
 
12-13-1977
 
150.100—150.108, 150.999


–
 
10-10-1978
 
93.07


–
 
3-13-1979
 
150.120—150.129, 150.131


–
 
5-8-1979
 
130.12


–
 
6-10-1980
 
130.01


–
 
12-9-1980
 
90.36, 90.39


–
 
2-10-1981
 
98.01—98.16, 98.30—98.34


–
 
4-14-1981
 
92.30


–
 
3-14-1984
 
94.001, 94.020—94.025, 94.040—94.045


–
 
8-9-1988
 
97.01—97.13, 97.99


–
 
11-14-1989
 
96.07, 96.99


–
 
9-11-1990
 
92.60—92.67, 92.99, 94.100—94.103, 94.999


–
 
12-11-1990
 
130.10, 130.99


–
 
6-12-1991
 
30.01


–
 
6-29-1992
 
130.15


–
 
2-9-1993
 
92.01


–
 
8-9-1994
 
30.40—30.43


–
 
2-22-1996
 
98.17


–
 
3-13-1996
 
130.19


–
 
6-11-1996
 
130.35—130.39


–
 
8- -1997
 
130.50—130.54, 130.99


–
 
9-8-1998
 
151.01—151.07, 151.99


–
 
10-6-1998
 
72.01


–
 
10- -1999
 
130.15


–
 
11-27-2000
 
96.26


–
 
3-14-2001
 
95.01—95.03, 95.99


–
 
5-13-2003
 
130.09


–
 
9-9-2003
 
94.080—94.086, 94.999


–
 
11-24-2003
 
30.03


–
 
8-10-2004
 
72.01


–
 
9-14-2004
 
90.42, 90.43


–
 
6-14-2005
 
51.090—51.092, 51.999


–
 
11-14-2006
 
98.02


–
 
6-12-2007
 
130.18, 130.99


–
 
7-10-2007
 
150.130—150.141, 150.999


–
 
11-10-2008
 
114.01—114.04, 114.99


–
 
9-14-2010
 
130.19


–
 
10-12-2010
 
130.09


–
 
12-14-2010
 
51.100—51.107


–
 
7-12-2011
 
90.43


–
 
3-13-2012
 
90.02


–
 
3-13-2012
 
130.07


–
 
3-13-2012
 
130.11


–
 
6-12-2012
 
70.50 —70.56


–
 
12-11-2012
 
73.02


–
 
3-12-2013
 
51.120—51.123


–
 
6-10-2014
 
130.10


–
 
6-10-2014
 
30.40


–
 
7-14-2015
 
94.060—94.074


–
 
3-8-2016
 
130.02


–
 
7-12-2016
 
94.042


–
 
3-14-2017
 
130.20


–
 
6-13-2017
 
99.01—99.06


–
 
11-14-2017
 
94.042


UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
ORDINANCE
(Last Amended August 2016)
Town of Edenton
PO Box 300
Edenton, NC 27932
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
i
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1 Short Title/Purpose 1-1
Section 2 Authority 1-1
Section 3 Jurisdiction 1-1
Section 4 Effective Date 1-1
Section 5 Relationship to Existing Zoning, Subdivision, and Flood Control Ordinance 1-1
Section 6 Relationship to Land Use Plan 1-2
Section 7 No Use or Sale of Land or Buildings Except in Conformity with Chapter
Provisions 1-2
Section 8 Fees 1-2
Section 9 Severability 1-3
Section 10 Computation of Time 1-2
Section 11 Miscellaneous 1-3
Section 12-14 Reserved 1-3
ARTICLE II
BASIC DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Section 15 Definitions of Basic Terms 2-1
Section 16 Lots Divided by District Lines 2-14
Section 17-20 Reserved 2-15
ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISMS
Part I. Planning Board
Section 21 Appointment and Terms of Planning Board Members 3-1
Section 22 Meetings of the Planning Board 3-1
Section 23 Quorum and Voting 3-2
Section 24 Planning Board Officers 3-2
Section 25 Powers and Duties of the Planning Board 3-2
Section 26 Advisory Committees 3-3
Section 27-28 Reserved 3-3
Part II. Board of Adjustment
Section 29 Appointments and Terms of Board of Adjustment 3-3
Section 30 Meetings of the Board of Adjustment 3-4
Section 31 Quorum 3-5
Section 32 Voting 3-5
Section 33 Board of Adjustment Officers 3-5
Section 34 Powers and Duties of the Board of Adjustment 3-6
Section 35 Fees for Permits and Appeals 3-6
Section 36 Reserved 3-6
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
ii
Part III. Land Use Administrator
Section 37 Land Use Administrator 3-6
Section 38-39 Reserved 3-6
Part IV. Town Council
Section 40 Town Council 3-7
Part V. Historic Preservation Commission
Section 41 Appointment and Terms of Historic Preservation Commission 3-7
Section 42 Meetings of the Historic Preservation Commission 3-8
Section 43 Quorum and Voting 3-8
Section 44 Historic Preservation Commission Officers 3-8
Section 45 Powers and Duties of the Historic Preservation Commission 3-8
Section 45.1 Designation of Historic District 3-9
ARTICLE IV
PERMITS AND FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
Part I. Zoning, Special Use, and Conditional Use Permits
Section 46 Permits Required 4-1
Section 47 No Occupancy, Use, or Sale of Lots Until Requirements Fulfilled 4-2
Section 48 Who May Submit Permit Applications 4-2
Section 49 Applications To Be Complete 4-2
Section 50 Staff Consultation before Formal Application 4-3
Section 51 Staff Consultation after Application Submitted 4-4
Section 52 Zoning Permits 4-5
Section 53 Authorizing Use or Occupancy Before Completion of Development
Under Zoning Permit 4-5
Section 54 Special Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits 4-6
Section 55 Burden of Presenting Evidence, Burden of Persuasion 4-7
Section 56 Recommendations on Special Use Permit Applications 4-8
Section 57 Recommendations on Conditional Use Permits 4-8
Section 58 Council Action on Conditional Use Permits 4-9
Section 59 Board of Adjustment Action on Special Use Permits 4-9
Section 60 Additional Requirements on Special use and Conditional Use Permits 4-10
Section 61 Authorizing Use, Occupancy, or Sale before Completion of Development Under
Special Use or Conditional Use Permits 4-11
Section 62 Completing Development in Phases 4-11
Section 63 Expiration of Permits 4-12
Section 64 Effect of Permit on Successors and Assigns 4-13
Section 65 Amendments to and Modifications of Permits 4-13
Section 66 Reconsideration of Board Action 4-14
Section 67 Applications to be Processed Expeditiously 4-15
Section 68 Maintenance of Common Areas, Improvements, and Facilities 4-15
Section 69-75 Reserved 4-15
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
iii
Part II. Major and Minor Subdivisions
Section 76 Regulation of Subdivisions 4-15
Section 77 No Subdivision Without Plat Approval 4-15
Section 78 Minor Subdivision Approval 4-16
Section 79 Major Subdivision Approval Process 4-17
Section 80 Endorsements on Major Subdivision Plats 4-18
Section 81 Plat Approval Not Acceptance of Dedication Offers 4-20
Section 82 Protection Against Defects 4-20
Section 83 Maintenance of Dedicated Areas Until Acceptance 4-21
Section 84 Commercial Subdivisions 4-21
Section 85 Subdivisions in the Historic District 4-21
Section 86 through 90 Reserved 4-21
ARTICLE V
APPEALS, VARIANCES, INTERPRETATIONS
Section 91 Appeals 5-1
Section 92 Variances 5-1
Section 93 Variances From Floodplain or Floodway Requirements 5-2
Section 94 Interpretations 5-2
Section 95 Requests to be Heard Expeditiously 5-3
Section 96 Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances 5-3
Section 97 Board Action on Appeals and Variances 5-3
Sections 98 through 100 Reserved 5-4
ARTICLE VI
HEARING PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS
Section 101 Hearing Required on Appeals and Applications 6-1
Section 102 Notice of Hearing 6-1
Section 103 Evidence 6-2
Section 104 Modification of Application at Hearing 6-2
Section 105 Record 6-2
Section 106 Written Decision 6-2
Section 107 through 110 Reserved 6-3
ARTICLE VII
ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW
Section 111 Complaints Regarding Violations 7-1
Section 112 Persons Liable 7-1
Section 113 Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations 7-1
Section 114 Penalties and Remedies for Violations 7-1
Section 115 Permit Revocation 7-2
Section 116 Judicial Review 7-2
Sections 117 through 120 Reserved 7-3
ARTICLE VIII
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
Section 121 Definitions 8-1
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
iv
Section 122 Continuation of Nonconforming Situations and
Completion of Nonconforming Projects 8-2
Section 123 Nonconforming Lots 8-2
Section 124 Extension or Enlargement of Nonconforming Situations 8-3
Section 125 Repair, Maintenance and Replacement 8-4
Section 126 Change in Use of Property Where a Nonconforming Situation Exists 8-5
Section 127 Abandonment and Discontinuance of Nonconforming Situations 8-6
Section 128 Completion of Nonconforming Projects 8-6
Section 129 Nonconforming Signs 8-9
Section 130 Termination of Miscellaneous Nonconforming Situations 8-10
Section 131 Nonconforming Manufactured Homes (Class C) and
Manufactured Home Parks 8-10
Section 132 through 134 Reserved 8-10
ARTICLE IX
ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
Part 1. Zoning District
Section 135 Residential Districts Established 9-1
Section 136 Commercial Districts Established 9-1
Section 137 Industrial Districts Established 9-3
Section 138 Overlay Districts Established 9-3
Section 139 Conditional Use Zoning District 9-4
Section 140 through 141 Reserved 9-4
Part II. Zoning Map
Section 142 Official Zoning Map 9-4
Section 143 Amendments to Official Zoning Map 9-4
Section144 and 145 Reserved 9-5
ARTICLE X
PERMISSIBLE USES
Section 146 Table of Permissible Uses 10-1
Section 147 Use of the Designations Z, S, C in Table of Permissible Uses 10-1
Section 148 Board of Adjustment Jurisdiction Over Uses Otherwise Permissible
With a Zoning Permit 10-1
Section 149 Permissible Uses and Specific Exclusions 10-1
Section 150 Accessory Uses 10-2
Section 151 Permissible Uses Not Requiring Permits 10-3
Section 152 Change in Use 10-4
Section 153 Reserved 10-5
Section 154 Combination Uses 10-5
Section 155 More Specific Use Controls 10-5
Section 156 and 157 Reserved 10-5
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
v
ARTICLE XI
SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS
Section 158 Planned Residential Developments 11-1
Section 159 Manufactured Home Parks 11-1
Section 160 Service Stations/Gas Sales Operations 11-2
Section 161 Special Temporary Events 11-2
Section 162 Bed and Breakfast Establishments 11-3
Section 163 Special Services Homes 11-3
Section 164 Day Care Centers, Adult and Child 11-4
Section 165 Cemeteries 11-4
Section 166 Reserved 11-4
Section 167 Airport Hazard Overlay District Requirements 11-4
Section 168 Historic Overlay District Requirements 11-5
Section 168A South Broad Street Residential Overlay District Requirements 11-9
Section 169 Multi-Family Dwellings 11-10
Section 170 Institutional Care Facilities 11-10
Section 171 Golf Courses 11-10
Section 172 Solid Waste Disposal 11-10
Section 173 Reserved 11-10
Section 174 Fuel Oil/Propane Sales 11-11
Section 175 Marina 11-11
Section 176 Waterfront Subdivisions 11-11
Section 177 Public Water Access 11-12
Section 178 Compliance with State Guidelines for Areas of Environmental Concern 11-12
Section 179 Walls and Fences 11-12
Section 180 Satellite Dish Antenna 11-12
Section 180.1 Manufactured Home Sales 11-12
Section 180.2 Sexually-Oriented Business 11-13
Section 180.3 Bars, Night Clubs, and Taverns 11-14
Section 180.4 Shopping Centers 11-14
Section 180.5 Department, Variety or General Merchandise Stores 25,000 square 11-14
Feet or Larger 11-16
Section 180.6 Resort/Conference Facility 11-17
Section 180.7 Wireless Communications 11-18
Section 180.8 Fairgrounds 11-28
Section 180.9 Roadway Corridor Overlay District Requirements 11-29
Section 180.10 Solar Farms 11-30
ARTICLE XII
DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
Section 181 Minimum Lot Size 12-1
Section 182 Residential Density 12-1
Section 183 Minimum Lot Widths 12-2
Section 184 Building Setback Requirements 12-3
Section 185 Accessory Building Setback Requirements/ Maximum Lot Coverage 12-5
Section 186 Building Height Limitations 12-5
Section 187 Cluster Subdivisions 12-6
Section 188 Architecturally Integrated Subdivisions 12-7
Section 189 Density on Lots Where Portion Dedicated to Town 12-8
Section 190 through 195 Reserved 12-8
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
vi
ARTICLE XIII
RECREATIONAL FACITLITES AND OPEN SPACE
Section 196 Mini-Parks Required 13-1
Section 197 Mini-Parks: Purpose and Standards 13-1
Section 198 Usable Open Space 13-2
Section 199 Ownership and Maintenance of Recreational Areas and Required
Open Space 13-3
Section 200 Dedication of Open Space 13-3
Section 201 Payments in Lieu of Dedication 13-3
Section 202 Procedure for Requesting Payment in Lieu of Dedication of Land 13-4
Section 203 Homeowners Associations 13-4
Section 204 Flexibility in Administration Authorized 13-5
Section 205 Authority to Sell 13-5
Section 206 Land Acceptance 13-5
Section 207 through 209 Reserved 13-5
ARTICLE XIV
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section 210 Street Classification 14-1
Section 211 Access to Lots 14-2
Section 212 Access to Arterial Streets 14-2
Section 213 Entrances to Streets 14-2
Section 214 Coordination with Surrounding Streets 14-3
Section 215 Relationship of Streets to Topography 14-3
Section 216 Street Width, Sidewalk, and Drainage Requirements in Subdivisions 14-3
Section 217 General Layout of Streets 14-5
Section 218 Street Intersections 14-6
Section 219 Construction Standards and Specifications 14-6
Section 220 Private Streets and Private Roads in Subdivisions 14-6
Section 221 Road and Sidewalk Requirements in Unsubdivided Developments 14-8
Section 222 Attention to Handicapped in Street and Sidewalk Construction 14-9
Section 223 Street Names and House Numbers 14-9
Section 224 Bridges 14-10
Section 225 Utilities 14-10
Section 226 Cost of Street and Sidewalk Improvements 14-10
Section 227 Street Name and Traffic Signs 14-10
Sections 228 through 235 Reserved 14-10
ARTICLE XV
UTILITIES
Section 236 Utility Ownership and Easement Rights 15-1
Section 237 Lots Served by Governmentally Owned Water or Sewer Lines 15-1
Section 238 Sewage Disposal Facilities Required 15-1
Section 239 Determining Compliance With Section 238 15-2
Section 240 Water Supply System Required 15-4
Section 241 Determining Compliance with Section 240 15-4
Section 242 Lighting Requirements 15-6
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
vii
Section 243 Excessive Illumination 15-6
Section 244 Electric Power 15-6
Section 245 Telephone Service 15-7
Section 246 Underground Utilities 15-7
Section 247 Utilities To Be Consistent With Internal and External Development 15-8
Section 248 As-Built Drawings Required 15-8
Section 249 Fire Hydrants 15-8
Section 250 Sites for and Screening of Dumpsters 15-9
Section 250.1 Sites for and Screening of Recycling Collection Boxes 15-9
ARTICLE XVI
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS, DRAINAGE, STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Part 1. Flood Hazard Areas
Section 251 Definitions 16-1
Section 252 Artificial Obstructions Within Floodways Prohibited 16-6
Section 253 Permissible Uses Within Floodways 16-6
Section 254 Construction Within Areas of Special Flood Hazard Restricted 16-7
Section 255 Special Provisions for Subdivisions 16-12
Section 256 Water Supply and Sanitary Sewer Systems in Areas of Special Flood
Hazard 16-13
Section 257 Permit Requirements, Certifications, and Duties and of the Administrator 16-14
Section 258 Reserved 16-16
Section 259 Location of Boundaries of Areas of Special Flood Hazard 16-16
Section 260 Amendments to the Official Flood Hazard Zoning and Flood Hazard
Boundary Map; Variance Procedures 16-17
Section 261 Regulations Do Not Guarantee Flood Protection 16-19
Section 262 Setbacks from Streams Outside Designated Areas of Special Flood
Hazard 16-19
Part II. Drainage, Erosion Control, Storm Water Management
Section 263 Natural Drainage System Utilized to Extent Feasible 16-19
Section 264 Developments Must Drain Properly 16-19
Section 265 Storm Water Management 16-20
Section 266 Sedimentation and Erosion Control 16-20
Section 267 through 269 Reserved 16-21
ARTICLE XVII
SIGNS
Section 270 Purpose/Definitions 17-1
Section 271 Permit Required for Signs 17-2
Section 272 Signs Excluded from Regulation 17-3
Section 273 Certain Temporary Signs: Permit Exemptions and Additional Regulations 17-3
Section 274 Determining the Number of Signs 17-5
Section 275 Computation of Sign Area 17-5
Section 276 Signs in Residential Districts 17-5
Section 277 Signs in MA and OS Districts 17-5
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
viii
Section 278 Signs in CD Districts 17-6
Section 279 Signs in CN Districts 17-6
Section 280 Signs in CH Districts Within 1,000 Feet of U.S. Highway 17 17-6
Section 281 Signs in CH Districts Not Within 1,000 Feet of U.S. Highway 17 17-7
Section 282 Shopping Center Signs 17-7
Section 283 Signs in IW Districts 17-8
Section 284 Subdivision and Multi-Family Development Entrance Signs 17-8
Section 285 Location Requirements 17-8
Section 286 Sign Illumination and Signs Containing Lights 17-8
Section 287 Miscellaneous Restrictions and Prohibitions 17-9
Section 288 Nonconforming Signs 17-10
Section 289 Discontinued Signs 17-10
ARTICLE XVIII
PARKING
Section 290 Definitions 18-1
Section 291 Number of Parking Spaces Required 18-1
Section 292 Flexibility in Administration Required 18-7
Section 293 Parking Space Dimensions 18-7
Section 294 Required Width of Parking Area Aisles and Driveways 18-8
Section 295 General Design Requirements 18-8
Section 296 Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces 18-9
Section 297 Joint Use of Required Parking Spaces 18-9
Section 298 Satellite Parking 18-10
Section 299 Special Provisions For Lots With Existing Buildings 18-10
Section 300 Loading and Unloading Areas 18-10
Section 301 Parking Area Landscaping 18-11
Section 302 Landscaping of Preexisting Vehicle Parking Areas 18-13
Section 303 Flexibility in Administration Required 18-14
ARTICLE XIX
SCREENING AND TREES
Section 304 Purpose 19-1
Section 305 Parking and Loading Area Landscaping 19-1
Section 306 Screening of Dumpsters 19-2
Section 307 Screening of Adjoining Incompatible Land Uses 19-2
Section 308 Alternative Screening Methods 19-3
Section 309 Maintenance 19-4
Section 310 Use of Existing Screening 19-4
Section 310.1 Obstruction Prohibited Use of Existing Screening 19-5
Section 310.2 Guarantee in Lieu of Immediated Installation of Landscaping and Screening
Materials 19-5
Sections 311-313 Reserved 19-5
Part II. Shading
Section 314 Council Findings and Declaration of Policy on Shade Trees 19-5
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
ix
Section 315 Required Trees Along Dedicated Streets 19-6
Section 316 Retention and Protection of Large Trees 19-6
Section 317 Shade Trees in Parking Areas 19-7
Section 318 Compliance with Landscaping and Screening Standards 19-7
Part III. Supplemental Standards Applicable to All Landscaped Areas
Section 319 Irrigation 19-7
Section 319.01 Revegetation 19-7
Section 319.02 Preservation of Existing Vegetation 19-8
Section 319.03 Specificity of Plans 19-8
ARTICLE XX
AMENDMENTS
Section 320 Amendments in General 20-1
Section 321 Initiation of Amendments 20-1
Section 322 Planning Board Consideration of Proposed Amendments 20-2
Section 323 Hearing Required; Notice 20-2
Section 324 Council Action on Amendments 20-4
Section 325 Ultimate Issue Before Council on Amendments 20-4
Section 326 Protests to Zoning District Changes 20-5
Section 327 Conditional Use District Rezonings 20-5
Section 328 Vested Right 20-7
APPENDICES
Appendix A- Information Required With Applications
Appendix B- Specifications On Driveway Entrances
Appendix C- Specifications For Street Design and Construction
Appendix D- Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces
Appendix E- Screening And Trees
Appendix F- Planting, Pruning And Annual Maintenance Practices For Street And Park Trees
Appendix G- Plants For Buffer And Parking Lot Landscaping
Appendix H- Street Trees Approved For Use
Appendix I – Graphics Illustrating Major Buffering And Landscaping Requirements
Appendix J – Guidelines For The Preparation Of A Traffic Impact Assessment
Appendix K- Guidelines For the Preparation Of An Environmental Review
Appendix L- Guidelines For The Preparation Of A Fiscal Impact Statement
Appendix M- Design Standards
2001 Amendments
5-01 Appointments & Terms, Planning Board, Section 21
5-01 Appointments & Terns, Board of Adjustment, Section 29
5-01 Historic Preservation Commission, Section 41
5-01 Minor Subdivisions, Section 78
5-01 Name changes to Historic Preservation Commission, Various Sections
5-01 NC Department of Cultural Resources, Section 45
2002 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
3/18/02 TA-02-01 180.7 / Use Table Wireless Communications
3/18/02 TA-02-02 139, 327 Conditional Use Zoning
4/9/02 TA-02-03 15, 180, 181 Various Shopping Center
282, Appendix J Regulations
6/11/02 TA-02-04 282 Shopping Center Signs
2003 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
1/14/03 TA-02-05 8 General Provisions
21, 35, 42 Administrative Mechanisms
76, 80 Subdivision Regulations
139
Zoning Districts & Map
301, 302, 303 Parking
308 Landscaping
327 Amendments
8/13/03 ------------ 138, 180.9 Road Corridor Overlay
9/9/03 TA-03-02 146 Use Table; Self Storage
Warehouse removed from CH
and by CUP in IW
10/7/03 TA-03-03 179 Walls & Fences; height
2004 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
5/11/04 TA-03-04 15, 180.8 Fairgrounds
5/11/04 TA-03-05 15, 180.8 Outdoor Flea Markets
8/23/04 TA-04-01 Appendix H Street Trees Approved for Use
2005 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
8/9/05 TA-05-01 85 Subdivisions in the Historic District
8/9/05 TA-05-02 146 Use Table; Drugstore w/ Drive-
Thru as CUP in MA, CH, SC;
Building Supply Sales as CUP
2005 Amendments (cont’d)
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
8/9/05 TA-05-03 184(a) Building Setback Requirements
9/26/05 TA-05-04 185 (2) Maximum Lot Coverage
8/9/05 TA-05-05 280 & 281 Signs in CH Districts
9/26/05 TA-05-06 296 (a) Vehicle Accommodation Area
Surfaces
9/26/05 TA-05-07 291 (e) Table of Parking Requirements
9/26/05 TA-05-08 Appendix M Architectural Standards for
11/7/05 New Commercial Construction
2006 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
3/14/06 TA-06-01 168 Historic Overlay District (Demo)
5/9/06 TA-06-02 15, 161 Special Temporary Events
11/14/06 TA-06-03 146 Use Table, Various
12/12/06 TA-06-05 Appendix M Architectural Guidelines (Roofs)
2007 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
11/13/07 TA-07-01 33 Board of Adjustment Officers
2008 Amendments
Date Case No. Section (s) Title
10/7/08 TA-08-01 Article 16 Part 1 Flood Hazard Areas
2009 Amendments
Date Case No. Section (s) Title
02/10/09 TA-09-01 Article III, Section 41 Appointment and Terms of
Edenton Preservation
Commission
2010 Amendments
Date Case No. Section (s) Title
2/11/2010 TA-09-02 Article XI, Section 180.6(i) Signs in Resort/Conference
Facilities
2011 Amendments
Date Case No. Section (s) Title
2/8/2011 TA-11-01 Article IV, Section 48 Who May Submit Permit
Applications
2/8/2011 TA-11-02 Article XI, Section 168(d)(1) Application Submittal
Requirements
2/8/2011 TA-11-03 Article XX, Section 321(b)(1) Initiation of Amendments
2/8/2011 TA-11-04 Appendix A, A-2(2) Written Application
2/8/2011 TA-11-05 Article XII, Section 185 Accessory Building Setback
Requirements/Maximum Lot
Coverage
2/8/2011 TA 11-05 Article XII, Section 184 (e) Building Setback
& (f) Requirements
8/9/2011 TA 11-07 Article X, Permissible Uses Taxidermy
2013 Amendments
Date Case No. Section (s) Title
11/25/2013 TA 13-01 Article III Admin. Mechanisms
Article XVII Signs
Article XX Amendments
2014 Amendments
Date Case No. Section (s) Title
12/9/2014 TA 14-01 Airport Height Restriction
2015 TA 14-02 Article X, Multifamily Dwellings
Permitted Use Table
2015 Amendments
Date Case No. Section (s) Title
5/12/2015 TA 15-01 Article III Admin. Mechanisms
Article XVII Signs
Article XX Amendments
2016 Amendments
Date Case No. Sections (s) Title
3/8/2016 TA 15-03 Article II Definition of Basic Terms
Article XI Supplementary Use
Regulations
8/5/2016 TA 15-02 Article IX Zoning Districts & Zoning
Map
8/5/2016 TA 15-02 Article XI Supplementary Use
Regulations
2017 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
5/9/17 TA 17-01 Article II, Article III, Beekeeping *rewritten 6/18*
Article X, Article XI
5/18/17 TA 17-02 Article II, Article III, Food Trucks
Article X, Article XI
5/9/17 TA 17-03 Article II, Article III, Elec. Gaming Operations
Article X, Article XI
2018 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
6/25/18 TA 18-01 Article II, Article III, Beekeeping
Article X, Article XI
8/27/18 TA 18-02 Article X Pet Grooming in IW District
10/9/18 TA 18-03 Article XVI Flood Hazard Areas
2019 Amendments
Date Case No. Section(s) Title
5/14/19 TA 19-01 Comprehensive Update Consistency with NCGS
5/14/19 TA 19-02 Article X Misc. Retail in CN District
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 1-1
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1 Short Title/Purpose.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Edenton Land Development Ordinance.
This ordinance is designed to serve as a land development regulatory document which combines
traditional zoning provisions, subdivision regulations, flood damage prevention regulations, and
street and utility standards. The principal objectives of the Edenton Land Development Ordinance
are to (i) assist in the implementation of the town's land development plan, (ii) provide a flexible
means to administer land development regulations, and (iii) expedite the land development permit
review process.
Section 2 Authority.
(a) This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Article 19, Chapter 160A;
Article 4, Chapter 113A; and Article 21, Chapter 143 of the North Carolina General Statutes.
(b) Whenever any provision of this chapter refers to or cites a section of the North Carolina
General Statutes and that section is later amended or superseded, the chapter shall be deemed
amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the
superseded section.
Section 3 Jurisdiction.
(a) This chapter shall be effective throughout the town's planning jurisdiction. The town's
planning jurisdiction comprises the area within the corporate boundaries of the town as well as the
area described in that ordinance adopted by the Town Council on November 14, 1989, entitled an
"Ordinance Establishing Extraterritorial Jurisdiction," which ordinance is recorded in book____,
page_____of the Chowan County Registry. Such planning jurisdiction may be modified from time to
time in accordance with Section 160A-360 of the North Carolina General Statutes.
(b) In addition to other locations required by law, a copy of a map showing the boundaries
of the town's planning jurisdiction shall be available for public inspection in the Zoning
Administrator's office.
Section 4 Effective Date.
The provisions in this chapter were originally adopted and became effective on May 27, 1969.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 1-2
Section 5 Relationship to Existing Zoning, Subdivision and Flood Control Ordinances.
To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are the same in substance as the previously
adopted provisions that they replace in the town's zoning, subdivision, or flood control ordinances,
they shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments unless otherwise
specifically provided. In particular, a situation that did not constitute a lawful, nonconforming
situation under the previously adopted zoning ordinance does not achieve lawful nonconforming
status under this chapter merely by the repeal of the zoning ordinance.
Section 6 Relationship to Land Use Plan.
It is the intention of the Council that this chapter implement the planning policies adopted by
the Council for the town and its extraterritorial planning area, as reflected in the land use plan and
other planning documents. While the Council reaffirms its commitment that this chapter and any
amendment to it be in conformity with adopted planning policies, the Council hereby expresses its
intent that neither this chapter nor any amendment to it may be challenged on the basis of any
alleged nonconformity with any planning document.
Section 7 No Use or Sale of Land or Buildings Except in Conformity With Chapter
Provisions.
(a) Subject to Article VIII of this chapter (Nonconforming Situations), no person may use,
occupy, or sell any land or buildings or authorize or permit the use, occupancy, or sale of land or
buildings under his control except in accordance with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(b) For purposes of this section, the "use" or "occupancy" of a building or land relates to
anything and everything that is done to, on, or in that building or land.
Section 8 Fees.
(a) Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration, inspection, publication
of notice and similar matters may be charged to applicants for zoning permits, sign permits,
conditional use permits, special use permits, subdivision plat approval, zoning amendments,
variances, Certificates of Appropriateness and other administrative relief. The amount of the fees
charged shall be as set forth in the town's budget or as established by resolution of the Council filed
in the office of the Town Administrator (Amended 1/14/03).
(b) Fees established in accordance with subsection (a) shall be paid upon submission of a
signed application or notice of appeal.
Section 9 Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses, and phrases of this ordinance are severable, and if any such section,
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court
of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 1-3
affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this ordinance
since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation into this ordinance of such
unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase.
Section 10 Computation of Time.
(a) Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday,
or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays shall be excluded.
(b) Unless otherwise specifically provided, whenever a person has the right or is required to
do some act within a prescribed period after the service of a notice or other paper upon him and the
notice or paper is served by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed period.
Section 11 Split Jurisdiction.
If a project is partially located within the Town’s jurisdiction and Town requirements are being
applied to the portion of the project outside of the Town’s jurisdiction, the Town and property owner
must certify that Town regulations are not being applied under coercion. Coercion means that Town
of Edenton approval of the portion of the project within Town jurisdiction would be withheld unless
application of Town regulations will apply to the portion of the project located beyond the Town’s
jurisdiction. The certification may be evidenced by a signed statement of the parties on any
approved plat recorded in accordance with this UDO.
Section 12 Miscellaneous.
(a) As used in this ordinance, words importing the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter.
(b) Words used in the singular in this ordinance include the plural and words used in the
plural include the singular.
Sections 13 and 14 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-1
ARTICLE II
BASIC DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
Section 15 Definitions of Basic Terms.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this chapter.
(1) Accessory Building. A detached subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that
of the principal building and located on the same lot therewith. (Amended 7/99)
(2) Accessory Structure. A detached subordinate structure(s), the use of which is incidental to
that of the principal structure and located on the same lot therewith. (Amended 7/99)
(3) Accessory Use. A structure or use that: 1) is clearly incidental to and customarily found in
connection with a principal building or principal use; 2) is subordinate to and serves a
principal building or principal use; 3) is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the
principal building or principal use served; 4) contributes to the comfort, convenience, or
necessity of occupants, business, or industry, in the principal building or principal use
served; and 5) is located on the same lot as the principal building or principal use served.
(Amended 7/99)
(4) Administrator. (See Section 37).
(5) Agriculture. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms “agriculture,” “agricultural,” and
“farming” refer to all of the following:
(a) The cultivation of soil for production and harvesting of crops, including but not
limited to fruits, vegetables, sod, flowers and ornamental plants.
(b) The planting and production of trees and timber.
(c) Dairying and the raising, management, care, and training of livestock, including
horses, bees, poultry, and other animals for individual and public use,
consumption, and marketing.
(d) Aquaculture as defined in NCGS 106-758.
(e) The operation, management, conservation, improvement, and maintenance of a
farm and the structures and buildings on the farm, including building and structure
repair, replacement, expansion, and construction incident to the farming operation.
(f) When performed on the farm, “agriculture,” “agricultural,” and “farming” also include
the marketing and selling of agricultural products, agritourism, the storage and use
of materials for agricultural purposes, packing, treating, processing, sorting,
storage, and other activities performed to add value to crops, livestock, and
agricultural items produced on a farm, and similar activities incident to the
operation of a farm.
(g) A public or private grain warehouse or warehouse operation where grain is held ten
(10) days or longer and includes, but is not limited to, all buildings, elevators,
equipment, and warehouses consisting of one or more warehouse sections and
considered a single delivery point with the capability to receive, load out, weigh,
dry, and store grain.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-2
(6) Agricultural Production Crops. The production of (and activities relating or incidental to the
production of) crops, fruits, vegetables, ornamental and flowering plants, and nursery
products such as bulbs, trees, vines, shrubbery, flower and vegetable seeds and plants,
and sod. (Amended 7/99)
(7) Agricultural Production, Livestock. The production of (and activities relating or incidental to
the production of) dairy, livestock and poultry products. Livestock as used here includes
cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, and poultry as well as animal specialties such as horses,
rabbits, bees, fur-bearing animals in captivity, and fish in captivity. This definition does not
include animal feeder/breeder operations nor the keeping of domesticated animals for
pets. (Amended 7/99)
(8) Agritourism. Any activity carried out on a farm or ranch that allows members of the general
public, for recreational, entertainment, or educational purposes, to view or enjoy rural
activities, including farming, ranching, historic, cultural, harvest-your-own activities, or
natural activities and attractions. A building or structure used for agritourism includes any
building or structure used for public or private events, including, but not limited to,
weddings, receptions, meetings, demonstrations of farm activities, meals, and other events
that are taking place on the farm because of its farm or rural setting.
(9) Animation. The movement, or optical illusion of movement of any part of the sign. Also
included in this definition are signs having chasing action which is the action of a row of
lights commonly used to create the appearance of motion. Automatic changeable copy
boards are permitted provided that there is no running action to copy and provided that the
copy does not change more than once every one minute. No flashing, revolving, or
intermittent illuminating shall be employed.
(10) Antenna. Equipment designed to transmit or receive electronic signals.
(11) Bars, Night Clubs, Taverns. Establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of
alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, and liquor, for consumption on the premises.
(Amended 7/99)
(12) Base Flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any
given year. Also known as the 100-year flood.
(13) Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one
or more points not on the same property as the light source. Also, any light with one or
more beams that rotate or move.
(14) Bed and Breakfast. A residential dwelling in which sleeping and/or eating accommodations
are provided or offered to eight or fewer persons per night. See Section 162 for specific
provisions regarding bed and breakfast establishments.
(15) Bees. Eggs, larvae, developing bees and adult bees.
(16) Beekeeper. The person who keeps and raises bees.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-3
(17) Bona Fide Farm. Land being used for farm purposes as defined by NCGS 160A-360(k).
Proof that property functions as a farm includes the following: (1) a farm sales tax
exemption certificate; (2) a copy of the property tax listing showing that the farm qualifies
for the present-use-value property taxation that applies to agricultural, horticultural, and
forestry uses; (3) a copy of the farm operator’s federal income tax form that demonstrates
farm activity; or (4) a forestry management plan.
(18) Brewery, Generally. An establishment primarily engaged in the production and distribution
of beer and other fermented malt beverages, and may include accessory uses such as a
tasting room, restaurant, retail, demonstration areas, education and training facilities, or
other uses incidental to the brewing business and open and accessible to the public.
Breweries exceeding the size limitations of a microbrewery shall be regulated as a
manufacturing use.
(19) Brewery, Microbrewery. A brewery, as defined above, not exceeding twelve thousand
(12,000) square feet including the principal building footprint and any exterior areas used
for demonstration, on-premises consumption, education, retail sales, or other permitted
accessory uses.
(20) Buffer. A strip of land which is established to separate one type of land use from another
type of land use and which contains natural or planted vegetation, berms, walls, or fences
in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. (Amended 7/99)
(21) Building. A structure designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage or shelter.
(22) Building Permit. A permit issued by the town's designated building official that authorizes
the recipient to construct or demolish a structure or to make alterations to a structure.
(23) Building, Principal. The primary building on a lot or a building that houses a principal use.
(24) Caretaker Dwelling. A dwelling unit that exists either as part of a principal structure or as
an accessory building, is secondary and incidental to the use of the principal structure, is
occupied by a person (persons) that is (are) employed by the owner of the principal
structure to provide domestic, maintenance, or security services. (Amended 7/99)
(25) Certify. Whenever this chapter requires that some agency certify the existence of some
fact or circumstance to the town, the town may require that such certification be made in
any manner that provides reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the certification. By
way of illustration, and without limiting the foregoing, the town may accept certification by
telephone from some agency when the circumstances warrant it, or the town may require
that the certification be in the form of a letter or other document.
(26) Circulation Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used for access to
parking or loading areas or other facilities on the lot. Essentially, driveways and other
maneuvering areas (other than parking aisles) comprise the circulation area.
(27) Clubs. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, fraternal,
literary, political, recreational or like activities, operated on a non-profit basis for the benefit
of its members. (Amended 7/99)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-4
(28) Combination Use. A use consisting of a combination on one lot of two or more principal
uses separately listed in the Table of Permissible Uses, Section 146. (Under some
circumstances, a second principal use may be regarded as accessory to the first, and thus
a combination use is not established. See Section 150. In addition, when two or more
separately owned or separately operated enterprises occupy the same lot, and all such
enterprises fall within the same principal use classification, this shall not constitute a
combination use.)
(29) Conditional Use Permit. A permit issued by the Town Council that authorizes the recipient
to make use of property in accordance with the requirements of this chapter as well as any
additional requirements imposed by the Council.
(30) Convenience Store. A one story, retail store containing less than 2000 square feet of
gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other
household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a
"supermarket"). It is designed to attract and depends upon a large volume of "stop and go"
traffic. Illustrative examples of convenience stores are those operated by the "Fast Fare,"
"7-11" and "Pantry" chains.
(31) Council. The Town Council of the Town of Edenton.
(32) Day Care Center. A child day care facility as defined in NCGS 110-86 as well as a center
providing day care on a regular basis for more than two hours per day for more than five
adults. See Section 164 for specific provisions related to day care centers.
(33) Developer. A person who is responsible for any undertaking that requires a zoning permit,
special use permit, conditional use permit, or sign permit.
(34) Development. That which is to be done pursuant to a zoning permit, special use permit,
conditional use permit, or sign permit.
(35) Dimensional Nonconformity. A nonconforming situation that occurs when the height, size,
or minimum floor space of a structure or the relationship between an existing building or
buildings and other buildings or lot lines does not conform to the regulations applicable to
the district in which the property is located.
(36) Drainageway. Any perennial stream, watercourse, channel, ditch or similar physiographic
feature draining water from the land.
(37) Driveway. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane
bounded on either side by an area that is not part of the vehicle accommodation area.
(38) Duplex. See Dwelling, Two-Family. (Amended 7/99)
(39) Dwelling, Multifamily. A building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for
three or more families living independently of each other with separate housekeeping and
cooking facilities for each, and includes apartments, townhouses and condominiums.
(Amended 7/99)
(40) Dwelling, Single-Family Detached. A separate, detached building designed for and
occupied exclusively by one family. (Amended 7/99)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-5
(41) Dwelling, Townhouse. A building consisting of single-family residences attached to one
another in which each unit is located on an individually-owned parcel, generally within a
development containing drives, walks and open space in common area. (Amended 7/99)
(42) Dwelling, Two-Family. A building on one lot arranged and designed to be occupied by two
families living independently of each other. (Amended 7/99)
(43) Dwelling Unit. An enclosure containing sleeping, kitchen, and bathroom facilities designed
for and used or held ready for use as a permanent residence by one family.
(44) Expenditure. A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to fulfill some
obligation. The term also includes binding contractual commitments to make future
expenditures, as well as any other substantial changes in position.
(45) Extraterritorial Planning Area. That portion of the town's planning jurisdiction that lies
outtside the corporate limits of the town.
(46) Electronic Gaming Operations. Any enterprise, established as a principal use, utilizing
electronic machines, including computers, as game promotions. In a game promotion, a
person may conduct a game of chance in conjunction with the sale of consumer products
or services and/or for which the elements of chance and prize are present. This term
includes, but is not limited to, sweepstakes or internet cafes. This does not include any
lottery approved by the State of North Carolina.
(47) Fairgrounds. An area of land use including, but not limited to: Agricultural related office
buildings, animal shows and judging, carnivals, circuses, community meeting or
recreational buildings and uses, concerts, food booths and stands, games, rides, rodeos,
sales and auctions (including outdoor flea markets), and theatres. Such county fairs,
exhibitions, and shows do not include racetracks or motorized contests of speed. See
Section 180.8 for further input. (Amended 5/04)
(48) Family. One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.
(49) Family Care Home. A home with support and supervisory personnel that provide room and
board, personal care and habilitation services in a family environment for not more than six
(6) resident handicapped persons where such persons have a temporary or permanent
physical, emotional, or mental disability including but not limited to mental retardation,
cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing or sight impairments, emotional disturbances and
orthopedic impairments, but not including mentally ill persons who are dangerous to others
as defined in NCGS 122-58.2 (1) b. (Amended 2/12/91)
(50) Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to be inundated by water from the base flood. As
used in this chapter, the term refers to that area designated as subject to flooding from the
base flood (one-hundred-year flood) on the "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" prepared
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, a copy of which is on file in
the planning department.
(51) Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot. As used in this chapter, the term refers to that
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-6
area designated as a floodway on the "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" prepared by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, a copy of which is on file in the
planning department.
(52) Floor. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e. top of
slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in a frame construction. The term
does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
(53) Food Truck or Concession Trailer. A self-contained, readily movable trailer or motorized
wheeled vehicle, currently registered with the North Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles,
designed and equipped with facilities for cooking and selling food which satisfies local and
state regulations for health and sanitation standards, that is removed each day from the
location where the food is sold.
(54) Granny Pods/Temporary Health Care Structures. A transportable residential structure,
providing an environment facilitating a caregiver’s provision of care for a mentally or
physically impaired person, that (i) is primarily assembled at a location other than its site of
installation; (ii) is limited to one occupant who shall be the mentally or physically impaired
person, (iii) has no more than 300 gross square feet; and (iv) complies with applicable
provisions of the State Building Code and NCGS 143-139.1.
(55) Gross Floor Area. The total area of a building measured by taking the outside dimensions
of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage.
(56) Group Care Facility. A facility licensed by the State of North Carolina (by whatever name it
is called, other than ‘Family Care Home’ as defined by this Ordinance), with support and
supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care or habilitation services
in a family environment for not more than thirty people. (Amended 7/99)
(57) Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to
construction, next to proposed walls of the structure.
(58) Hives. The structures used to house bees.
(59) Homeless Shelter. A facility operating year-round which provides lodging and supportive
services including, but not limited to, a community kitchen; assistance in obtaining
permanent housing; medical counseling, treatment, and/or supervision; psychological
counseling, treatment, and/or supervision; assistance in recuperating from the effects of or
refraining from the use of drugs and/or alcohol; nutritional counseling; employment
counseling; job training and placement; and child care for indigent individuals and/or
families with no regular home or residential address; and which complies with the following
requirements: 1) the facility shall be contained within the building and operated by a
government agency or nonprofit organization; 2) a minimum floor space of fifty square feet
shall be provided for each individual sheltered; and 3) the facility operator(s) shall provide
continuous on-site supervision by an employee(s) and/or volunteer(s) during the hours of
operation. (Amended 7/99)
(60) Home Occupation. A commercial activity that: (i) is conducted by a person on the same
lot (in a residential district) where such person resides, and (ii) is not so insubstantial or
incidental or is not so commonly associated with the residential use as to be regarded as
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-7
an accessory use (see Section 150), but that can be conducted without any significantly
adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a use may not be regarded as having an
insignificantly adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood if: (i) goods, stock in trade,
or other commodities are displayed; (ii) any on-premises retail sales occur; (iii) more than
one person not a resident on the premises is employed in connection with the purported
home occupation; (iv) it creates objectionable noise, fumes, odor, dust or electrical
interference; or (v) more than twenty-five percent of the total gross floor area of residential
buildings plus other buildings housing the purported home occupation, or more than 500
square feet of gross floor area (whichever is less), is used for home occupation purposes.
The following is a non-exhaustive list of examples of enterprises that may be home
occupations if they meet the foregoing definitional criteria: (i) the office or studio of a
physician, dentist, artist, musician, lawyer, architect, engineer, teacher, or similar
professional, (ii) workshops, greenhouses, or kilns, (iii) dressmaking or hairdressing
studios.
(61) Inn. A building, which contains a dwelling unit occupied by an owner or resident manager,
in which more than four and less than 10 lodging rooms or lodging rooms and meals are
offered to the general public for compensation, and in which entrance to bedrooms is made
through a lobby or other common room.
(62) Kennel. A commercial operation that: (i) provides food and shelter and care of animals for
purposes not primarily related to medical care (a kennel may or may not be run by or
associated with a veterinarian), or (ii) engages in the breeding of animals for sale.
(63) Loading and Unloading Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used to
satisfy the requirements of Section 300.
(64) Lot. A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument
such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal
entity for purposes of transfer of title.
If a public body or any authority with the power of eminent domain condemns, purchases,
or otherwise obtains fee simple title to or a lesser interest in a strip of land cutting across a
parcel of land otherwise characterized as a lot by this definition, or a private road is created
across a parcel of land otherwise characterized as a lot by this definition, and the interest
thus obtained or the road so created is such as effectively to prevent the use of this parcel
as one lot, then the land on either side of this strip shall constitute a separate lot.
Subject to Section 123, the permit-issuing authority and the owner of two or more
contiguous lots may agree to regard the lots as one lot if necessary or convenient to
comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance.
(65) Lot Area. The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except that: (i) when the
legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of the lot extending into a public street
right-of-way, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the
street right-of-way line, or if the right-of-way line cannot be determined, a line running
parallel to and thirty feet from the center of the traveled portion of the street, and (ii) in a
residential district, when a private road that serves more than three dwelling units is located
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-8
along any lot boundary, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall
be the inside boundary of the traveled portion of that road.
(66) Manufactured Home. A dwelling unit that is composed of one or more components, each
of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed for installation
or assembly and installation on the building site.
(67) Manufactured Home, Class A. A dwelling unit constructed with one or more components
which are prefabricated and hauled to the site that are capable of producing a dwelling
which is indistinguishable from conventionally built homes and which meets the
construction requirements of the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code as
amended.
(68) Manufactured Home, Class B. A dwelling unit that:
(i) is not constructed in accordance with the requirements of the North Carolina Uniform
Residential Building Code as amended, and (ii) is composed of two or more components,
each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be
transported to the home site, and (iii) meets or exceeds the construction standards of the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and (iv) conforms to the following
appearance criteria.
(a) The manufactured home has a minimum width, as assembled on the site, of twenty
feet;
(b) The pitch of the manufactured home's roof has a minimum vertical rise of three
inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run and the roof is finished with asphalt,
fiberglass shingles, or standing seam or rubber seam roof. (Amended 7/99)
(c) The exterior siding of the manufactured home is of a color, material, and scale
comparable with those in the immediate vicinity, and in no case does the degree of
reflectivity of the exterior finish exceed that of a gloss white paint;
(d) A continuous, permanent masonry curtain wall, unpierced except for required
ventilation and access, is installed under the manufactured home;
(e) The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus are
removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy;
(f) The manufactured home is set up in accordance with the standards established by
the NC Department of Insurance.
(g) Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps, and other means of entrance and exit
to and from the manufactured home are installed, are firmly attached to the
manufactured home, and are securely anchored to the ground;
(h) All roof structures provide an eave projection of no less than 6 inches, which may
include a gutter;
(I) The manufactured home shall be located on the lot so that the length of the
manufactured home is parallel to the street and the main entrance is facing the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-9
street. On multi-frontage lots, the manufactured home shall be sited so that its
length and main entrance are facing the higher classified street affording vehicular
access; and
(j) It is the intent of these criteria to ensure that Class B manufactured homes, when
installed, shall have substantially the appearance of an on-site conventionally-built,
single-family dwelling. (Amended 12/12/94)
(69) Manufactured Home, Class C. Any manufactured home that does not meet the definitional
criteria of a class A or class B manufactured home but which, at a minimum, exceeds 32
feet in length and 8 feet in width.
(70) Manufactured Home Park. A residential use in which more than one Class C
manufactured home is located on a single lot. See Section 159 for specific provisions
related to manufactured home parks.
(71) Marina. A publicly or privately owned dock, basin, or boat storage facility built to
accommodate more than 10 boats and to provide permanent or temporary docking space,
dry stack storage, haul-out facilities, and repair services. A marina may also include
related accessory services such as food preparation, food sales, fuel sales, etc.
(72) Modular Home. See Manufactured Home, Class A.
(73) Multi-Phase Development. A development containing 100 acres or more that (i) is
submitted for site plan approval for construction to occur in more than one phase and (ii) is
subject to a master development plan with committed elements, including a requirement to
offer land for public use as a condition of its master development plan approval.
(74) Nonconforming Lot. A lot existing at the effective date of this chapter (and not created for
the purposes of evading the restrictions of this chapter) that does not meet the minimum
area requirement of the district in which the lot is located.
(75) Nonconforming Project. Any structure, development, or undertaking that is incomplete at
the effective date of this chapter and would be inconsistent with any regulation applicable
to the district in which it is located if completed as proposed or planned.
(76) Nonconforming Situation. A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of this
chapter, any existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform
to one or more of the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or structure is
located. Among other possibilities, a nonconforming situation may arise because a lot
does not meet minimum acreage requirements, because structures exceed maximum
height limitations, because the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in
such matters as density and set-back requirements) is not in conformity with this chapter,
because signs do not meet the requirements of this chapter (Article XVII), or because land
or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by this chapter.
(77) Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming situation that occurs when property is used for a
purpose or in a manner made unlawful by the use regulations applicable to the district in
which the property is located. (For example, a commercial office building in a residential
district may be a nonconforming use.) The term also refers to the activity that constitutes
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-10
the use made of the property. (For example, all the activity associated with operating a
bakery in a residentially zoned area constitutes a nonconforming use.)
(78) Nursing Institution. An institutional facility maintained for the purpose of providing skilled
care and medical supervision at a lower level than that available in a hospital to more than
nine persons. (Amended 7/99)
(79) Outdoor Flea Market. An outdoor market held on a regular basis at a fixed location, and at
which an individual, or groups of individuals, offers goods, new or used, for sale to the
public. Open Air Markets include flea markets, permanent yard sales, outdoor craft shows,
itinerant merchant displays, curious items, antiques markets, and other goods and wares
(excluding yard sales not held on a regular basis, produce stands, auctions, motor vehicle
and boat sales, and other retail establishments). Refer to Section 180.8 for further input.
(Amended 5/04)
(80) Parking Area Aisles. A portion of the vehicle accommodation area consisting of lanes
providing access to parking spaces.
(81) Parking Space. A portion of the vehicle accommodation area set aside for the parking of
one vehicle.
(82) Parapet. The extension of a false front or a false wall above the roofline.
(83) Person. An individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization, or other entity acting as a unit.
(84) Planned Residential Development. A development constructed on a tract of at least five
acres under single ownership, planned and developed as an integral unit, and consisting of
single-family detached residences combined with either two-family residences or
multifamily residences, or both, all developed in accordance with Section 158.
(85) Planning Jurisdiction. The area within the town limits as well as the area beyond the town
limits within which the town is authorized to plan for and regulate development, as set forth
in Section 3.
(86) Public Water Supply System. Any water supply system furnishing potable water to ten or
more dwelling units or businesses or any combination thereof.
(87) Resort/Conference Facility. A use primarily intended for transient guests where the
primary attractions are generally conference and meeting facilities and recreational
activities and features. A resort may include a mixture of such uses as (a) conference
centers; (b) assembly halls; (c) indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, including but not
limited to golf courses, swim and tennis clubs, and physical fitness centers; (d) hotel and
motels; (e) multi-family dwellings and townhouses; (f) restaurants; (g) marinas; and (h)
incidental support retail businesses. (Amended 7/99)
(88) Road. All private ways used to provide motor vehicle access to (i) two or more lots or (ii)
two or more distinct areas or buildings in unsubdivided developments.
(89) Roof Line. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any
cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-11
(90) Rooming House. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming
units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not
husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or
operator.
(91) Sexually-Oriented Business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult massage parlor, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter studio, or any combination of the
foregoing. As used in this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) Adult Arcade (also know as ‘peep show’). Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited, wherein coin-operated or token-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors,
or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to persons in
booths or viewing rooms where the images so displayed depict or describe
specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.
(b) Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment which as one of
its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental, for any form of
consideration, any one or more of the following:
i. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities and/or
specified anatomical areas; or
ii. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection
with specified sexual activities.
(c) Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar restaurant, or other commercial establishment that
regularly features, exhibits, or displays as one of its principal business purposes:
i. Persons who appear nude or semi-nude; or
ii. Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas and/or by specified sexual activities; or
iii. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which depict or describe specified sexual activities and/or
specified anatomical areas.
(d) Adult Massage Parlor. A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electrical or magnetic treatment,
or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless
such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner,
chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar professional person
licensed by the State of North Carolina. This definition does not include an athletic
club, physical fitness center, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, or similar
establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered
as an incidental or accessory service.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-12
(e) Adult Motel. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that:
i. Offers accommodations to the public, for any form of consideration, and
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that
depict or describe specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas
as one of its principal business purposes; or
ii. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10)
hours; or
iii. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period
of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
(f) Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown as one of its principal business
purposes that depict or describe specified sexual activities and/or specified
anatomical areas.
(g) Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features, exhibits, or displays, as one of its principal
business purposes, persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live
performances that expose or depict specified anatomical areas and/or specified
sexual activities.
(h) Escort. A person who, for tips or any other form of consideration, agrees or offers
to act as a date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
(i) Escort Agency. A person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises
to furnish escorts as one of its principal business purposes, for a fee, tip, or any
other form of consideration.
(j) Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude,
or who displays specified anatomical areas, is provided to be observed to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any other form of consideration.
‘Nude model studio’ shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of
North Carolina or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or in part
by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college,
or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
i. That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing;
and
ii. Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3)
days in advance of the class; and
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-13
iii. Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
(k) Nude or a State of Nudity. The appearance of a human anus, male genitals, or
female genitals; or a state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus,
male genitals, or female genitals.
(l) Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals,
pubic region, or areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered
by supporting straps or devices.
(m) Sexual Encounter Center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as of one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, physical
contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, or
activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when
one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
(n) Specified Anatomical Areas. Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(o) Specified Sexual Activities. Includes any of the following:
i. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or
ii. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breasts; or
iii. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, or sodomy; or
iv. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
v. Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain;
or
vi. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other contact with an animal by a human
being; or
vii. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. (Amended
11/10/98)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-14
(92) Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed,
developed, and managed as a total entity with a unified design of buildings and with a
unified design of buildings, landscaping, and signage with coordinated parking for
customers and employees provided on site. Shopping Center Developments shall be
classified into one of the following categories:
(a) Neighborhood Shopping Center – a group of three of more commercial establishments
with a total business space of 10,000 square feet or less, designed to provide
convenient shopping for the day-to-day needs of consumers in the immediate
neighborhood.
(b) Community Shopping Center – a group of two or more commercial establishments
containing 10,000 to 80,000 square feet of gross floor area designed as a large-scale
commercial center offering a wider range of apparel and other goods providing a
shopping environment for the community and general public.
(c) Regional Shopping Center – a retail shopping area with a minimum lot size of 5 acres,
containing at least two major commercial establishments and over 80,000 square feet
of gross floor area designed to offer a wide range of retail and services with customers
drawing from the regional population. (Amended 4/9/02)
(93) Sign. Any device that (i) is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where such
device is located to accomplish either of the objectives set forth in subdivision two of this
definition; and (ii) is designed to attract the attention of such persons or to communicate
information to them.
(94) Sign, Construction. A sign placed at a construction site identifying or announcing the
project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financier or others involved in the
development of the project.
(95) Sign, Electronic Message Board. A sign with a fixed or changing display/message
composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. A time
and/or temperature sign shall not be considered an electronic graphics sign.
(96) Sign, Freestanding. A sign erected which is wholly independent of any building,
advertising a product, service, activity, or event on the premises. (Amended 2/12/91)
(97) Sign, Nonconforming. A sign that, on the effective date of this chapter, does not conform
to one or more of the regulations set forth in this chapter, particularly Article XVII, Signs.
(98) Sign Permit. A permit issued by the land use administrator that authorizes the recipient to
erect, move, enlarge, or substantially alter a sign.
(99) Sign, Roof. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon or over the roof of a
building, or extending above the highest wall of the building, and having its principal
support on the roof or walls of the building.
(100) Sign, Snipe. A sign that is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to
trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to other objects.
(101) Sign, Temporary. A sign that (i) is used in connection with a circumstance, situation, or
event that is designed, intended or expected to take place or to be completed within a
reasonably short or definite period after the erection of such sign, or (ii) is intended to
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-15
remain on the location where it is erected or placed for a period of not more than fifteen
days. If a sign display area is permanent but the message displayed is subject to periodic
changes, that sign shall not be regarded as temporary.
(102) Solar Farm: Solar Farms are defined as a collection of ground mounted photovoltaic
solar panels that are intended for utility-scale solar applications.
(103) Special Events. Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, or other types of special events that
(i) run for longer than two days but not longer than fourteen (14) calendar days, (ii) are
intended to or likely to attract substantial crowds, and (iii) are unlike the customary or
usual activities generally associated with the property where the special event is to be
located. (Amended 5/06)
(104) Special Use Permit. A permit issued by the Board of Adjustment that authorizes the
recipient to make use of property in accordance with the requirements of this chapter as
well as any additional requirements imposed by the Board of Adjustment.
(105) Street. A public street or a street with respect to which an offer of dedication has been
made.
(106) Street, Arterial. A major street in the town's street system that serves as an avenue for the
circulation of traffic onto, out, or around the town and carries high volumes of traffic.
(107) Street, Collector. A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between minor, local,
and sub-collector streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct access to
abutting properties. It serves or is designed to serve, directly or indirectly, more than one
hundred dwelling units and is designed to be used or is used to carry more than eight
hundred trips per day.
(108) Street, Cul-de-sac. A street that terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
(109) Street, Local. A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties. It
serves or is designed to serve at least ten but not more than twenty-five dwelling units and
is expected to or does handle between seventy-five and two hundred trips per day.
(110) Street, Marginal Access. A street that is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street and
that is designed to provide access to abutting properties so that these properties are
somewhat sheltered from the effects of the through traffic on the arterial street and so that
the flow of traffic on the arterial street is not impeded by direct driveway access from a
large number of abutting properties.
(111) Street, Minor. A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties. It
serves or is designed to serve not more than nine dwelling units and is expected to or does
handle up to seventy-five trips per day.
(112) Street, Sub-collector. A street whose principal function is to provide access to abutting
properties but is also designed to be used or is used to connect minor and local streets
with collector or arterial streets. Including residences indirectly served through connecting
streets, it serves or is designed to serve at least twenty-six but not more than one hundred
dwelling units and is expected to or does handle between two hundred and eight hundred
trips per day.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-16
(113) Structure. Anything constructed or erected.
(114) Subdivision. The division of a tract of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other
divisions when one or more of those divisions is created for the purpose of sale or building
development (whether immediate or future) and including all divisions of land involving the
dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be
included within this definition nor be subject to the regulations of this chapter applicable
strictly to subdivisions: (i) the combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the
resultant lots are equal to or exceed the minimum standards set forth in this chapter, (ii) the
division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street right-of-way dedication
is involved; or (iii) the public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for widening or
opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors; r (iv) the division of a tract
in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two acres into not more than three
lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are
equal to or exceed the minimum standards set forth in this chapter; or (v) the division of a
tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a probated will or in accordance with
intestate succession under Chapter 29 of the General Statutes.
(115) Subdivision, Architecturally Integrated. A subdivision in which approval is obtained not only
for the division of land into lots but also for a configuration of principal buildings to be
located on such lots. The plans for an architecturally integrated subdivision shall show the
dimensions, height and location of all such buildings to the extent necessary to comply with
the purpose and intent of architecturally integrated subdivisions as set forth in Section 188.
(116) Subdivision, Major. Any subdivision other than a minor subdivision.
(117) Subdivision, Minor. A subdivision that does not involve any of the following: (i) the creation
of more than a total of three lots; (ii) the creation of any new public streets, (iii) the
extension of a public water or sewer system, or (iv) the installation of drainage
improvements through one or more lots to serve one or more other lots.
(118) Temporary Uses/Sales. A use or sale established for a fixed period to time, with the intent
to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time, that does not involve the
construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
(119) Tiny House. A single-family detached home that is 200 square feet to 699 square feet in
size (not including loft space) and complies with the North Carolina State Building Code,
includes container homes. A tiny house on wheels for permanent occupancy (longer than
30 days) is considered a recreational vehicle.
(120) Tower. Any structure whose principal function is to support an antenna.
(121) Town. The Town of Edenton.
(122) Tract. A lot (see definition 47). The term tract is used interchangeably with the term lot,
particularly in the context of subdivisions, where one "tract" is subdivided into several "lots."
(123) Travel Trailer. A structure that (i) is intended to be transported over the streets and
highways (either as a motor vehicle or attached to or hauled by a motor vehicle) and (ii) is
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-17
designed for temporary use as sleeping quarters but that does not satisfy one or more of
the definitional criteria of a manufactured home.
(124) Use. The activity or function that actually takes place or is intended to take place on a lot.
(125) Use, Mixed. Occupancy of a building or land by more than one use. (Amended 7/99)
(126) Use, Principal. The primary purpose or function that a lot or structure serves or is
proposed to serve. (Amended 7/99)
(127) Variance. A grant of permission by the Board of Adjustment that authorizes the recipient to
do that which, according to the strict letter of this chapter, he could not otherwise legally do.
(128) Vegetative Zone. An area of natural or planted vegetation through which stormwater runoff
flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become channelized and which
provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of pollutants. (Amended 7/99)
(129) Vehicle Accommodation Area. That portion of a lot that is used by vehicles for access,
circulation, parking, and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of circulation areas,
loading and unloading areas, and parking areas.
(130) Vested Right. The right to undertake and complete the development and use of property
under the terms and conditions of a site specific development plan approved in accordance
with the provisions of Section 328. (Amended 6/13/95)
(131) Wholesale Trade. On-premises sales of goods primarily to customers engaged in the
business of reselling the goods. (Amended 7/99)
(132) Wooded Area. An area of contiguous wooded vegetation where trees are at a density of at
least one six-inch or greater caliper tree per 325 square feet of land and where the
branches and leaves form a contiguous canopy.
(133) Zoning Permit. A permit issued by the land use administrator that authorizes the recipient
to make use of property in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 2-18
Section 16 Lots Divided by District Lines
(a) Whenever a single lot two acres or less in size is located within two or more different zoning
districts, the district regulations applicable to the district within which the larger portion of the lot lies shall
apply to the entire lot.
(b) Whenever a single lot greater than two acres in size is located within two or more different
zoning districts, then:
(1) If each portion of the lot located within a separate district is equal to or greater than the
minimum lot size for that district, then each portion of the lot shall be subject to all
regulations applicable to the district in which it is located.
(2) If any portion of the lot located within a separate district is smaller than the minimum lot
size for that district, then such smaller portion shall be regarded as if it were in the
same zoning district as the nearest larger portion to which it is attached.
(c) This section applies only to lots created on or before the effective date of this chapter unless
the Board of Adjustment, in a proceeding under Section 94 to determine district boundaries, concludes
that a lot established after the effective date of this section was not created to bring additional lot area
within a more intensive zoning district, or otherwise to take unfair or unwarranted advantage of the
provisions of this section.
Sections 17 through 20 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
3-1
ARTICLE III
ADMINISTRATIVE MECHANISMS
Part I. Planning Board
Section 21 Appointment and Terms of Planning Board Members.
(a) There shall be a Planning Board consisting of seven members. Five members,
appointed by the Town Council, shall reside within the town. Two members, appointed by the
County Board of Commissioners, shall reside within the town's extraterritorial planning area. If a
larger number of extraterritorial members is needed to comply with the proportional representation
requirements of NCGS 160A-362, the Town Council shall submit to the County Board of
Commissioners a resolution requesting that an additional member or members, as appropriate, be
appointed. Proportional representation shall be determined by calculating the proportional
relationship of the exterritorial area population to the municipal population and applying that
proportional relationship to the total membership of the Planning Board. An additional member must
be appointed to the Planning Board to achieve proportional representation only when the population
of the entire extraterritorial area constitutes a full fraction of the town’s population divided by the total
membership of the Planning Board. Once the Town of Edenton provides proportional
representation, no power available to it under NCGS 160A-360 shall be ineffective in its
extraterritorial area solely because county appointments have not yet been made. If the County
Board of Commissioners fails to make appointments within 90 days after receiving a resolution from
the Town Council requesting that they be made, the Town Council may make the appointments.
(Amended 1/14/03)
(b) Planning Board members shall be appointed for three-year staggered terms, but
members may continue to serve until their successors have been appointed. Vacancies may be
filled for the unexpired terms only.
(c) Members may be appointed to up to three successive terms. If special circumstances
warrant, the Town Council may appoint a member to serve one additional term. (Amended 7/99)
(d) Planning Board members may be removed by the Council at any time for failure to
attend three consecutive meetings or for failure to attend thirty percent or more of the meetings
within any twelve-month period or for any other good cause related to performance of duties. Upon
request of the member proposed for removal, the Council shall hold a hearing on the removal before
it becomes effective.
(e) If an in-town member moves outside the town or if an extraterritorial area member
moves outside the planning jurisdiction, that shall constitute a resignation from the Planning Board,
effective upon the date a replacement is appointed by the Council or County Board of
Commissioners for ETJ members. (Amended 7/99)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
3-2
Section 22 Meetings of the Planning Board.
(a) The Planning Board shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet
frequently enough so that it can take action in conformity with Section 67 (Applications to be
Processed Expeditiously).
(b) Since the board has only advisory authority, it need not conduct its meetings strictly in
accordance with the quasi-judicial procedures set forth in Articles IV, V, and VI. However, it shall
conduct its meetings so as to obtain necessary information and to promote the full and free
exchange of ideas.
(c) Minutes shall be kept of all board proceedings.
(d) All board meetings shall be open to the public, and whenever feasible the agenda for
each board meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting.
(e) Whenever the board is called upon to make recommendations concerning a conditional
use permit request, special use permit request, or a zoning amendment proposal, the administrator
shall provide the same public hearing notice as required in Sections 54 and 323.
Section 23 Quorum and Voting.
(a) A quorum for the Planning Board shall consist of a majority of the board membership
(excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the board to take official action.
(b) All actions of the Planning Board shall be taken by majority vote, a quorum being
present.
(c) A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member.
(d) Extraterritorial planning area members may vote on all matters considered by the board,
regardless of whether the property affected lies within or without the town.
Section 24 Planning Board Officers.
(a) At its first meeting in June of each year, the Planning Board shall, by majority vote of its
membership (excluding vacant seats) elect one of its members to serve as chairman and preside
over the board's meetings and one member to serve as vice-chairman. The persons so designated
shall serve in these capacities for terms of one year. A secretary shall be appointed by the chairman
of the board, either from within or outside of its membership, to hold office during the term of the
chairman and/or until a successor secretary shall have been appointed. The duties of the secretary
shall be as directed by the Board in its by-laws. Vacancies in these offices may be filled for the
unexpired terms only by majority vote of the board membership (excluding vacant seats).
(b) The chairman, vice-chairman and secretary (if appointed from among the membership)
may take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
3-3
Section 25 Powers and Duties of Planning Board.
(a) The Planning Board may:
(1) Make studies and recommend to the Council plans, goals and objectives relating
to the growth, development and redevelopment of the town and the surrounding
extraterritorial planning area.
(2) Develop and recommend to the Council policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient
manner.
(3) Make recommendations to the Council concerning proposed conditional use
permits and proposed zoning map changes, as provided by Sections 57 and
322.
(4) Perform any other duties assigned by the Council.
(b) The Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations governing its procedures and
operations not inconsistent with the provisions of the chapter.
Section 26 Advisory Committees.
(a) From time to time, the Council may appoint one or more individuals to assist the
Planning Board to carry out its planning responsibilities with respect to a particular subject area. By
way of illustration, without limitation, the Council may appoint advisory committees to consider the
thoroughfare plan, bikeway plans, housing plans, economic development plans, etc.
(b) Members of such advisory committees shall sit as nonvoting members of the Planning
Board when such issues are being considered and lend their talents, energies, and expertise to the
Planning Board. However, all formal recommendations to the Council shall be made by the
Planning Board.
(c) Nothing in this section shall prevent the Council from establishing independent advisory
groups, committees, or boards to make recommendations on any issue directly to the Council.
Sections 27 through 28 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99
3-4
Part II. Board of Adjustment
Section 29 Appointment and Terms of Board of Adjustment.
(a) There shall be a Board of Adjustment consisting of five regular members and two
alternates. Four regular members and one alternate, appointed by the Council, shall reside within
the town. One regular member and one alternate, appointed by the County Board of
Commissioners, shall reside within the town's extraterritorial planning area. If a larger number of
extraterritorial members is needed to comply with the proportional representation requirements of
NCGS 160A-362, the Town Council shall submit to the County Board of Commissioners a resolution
requesting that an additional member or members, as appropriate, be appointed. Proportional
representation shall be determined by calculating the proportional relationship of the exterritorial
area population to the municipal population and applying that proportional relationship to the total
membership of the Board of Adjustment. An additional member must be appointed to the Board of
Adjustment to achieve proportional representation only when the population of the entire
extraterritorial area constitutes a full fraction of the town’s population divided by the total
membership of the Board of Adjustment. Once the Town of Edenton provides proportional
representation, no power available to it under NCGS 160A-360 shall be ineffective in its
extraterritorial area solely because county appointments have not yet been made. If the County
Board of Commissioners fails to make appointments within 90 days after receiving a resolution from
the Town Council requesting that they be made, the Town Council may make the appointments.
(Amended 7/99).
(b) Board of Adjustment regular members and alternates shall be appointed for three-year
staggered terms, but both regular members and alternates may continue to serve until their
successors have been appointed. Initially, two regular in-town members and one extraterritorial
area alternate member shall be appointed for three-year terms, one regular in-town member and
one regular extraterritorial area member shall be appointed for two-year terms, and one regular
in-town member and one in-town alternate shall be appointed for one-year terms. Vacancies may
be filled for the unexpired terms only.
(c) Members may be appointed to up to three successive terms. If special circumstances
warrant, the Town Council may appoint a member to serve one additional term. (Amended 7/99).
(d) Regular Board of Adjustment members may be removed by the Council at any time for
failure to attend three consecutive meetings or for failure to attend thirty percent or more of the
meetings within any twelve month period or for any other good cause related to performance of
duties. Alternate members may be removed for repeated failure to attend or participate in meetings
when requested to do so in accordance with regularly established procedures. Upon request of the
member proposed for removal, the Council shall hold a hearing on the removal before it becomes
effective.
(e) If a regular or alternate in-town member moves outside the town, or if an extraterritorial
area regular or alternate member moves outside the planning jurisdiction, that shall constitute a
resignation from the board, effective upon the date a replacement is appointed.
(f) Extraterritorial area members may vote on all matters coming before the board.
(g) The in-town alternate may sit only in lieu of a regular in-town member and the
extraterritorial area alternate may sit only in lieu of the regular extraterritorial area member. When
so seated, alternates shall have the same powers and duties as the regular member they replace.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 3-5
Section 30 Meetings of the Board of Adjustment.
(a) The Board of Adjustment shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet
frequently enough so that it can take action in conformity with Section 67 (Applications to be
Processed Expeditiously).
(b) The board shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the quasi-judicial procedures
set forth in Articles IV, V, and VI.
(c) All meetings of the board shall be open to the public, and whenever feasible the agenda
for each board meeting shall be made available in advance of the meeting.
Section 31 Quorum.
(a) A quorum for the Board of Adjustment shall consist of the number of members equal to
four-fifths of the regular board membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the
board to take official action.
(b) A member who has withdrawn from the meeting without being excused as provided in
Section 32 shall be counted as present for purposes of determining whether a quorum is present.
Section 32 Voting.
(a) The concurring vote of equal to four-fifths of the members of the board present at the
meeting and not excused from voting (a quorum being present), shall be necessary to grant a
variance. regular board membership (excluding vacant seats) shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any ordinance (including the issuance
of a special use permit) or to grant any variance. All other actions of the board, including decisions
relating to special use permits, shall be taken by majority vote of those present and not excused
from voting, a quorum being present. A quorum shall consist of the number of members equal to
four-fifths of the regular board membership (excluding vacant seats).
(b) Once a member is physically present at a board meeting, any subsequent failure to vote
shall be recorded as an affirmative vote unless the member has been excused in accordance with
subsection (c) or has been allowed to withdraw from the meeting in accordance with subsection (d).
(c) A member may be excused from voting on a particular issue by majority vote of the
remaining members present under the following circumstances:
(1) If the member has a direct financial interest in the outcome of the matter at issue;
or
(2) If the matter at issue involves the member's own official conduct; or
(3) If participation in the matter might violate the letter or spirit of a member's code of
professional responsibility; or
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 3-6
(4) If a member has such close personal ties to the applicant that the member
cannot reasonably be expected to exercise sound judgment in the public interest.
(d) A member may be allowed to withdraw from the entire remainder of a meeting by
majority vote of the remaining members present for any good and sufficient reason other than the
member's desire to avoid voting on matters to be considered at that meeting.
(e) A motion to allow a member to be excused from voting or excused from the remainder
of the meeting is in order only if made by or at the initiative of the member directly affected.
(f) A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member.
Section 33 Board of Adjustment Officers.
(a) At its first regular meeting in June, the Board of Adjustment shall, by majority vote of its
membership (excluding vacant seats) elect one of its regular members to serve as chairman and
preside over the board's meetings and one regular member to serve as vice-chairman. The persons
so designated shall serve in these capacities for terms of one year. Vacancies may be filled for the
unexpired terms only by majority vote of the board membership (excluding vacant seats).
(Amended 11/13/07).
(b) The chairman or any member temporarily acting as chairman may administer oaths to
witnesses coming before the board.
(c) The chairman and vice-chairman of the Board of Adjustment may take part in all
deliberations and may vote on all issues.
Section 34 Powers and Duties of Board of Adjustment.
(a) The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide:
(1) Appeals of decisions of administrative officials charged with enforcement of this
Ordinance (as provided in Section 91) and requests for variances (as provided in
Section 92). As used in this subsection, the term “decision” includes any final
and binding order, requirement, or determination. The Board shall hear and
decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under any statute or
ordinance that regulates land use and development.
(2) Applications for special use permits, as provided in Subsection 46(a).
(3) Questions involving interpretations of the zoning map, including disputed district
boundary lines and lot lines, as provided in Section 94.
(4) Any other matter the board is required to act upon by any other town ordinance.
(b) The board may adopt rules and regulations governing its procedures and operations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter.
Section 35 Fees for Permits and Appeals.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 3-7
See Article 1, Section 8.
Section 36 Reserved.
Part III. Land Use Administrator
Section 37 Land Use Administrator.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, primary responsibility for administering and
enforcing this chapter may be assigned to one or more individuals by the town manager. The
person or persons to whom these functions are assigned shall be referred to in this chapter as the
"land use administrator" or "administrator." The term "staff" is sometimes used interchangeably with
the term "administrator." As provided in Sections 78 and 79, the land use administrator is authorized
to approve major subdivisions, once a conditional use permit has been approved by the Town
Council, and minor subdivisions.
Section 38 and 39 Reserved.
Part IV. Town Council
Section 40 The Town Council.
(a) The Town Council, in considering conditional use permit applications, acts in a
quasi-judicial capacity and, accordingly, is required to observe the procedural requirements set forth
in Articles IV and VI of this chapter.
(b) In considering proposed changes in the text of this chapter or in the zoning map, the
Council acts in its legislative capacity and must proceed in accordance with the requirements of
Article XX.
(c) Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, in acting upon conditional use
permit requests or in considering amendments to this chapter or the zoning map, the Council shall
follow the regular, voting, and other requirements as set forth in other provisions of the town code,
the town charter, or general law.
(d) The Town Council, in considering the approval of a site specific development plan (as
defined in Section 328, Vested Right), shall follow the procedural requirements
set forth in Articles IV and VI of this Ordinance for the issuance of a conditional
use permit. (Amended 6/13/95)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 3-8
Part V. Edenton Preservation Commission
Section 41 Appointment and Terms of Historic Commission.
(a) There shall be an Edenton Preservation Commission consisting of seven members.
The members shall be appointed by the Town Council for four-year terms. Appointments shall be
made in June and shall be effective June 30th. (Amended 02/10/2009)
(b) Members may be appointed to up to three successive terms. If special circumstances
warrant, the Town Council may appoint a member to serve one additional term. (Amended 7/99)
(c) A majority of the members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or
education in history or architecture and all members shall reside within the territorial jurisdiction of
the Town of Edenton as established pursuant to NCGS 160A-360.
(d) Faithful and prompt attendance at all meetings of the Commission and conscientious
performance of the duties required of members shall be a prerequisite to continuing membership on
the Commission. Should a member fail to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the
Commission, and should there be no adequate excuse for such absences, the Chairman, with the
concurrence of a majority of the entire Commission, shall recommend to the Town Council that a
vacancy be declared and that the vacated position be filled.
Section 42 Meetings of the Edenton Preservation Commission.
(a) Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held on the second Monday of each
month at 1:15 p.m. in the Town Hall; provided that meetings may be held at some other convenient
place if directed by the Chairman in advance of the meeting. (Amended 1/14/03)
(b) Special meetings of the Commission may be called at any time by the Chairman. At
least forty-eight hours notice of the time and place of special meetings shall be given, by the
Secretary or by the Chairman, to each member of the Commission; provided that this requirement
may be waived by action of a majority of all the members.
(c) Whenever there is no business for the Commission, the Chairman may dispense with a
regular meeting by giving notice to all the members not less than twenty-four hours prior to the time
set for the meeting.
(d) All meetings shall be open to the public. The business at regular meetings shall
include: (i) roll call; (ii) approval of minutes of previous meetings; (iii) unfinished business; (iv)
consideration of applications; (v) reports of committees; and (vi) adjournment.
Section 43 Quorum and Voting.
(a) A quorum for the Edenton Preservation Commission shall consist of four members of
the Commission membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the Commission
to take official action. (Amended 3/13/2001)
(b) All actions of the Commission shall be taken by majority vote, a quorum being present.
(c) A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 3-9
Section 44 Edenton Preservation Commission Officers.
(a) At its first regular meeting in February of each year, the Edenton Preservation
Commission shall, by majority vote of its membership (excluding vacant seats), elect one of its
members to serve as chairman and preside over the commission meetings and one member to
serve as vice-chairman.
A member of the town staff shall be appointed by the Edenton Town Manager to serve as secretary
to the Commission. The duties of the officers shall be as directed by the Commission in its by-laws.
Vacancies in the office of chairman and vice-chairman may be filled for the unexpired terms only by
majority vote of the Commission membership. (Amended 3/13/2001)
(b) The chairman and vice chairman may take part in all deliberations and vote on all
issues. The secretary shall not be eligible to vote upon any matter.
Section 45 Powers and Duties of the Edenton Preservation Commission.
(a) The Edenton Preservation Commission shall:
(1) Review applications for Certificates of Appropriateness for constructing, altering,
or demolishing buildings or structures within the designated Historic District.
(2) Issue Certificates of Appropriateness in accordance with the procedures
delineated in Sections 168(d) and (e).
(3) Perform any other duties assigned by the Town Council. (Amended 3/13/2001)
(b) The Commission may request the N.C. Department of Cultural Resources or the N.C.
Historic Commission to review, comment on, and make recommendations upon all applications for a
Certificate of Appropriateness.
(c) The Commission may adopt rules and regulations governing its procedures and
operations not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance and NCGS 160A-395 thru 160-399.
Section 45.1 Designation of Historic District.
(a) It is the intent of this section to make provisions within this ordinance (1) to safeguard
the heritage of the Town of Edenton by preserving any area which reflects elements of its cultural,
social, economic, political, or architectural history; (2) to stabilize and improve property values in
such areas; (3) to foster civic beauty; (4) to strengthen the local economy; and (5) to promote the
use and preservation of such areas for the education, welfare, and pleasure of residents of Edenton
and the State as a whole.
(b) The Town Council may designate from time to time one or more Historic Districts within
the jurisdictional boundaries of the Town. No Historic District(s) shall be designated until:
(1) An investigation and report describing the significance of the buildings, structures,
features, sites or surroundings included in any such proposed district and a
description of boundaries of such district has been prepared, and reports required
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 3-10
by subdivision (1) of this section shall be prepared by the Edenton Preservation
Commission, and shall be referred to the local planning board for its review and
comments according to the procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance. Changes
in the boundaries of an initial district or proposal for additional districts shall also be
submitted to the Department of Cultural Resources in accordance with the
provisions of the subdivision (2) of this section. (Amended 03/13/2001)
(2) The Department of Cultural Resources, acting through an agent or employees
designated by its secretary, shall have made an analysis of and recommendations
concerning such report and description of proposed boundaries. Failure of the
department to submit its written analysis and recommendations to the municipal
governing body within thirty (30) calendar days after a written request for such
analysis has been mailed to it shall relieve the municipality of any responsibility for
awaiting such analysis, and said body may at any time thereafter take any necessary
action to adopt or amend its zoning ordinance.
(c) The municipal governing body may also, in its discretion, refer the report and proposed
boundaries to any local historic properties commission or other interested body for its
recommendations prior to taking action to amend the zoning ordinance. With respect
to any changes in the boundaries of such district subsequent to its initial establishment,
or the creation of additional districts within the jurisdiction, the investigative studies and
reports required by subdivision (1) of this section shall be prepared by the Edenton
Preservation Commission, and shall be referred to the local planning board for its
review and comments according to procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance.
Changes in the boundaries of an initial district or proposal for additional districts shall
also be submitted to the Department of Cultural Resources in accordance with the
provisions of subdivision (2) of this section. (Amended 3/13/2001)
(d) On receipt of these reports and recommendation, the municipality may proceed in the
same manner as would otherwise be required for the adoption or amendment of any
appropriate zoning ordinance provisions. (Amended 5/14/91)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-1
ARTICLE IV
PERMITS AND FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
Part I. Zoning, Special Use, and Conditional Use Permits
Section 46 Permits Required.
(a) Subject to Section 271 (Sign Permits), the use made of property may not be
substantially changed (see Section 152), substantial clearing, grading or excavation may not be
commenced, and buildings or other substantial structures may not be constructed, erected, moved,
or substantially altered except in accordance with and pursuant to one of the following permits:
(1) A zoning permit issued by the administrator;
(2) A special use permit issued by the Board of Adjustment;
(3) A conditional use permit issued by the Town Council;
(4) An erosion control permit issued by the North Carolina Department of Natural
Resources and Community Development, if required;
(5) A Coastal Area Management Act (CAMA) permit issued by the Division of Coast
Management, if required.
(b) Zoning permits, special use permits, conditional use permits and sign permits are
issued under this chapter only when a review of the application submitted, including the plans
contained therein, indicates that the development will comply with the provisions of this chapter if
completed as proposed. Such plans and applications as are finally approved are incorporated into
any permit issued, and except as otherwise provided in Section 64, all development shall occur
strictly in accordance with such approved plans and applications.
(c) Physical improvements to land to be subdivided may not be commenced except in
accordance with a conditional use permit issued by the Council for major subdivisions or after final
plat approval by the administrator for minor subdivisions (see Part II of this article).
(d) A zoning permit, conditional use permit, special use permit, or sign permit shall be
issued in the name of the applicant (except that applications submitted by an agent shall be issued
in the name of the principal) shall identify the property involved and the proposed use, shall
incorporate by reference the plans submitted, and shall contain any special conditions or
requirements lawfully imposed by the permit-issuing authority. All such permits issued with respect
to tracts of land in excess of one acre (except sign permits and zoning permits for single-family and
two-family residential uses) shall be recorded in the Chowan County Registry after execution by the
record owner as provided in Section 64.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-2
Section 47 No Occupancy, Use, or Sale of Lots Until Requirements Fulfilled.
Issuance of a conditional use, special use, or zoning permit authorizes the recipient to
commence the activity resulting in a change in use of the land or, (subject to obtaining a building
permit), to commence work designed to construct, erect, move, or substantially alter buildings or
other substantial structures or to make necessary improvements to a subdivision. However, except
as provided in Sections 53, 61, and 62, the intended use may not be commenced, no building may
be occupied, and in the case of subdivisions, no lots may be sold until all of the requirements of this
chapter and all additional requirements imposed pursuant to the issuance of a conditional use or
special use permit have been complied with.
Section 48 Who May Submit Permit Applications.
(a) Applications for zoning, special use, conditional use, or sign permits; certificates of
appropriateness or minor subdivision plat approval will be accepted only from persons having the
legal authority to take action in accordance with the permit, certificate of appropriateness or the
minor subdivision plat approval. By way of illustration, in general this means that applications should
be made by the owners or lessees of property, or their agents, or persons who have contracted to
purchase property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this chapter,
or the agents of such persons (who may make application in the name of such owners, lessees, or
contract vendees). When an authorized agent files an application on behalf of a property owner, the
agent shall provide the Town with written documentation that the owner of the property has
authorized the filing of the application.
(b) The administrator may require an applicant to submit evidence of his authority to submit
the application in accordance with subsection (a) whenever there appears to be a reasonable basis
for questioning this authority.
(c) All applicants for permits requiring Planning Board or Board of Adjustment review shall
be submitted to the administrator 25 calendar days prior to the date of the Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment meeting at which the permit will be reviewed. If the submission deadline date falls on
Saturday, the application must be received by the preceding Friday. If the submission deadline falls
on a Sunday, the application must be received by the following Monday.
Section 49 Applications To Be Complete.
(a) All applications for zoning, special use, conditional use, or sign permits must be
complete before the permit issuing authority is required to consider the application.
(b) Subject to subsection (c), an application is complete when it contains all of the
information that is necessary for the permit issuing authority to decide whether or not the
development, if completed as proposed, will comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance.
(c) In this ordinance, detailed or technical design requirements and construction
specifications relating to various types of improvements (streets, sidewalks, etc.) are set forth in one
or more of the appendices to this ordinance. It is not necessary that the application contain the type
of detailed construction drawings that would be necessary to determine compliance with these
appendices, so long as the plans provide sufficient information to allow the permit issuing authority
to evaluate the application in the light of the substantive requirements set forth in this text of this
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-3
ordinance. However, whenever this ordinance requires a certain element of a development to be
constructed in accordance with the detailed requirements set forth in one or more of these
appendices, then no construction work on such element may be commenced until detailed
construction drawings have been submitted to and approved by the administrator. Failure to
observe this requirement may result in permit revocation, denial of final subdivision plat approval, or
other penalty as provided in Article VII.
(d) The presumption established by this ordinance is that all of the information set forth in
Appendix A is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this section. However, it is recognized that
each development is unique, and therefore the permit issuing authority may allow less information or
require more information to be submitted according to the needs of the particular case. For
applications submitted to the Town Council or Board of Adjustment, the applicant may rely in the first
instance on the recommendations of the administrator as to whether more or less information than
that set forth in Appendix A should be submitted.
(e) The administrator shall make every effort to develop application forms, instructional
sheets, checklists, or other techniques or devices to assist applicants in understanding the
application requirements and the form and type of information that must be submitted. In classes of
cases where a minimal amount of information is necessary to enable the administrator to determine
compliance with this ordinance, such as applications for zoning permits to construct single-family or
two-family houses, or applications for sign permits, the administrator shall develop standard forms
that will expedite the submission of the necessary plans and other required information.
Section 50 Staff Consultation Before Formal Application.
(a) To minimize development planning costs, avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation,
and ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter, preapplication consultation between
the developer and the administrator is encouraged or required as provided in this section.
(b) Before submitting an application for a conditional use permit authorizing a development
that consists of or contains a major subdivision, the developer shall submit to the administrator a site
plan of such subdivision, drawn approximately to scale (1" = 100 feet). The site plan shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the developer;
(2) The proposed name and location of the subdivision;
(3) The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be subdivided;
(4) The approximate total acreage of the proposed subdivision;
(5) The tentative street and lot arrangement;
(6) Topographic lines;
(7) A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to the
neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads and waterways;
(8) The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and adjoining
it, including the streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted tracts;
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-4
(9) The zoning classification(s) of the tract and of adjacent tracts;
(10) Any impact the proposed development will have on any environmentally sensitive
areas;
(11) Any other information the developer believes necessary to obtain the informal
opinion of the administrator as to the proposed subdivision's compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
The administrator shall meet with the developer as soon as conveniently possible to
review the site plan.
(c) Before submitting an application for any other permit, developers are strongly
encouraged to consult with the administrator concerning the application of this chapter to the
proposed development.
Section 51 Staff Consultation After Application Submitted.
(a) Upon receipt of a formal application for a zoning, special use, or conditional use permit,
or minor plat approval, the administrator shall review the application and confer with the applicant to
ensure that he understands the administrator's interpretation of the applicable requirements of this
chapter, that he has submitted all of the information that he intends to submit, and that the
application represents precisely and completely what he proposes to do.
(b) If the application is for a special use or conditional use permit, the administrator shall
place the application on the agenda of the appropriate board when the applicant indicates that the
application is as complete as he intends to make it. However, as provided in Sections 56 and 57, if
the administrator believes that the application is incomplete, he shall recommend to the appropriate
board that the application be denied on that basis.
(c) If the administrator determines that the development for which a special use or
conditional use permit is requested will have or may have substantial impact on surrounding
properties, he shall require that (i) the applicant notify, at a minimum, all adjoining property owners,
at least ten days in advance, of an informal information meeting and (ii) the applicant conduct the
informational meeting to discuss the proposed development with the adjoining property owners. The
purpose of the informational meeting is to involve those property owners most likely impacted by a
proposed project in the early stages of the development process. Consequently, the informational
meeting should be held prior to the public hearing date established for the permit request.
(d) Without limiting the generality of subsection (c), the administrator shall require the
applicant to hold an informational meeting when:
(1) the request for a special use or conditional use permit involves a residential
project of 25 or more dwelling units;
(2) the request for a special use or conditional use permit involves a non-residential
project containing 10 acres or more.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-5
Section 52 Zoning Permits.
(a) A completed application form for a zoning permit shall be submitted to the administrator
by filing a copy of the application with the administrator.
(b) The administrator shall issue the zoning permit unless he finds, after reviewing the
application and consulting with the applicant as provided in Section 50, that:
(1) The requested permit is not within his jurisdiction according to the Table of
Permissible Uses; or
(2) The application is incomplete; or
(3) If completed as proposed in the application, the development will not comply with
one or more requirements of this chapter (not including those requirements
concerning which a variance has been granted or those the applicant is not
required to comply with under the circumstances specified in Article VIII,
Nonconforming Situations).
(c) If the administrator determines that the development for which a zoning permit is
requested will have or may have substantial impact on surrounding properties, he shall, at least ten
days before taking final action on the permit request, send a written notice to those persons who
have listed for taxation real property any portion of which is within 100 feet of the lot that is the
subject of the application, informing them that:
(1) An application has been filed for a permit authorizing identified property to be
used in a specified way;
(2) All persons wishing to comment on the application should contact the
administrator by a certain date; and
(3) Persons wishing to be informed of the outcome of the application should send a
written request for such notification to the administrator.
Section 53 Authorizing Use or Occupancy Before Completion of Development Under
Zoning Permit.
In cases when, because of weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the
zoning permit recipient (exclusive of financial hardship), it would be unreasonable to require the
zoning permit recipient to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the
intended use of the property or occupying any buildings, the administrator may authorize the
commencement of the intended use or the occupancy of buildings (insofar as the requirements of
this chapter are concerned) if the permit recipient provides an adequately secured completion bond
or other security satisfactory to the administrator to ensure that all of the requirements of this chapter
will be fulfilled within a reasonable period (not to exceed twelve months) determined by the
administrator. The bond and security shall be reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney,
however, prior to the administrator authorizing the intended use or occupancy.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-6
Section 54 Special Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits.
(a) An application for a special use permit shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment by
filing a copy of the application with the administrator.
(b) An application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted to the Council by filing a
copy of the application with the administrator.
(c) Subject to subsection (d), the Board of Adjustment or the Council, respectively, shall
issue the requested permit unless it concludes, based upon the information submitted at the
hearing, that:
(1) The requested permit is not within its jurisdiction according to the table of
permissible uses; or
(2) The application is incomplete; or
(3) If completed as proposed in the application, the development will not comply with
one or more requirements of this chapter (not including those the applicant is
not required to comply with under the circumstances specified in Article VIII,
Nonconforming Situations); or
(d) Even if the permit issuing board finds that the application complies with all other
provisions of this chapter, it may still deny the permit if it concludes, based upon the information
submitted at the hearing, that if completed as proposed, the development, more probably than not:
(1) Will materially endanger the public health or safety; or
(2) Will substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property; or
(3) Will not be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located; or
(4) Will not be in general conformity with the land use plan, thoroughfare plan, or
other plan officially adopted by the Council.
(e) No special use nor conditional use permit shall be approved until a public hearing has
been held by the permit issuing board.
(f) The administrator shall publish a notice of the public hearing once a week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper having general circulation in the area. The notice shall be
published for the first time not less than ten days nor more than twenty-five days before the date
affixed for the hearing. In computing this period, the date of publication shall not be counted but the
date of the hearing shall be.
(g) The administrator shall mail written notice of the public hearing to the owners of all
properties involved in the permit request as well as the owners of all properties any portion of which
is within 100 feet of the property involved in the permit request.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-7
(h) The administrator shall also post notices of the public hearing in the vicinity of the
property involved in the permit request and take any other action deemed by the administrator to be
useful or appropriate to give notice of the public hearing on any permit request.
(i) The notice required by this section shall:
(1) State the date, time, and place of the public hearing;
(2) Summarize the nature and character of the permit request;
(3) Reasonably identify the property affected by the permit request;
(4) State that the full permit request application can be reviewed at the office of the
administrator; and
(5) State that substantial changes in the permit request may be made following the
public hearing.
(j) The administrator shall make every reasonable effort to comply with the notice
provisions set forth in this section. However, it is the permit issuing board's intention that failure to
comply with any of the notice provisions (except those set forth in subsection (f)) shall not render
any permit request invalid.
(k) At the conclusion of the public hearing, the permit issuing board may proceed to vote on
the permit request, refer it to a committee for further study, or take any other action consistent with
its usual rules of procedure.
(l) The permit issuing board shall be required to take final action on a permit request within
180 days of the date the permit application fee is paid to the town, but it should proceed as
expeditiously as practicable on permit requests since inordinate delays can result in the applicant
incurring unnecessary costs.
(m) Decision of the permit issuing board to be filed in the office of the administrator the
working day following the decision. (Amended 2/12/91)
(n) Special use and conditional use permits must be recorded with the Chowan County
Register of Deeds in the chain of title.
Section 55 Burden of Presenting Evidence; Burden of Persuasion.
(a) The burden of presenting a complete application (as described in Section 49) to the
permit issuing board shall be upon the applicant. However, unless the board informs the applicant at
the hearing in what way the application is incomplete and offers the applicant an opportunity to
complete the application (either at that meeting or at a continuation hearing), the application shall be
presumed to be complete.
(b) Once a completed application has been submitted, the burden of presenting evidence
to the permit issuing board sufficient to lead it to conclude that the application should be denied for
any reasons stated in Subdivision 54© shall be upon the party or parties urging this position, unless
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-8
the information presented by the applicant in his application and at the public hearing is sufficient to
justify a reasonable conclusion that a reason exists to so deny the application.
(c) The burden of persuasion on the issue of whether the development, if completed as
proposed, will comply with the requirements of this chapter remains at all times on the applicant.
The burden of persuasion on the issue of whether the application should be turned down for any of
the reasons set forth in subdivision 54(d) rests on the party or parties urging that the requested
permit should be denied.
Section 56 Recommendations on Special Use Permit Applications.
(a) When presented to the Board of Adjustment at the hearing, the application for a special
use permit shall be accompanied by a report setting forth the administrator's proposed findings
concerning the application's compliance with Section 49 (Application To Be Complete) and the other
requirements of this chapter, as well as the administrator's recommendations for additional
requirements to be imposed by the Board of Adjustment.
(b) If the administrator proposes a finding or conclusion that the application fails to comply
with Section 49 or any other requirement of this chapter, it shall identify the requirement in question
and specifically state supporting reasons for the proposed findings or conclusions.
(c) The Board of Adjustment may, by general rule applicable to all cases or any class of
cases, or on a case by case basis, refer applications to the Planning Board to obtain its
recommendations.
Section 57 Recommendations on Conditional Use Permits.
(a) Before being presented to the Council, an application for a conditional use permit shall
be referred to the Planning Board for action in accordance with this section. The Council may not
hold a public hearing on a conditional use permit application until the Planning Board has had an
opportunity to consider the application pursuant to standard agenda procedures. In addition, at the
request of the Planning Board, the Council may continue the public hearing to allow the Planning
Board more time to consider or reconsider the application.
(b) When presented to the Planning Board, the application shall be accompanied by a
report setting forth the administrator's proposed findings concerning the application's compliance
with Section 49 and other requirements of this chapter, as well as the administrator's
recommendations for additional requirements to be imposed by the Council. If the administrator's
report proposes a finding or conclusion that the application fails to comply with Section 49 or any
other requirement of this chapter, it shall identify the requirement in question and specifically state
supporting reasons for the proposed findings or conclusions.
(c) The Planning Board shall consider the application and the attached administrator's
report in a timely fashion, and may, in its discretion, hear from the applicant or members of the
public.
(d) After reviewing the application, the Planning Board shall report to the Council whether it
concurs in whole or in part with the administrator's proposed findings and conditions, and to the
extent there are differences the Planning Board shall propose its own recommendations and the
reasons therefore.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-9
(e) In response to the Planning Board's recommendations, the applicant may modify his
application prior to submission to the Council, and the administrator may likewise revise his
recommendations.
Section 58 Council Action on Conditional Use Permits.
In considering whether to approve an application for a conditional use permit, the Council
shall proceed according to the following format:
(1) The Council shall consider whether the application is complete. If no member
moves that the application be found incomplete (specifying either the particular
type of information lacking or the particular requirement with respect to which the
application is incomplete) then this shall be taken as an affirmative finding by the
Council that the application is complete.
(2) The Council shall consider whether the application complies with all of the
applicable requirements of this chapter. If a motion to this effect passes, the
Council need not make further findings concerning such requirements. If such a
motion fails or is not made then a motion shall be made that the application be
found not in compliance with one or more of the requirements of this chapter.
Such a motion shall specify the particular requirements the application fails to
meet. Separate votes may be taken with respect to each requirement not met by
the application. It shall be conclusively presumed that the application complies
with all requirements not found by the Council to be unsatisfied through this
process.
(3) If the Council concludes that the application fails to comply with one or more
requirements of this chapter, the application shall be denied. If the Council
concludes that all such requirements are met, it shall issue the permit unless it
adopts a motion to deny the application for one or more of the reasons set forth
in Subsection 54(d). Such a motion shall propose specific findings, based upon
the evidence submitted, justifying such a conclusion.
Section 59 Board of Adjustment Action on Special Use Permits.
In considering whether to approve an application for a special use permit, the Board of
Adjustment shall proceed in the same manner as the Council when considering conditional use
permit applications (Section 58), except that the format of the Board of Adjustment's proceedings
will differ as a result of the four-fifths voting requirement set forth in Subsection 32(a).
(1) The board shall consider whether the application is complete. If the board
concludes that the application is incomplete and the applicant refuses to provide
the necessary information, the application shall be denied. A motion to this
effect shall specify either the particular type of information lacking or the
particular requirement with respect to which the application is incomplete. A
motion to this effect, concurred in by four members of the board, shall constitute
the board's finding on this issue. If a motion to this effect is not made and
concurred in by at least four members, this shall be taken as an affirmative
finding by the board that the application is complete.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-10
(2) The board shall consider whether the application complies with all of the
applicable requirements of this chapter. If a motion to this effect passes by the
necessary four-fifths vote, the board need not make further findings concerning
such requirements.
If such a motion fails to receive the necessary four-fifths vote or is not made,
then a motion shall be made that the application be found not in compliance with
one or more requirements of this chapter. Such a motion shall specify the
particular requirements the application fails to meet. A separate vote may be
taken with respect to each requirement not met by the application, and the vote
of the number of members equal to more than one fifth of the board membership
(excluding vacant seats) in favor of such a motion shall be sufficient to constitute
such motion a finding of the board. It shall be conclusively presumed that the
application complies with all requirements not found by the board to be
unsatisfied through this process. As provided in Subsection 54(c), if the board
concludes that the application fails to meet one or more of the requirements of
this chapter, the application shall be denied.
(3) If the board concludes that all such requirements are met, it shall issue the
permit unless it adopts a motion to deny the application for one or more of the
reasons set forth in Subsection 54(d). Such a motion shall propose specific
findings, based upon the evidence submitted, justifying such a conclusion. Since
such a motion is not in favor of the applicant, it is carried by a simple majority
vote.
Section 60 Additional Requirements on Special Use and Conditional Use Permits.
(a) Subject to subsection (b), in granting a special or conditional use permit, the Board of
Adjustment or Town Council, respectively, may attach to the permit such reasonable
requirements in addition to those specified in this chapter as will ensure that the development in
its proposed location:
(1) Will not endanger the public health or safety;
(2) Will not injure the value of adjoining or abutting property;
(3) Will be in harmony with the area in which it is located; and
(4) Will be in conformity with the land use plan, thoroughfare plan, or other plan
officially adopted by the Council.
(b) The permit-issuing board may not attach additional conditions that modify or alter the
specific requirements set forth in this ordinance unless the development in question presents
extraordinary circumstances that justify the variation from the specified requirements.
(c) Without limiting the foregoing, the permit-issuing board may attach to a permit a
condition limiting the permit to a specified duration.
(d) All additional conditions or requirements shall be entered on the permit.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-11
(e) All additional conditions or requirements authorized by this section are enforceable in
the same manner and to the same extent as any other applicable requirement of this ordinance.
(f) A vote may be taken on application conditions or requirements before consideration of
whether the permit should be denied for any of the reasons set forth in Subsections 54 (c) or (d).
Section 61 Authorizing Use, Occupancy, or Sale Before Completion of Development Under
Special Use of Conditional Use Permits.
(a) In cases when, because of weather conditions or other factors beyond the control of the
special use or conditional use permit recipient (exclusive of financial hardship) it would be
unreasonable to require the permit recipient to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter
before commencing the intended use of the property or occupying any buildings or selling lots in a
subdivision, the permit issuing board may authorize the commencement of the intended use or the
occupancy of buildings or the sale of subdivision lots (insofar as the requirements of this chapter are
concerned) if the permit recipient provides an adequately secured completion bond or other security
satisfactory to the board to ensure that all of these requirements will be fulfilled within a reasonable
period (not to exceed twelve months). The proposed completion bond and security shall be
reviewed and approved by the Town Attorney, however, prior to the permit issuing board authorizing
the intended use or occupancy.
(b) When the board imposes additional requirements upon the permit recipient in
accordance with Section 60 or when the developer proposes in the plans submitted to install
amenities beyond those required by this chapter, the board may authorize the permittee to
commence the intended use of the property or to occupy any building or to sell any subdivision lots
before the additional requirements are fulfilled or the amenities installed if it specifies a date by
which or a schedule according to which such requirements must be met or each amenity installed
and if it concludes that compliance will be ensured as the result of any one or more of the following:
(1) A completion bond and security satisfactory to the Town Attorney is furnished;
(2) A condition is imposed establishing an automatic expiration date on the permit,
thereby ensuring that the permit recipient's compliance will be reviewed when
application for renewal is made;
(3) The nature of the requirements or amenities is such that sufficient assurance of
compliance is given by Section 114 (Penalties and Remedies For Violations) and
Section 115 (Permit Revocation).
(c) With respect to subdivisions in which the developer is selling only undeveloped lots, the
Council may authorize final plat approval and the sale of lots before all the requirements of this
chapter are fulfilled if the subdivider provides a completion bond and security satisfactory to the
Town Attorney to ensure that all of these requirements will be fulfilled within not more than twelve
months after final plat approval.
Section 62 Completing Developments in Phases.
(a) If a development is constructed in phases or stages in accordance with this section,
then, subject to subsection (c), the provisions of Section 47 (No Occupancy, Use, or Sale of Lots
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-12
Until Requirements Fulfilled) and Section 61 (exceptions to Section 47) shall apply to each phase as
if it were the entire development.
(b) As a prerequisite to taking advantage of the provisions of subsection (a), the developer
shall submit plans that clearly show the various phases or stages of the proposed development and
the requirements of this chapter that will be satisfied with respect to each phase or stage.
(c) If a development that is to be built in phases or stages includes improvements that are
designed to relate to, benefit, or be used by the entire development (such as a swimming pool or
tennis courts in a residential development) then, as part of his application for development approval,
the developer shall submit a proposed schedule for completion of such improvements. The
schedule shall relate completion of such improvements to completion of one or more phases or
stages of the entire development. Once a schedule has been approved and made part of the permit
by the permit issuing authority, no land may be used, no buildings may be occupied, and no
subdivision lots may be sold except in accordance with the schedule approved as part of the permit,
provided that:
(1) If the improvement is one required by this chapter then the developer may utilize
the provisions of Subsections 61(a) or 61(c);
(2) If the improvement is an amenity not required by this chapter or is provided in
response to a condition imposed by the board, then the developer may utilize the
provisions of Subsection 61(b).
Section 63 Expiration of Permits.
(a) Zoning, special use, and sign permits shall expire automatically if, within one year after
the issuance of such permits:
(1) The use authorized by such permits has not commenced, in circumstances
where no substantial construction, erection, alteration, excavation, demolition, or
similar work is necessary before commence-ment of such use; or
(2) Less than ten percent of the total cost of all construction, erection, alteration,
excavation, demolition, or similar work on any development authorized by such
permits has been completed on the site. With respect to phased development
(see Section 62), this requirement shall apply only to the first phase.
(b) If, after some physical alteration to land or structures begins to take place, such work is
discontinued for a period of one year, then the permit authorizing such work shall immediately
expire. However, expiration of the permit shall not affect the provisions of Section 64.
(c) The permit issuing authority may extend for a period up to six months the date when a
zoning, special use, or sign permit would otherwise expire pursuant to subsections (a) or (b) if it
concludes that (i) the permit has not yet expired, (ii) the permit recipient has proceeded with due
diligence and in good faith, and (iii) conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant a
new application. Successive extensions may be granted for periods up to six months upon the
same findings. All such extensions may be granted without resort to the formal processes and fees
required for a new permit.
(d) For purposes of this section, the permit within the jurisdiction of the Council or the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-13
Board of Adjustment is issued when such board votes to approve the application and issue the
permit. A permit within the jurisdiction of the zoning administrator is issued when the earlier of the
following takes place:
(1) A copy of the fully executed permit is delivered to the permit recipient, and
delivery is accomplished when the permit is hand delivered or mailed to the
permit applicant; or
(2) The administrator notifies the permit applicant that the application has been
approved and that all that remains before a fully executed permit can be
delivered is for the applicant to take certain specified actions, such as having the
permit executed by the property owner so it can be recorded if required under
subsection 64(b).
(e) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of Article VIII (Nonconforming Situations), this
section shall be applicable to permits issued prior to the date this section becomes effective.
(f) Conditional use permits shall expire within one year or, if applicable, at the end of the
vesting period established in accordance with Section 328, Vested Right. (Amended 6/13/95)
Section 64 Effect of Permit on Successors and Assigns.
(a) Zoning, special use, conditional use and sign permits authorize the permittee to make
use of land and structures in a particular way. Such permits are transferable. However, so long as
the land or structures or any portion thereof covered under a permit continues to be used for the
purposes for which the permit was granted, then:
(1) No person (including successors or assigns of the person who obtained the permit)
may make use of the land or structures covered under such permit for the purposes
authorized in the permit except in accordance with all the terms and requirements
of that permit; and
(2) The terms and requirements of the permit apply to and restrict the use of land or
structures covered under the permit, not only with respect to all persons having any
interest in the property at the time the permit was obtained, but also with respect to
persons who subsequently obtain any interest in all or part of the covered property
and wish to use it for or in connection with purposes other than those for which the
permit was originally issued, so long as the persons who subsequently obtain an
interest in the property had actual or record notice (as provided in subsection (b)) of
the existence of the permit at the time they acquired their interest.
(b) Whenever a zoning, special use or conditional use permit is issued to authorize
development (other than single-family or two-family residences) on a tract of land in excess of one
acre, nothing authorized by the permit may be done until the record owner of the property signs a
written acknowledgement that the permit has been issued so that the permit may be recorded in the
Chowan County Registry and indexed under the record owner's name as grantor.
Section 65 Amendments to and Modifications of Permits.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-14
(a) Insignificant deviations from the permit (including approved plans) issued by the Town
Council, the Board of Adjustment, or the administrator are permissible and the administrator may
authorize such insignificant deviations. A deviation is insignificant if it has no discernible impact on
neighboring properties, the general public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed
development.
(b) Minor design modifications or changes in permits (including approved plans) are
permissible with the approval of the permit issuing authority. Such permission may be obtained
without a formal application, public hearing, or payment of any additional fee. For purposes of this
section, minor design modifications or changes are those that have no substantial impact on
neighboring properties, the general public, or those intended to occupy or use the proposed
development.
(c) All other requests for changes in approved plans will be processed as new applications.
If such requests are required to be acted upon by the Council or Board of Adjustment, new
conditions may be imposed in accordance with Section 60, but the applicant retains the right to
reject such additional conditions by withdrawing his request for an amendment and may then
proceed in accordance with the previously issued permit.
(d) The administrator shall determine whether amendments to and modifications of permits
fall within the categories set forth above in subsections (a), (b), and (c).
(e) A developer requesting approval of changes shall submit a written request for such
approval to the administrator, which request shall identify the changes. Approval of all changes
must be given in writing.
(f) Upon complaint to the Town Council from any person within 400 feet of a use allowed
by conditional use permit, the Town Council may initiate permit revocation proceedings in
accordance with the provisions of Section 115.
Section 66 Reconsideration of Board Action.
(a) Whenever (i) the Town Council disapproves a conditional use permit application, or (ii) the
Board of Adjustment disapproves an application for a special use permit or a variance, on any basis
other than the failure of the applicant to submit a complete application, such action may not be
reconsidered by the respective board at a later time unless the applicant clearly demonstrates that:
(1) Circumstances affecting the property that is the subject of the application have
substantially changed; or
(2) New information is available that could not with reasonable diligence have been
presented at a previous hearing. A request to be heard on this basis must be
filed with the administrator within the time period for an appeal to superior court
(see Section 116). However, such a request does not extend the period within
which an appeal must be taken.
(b) Notwithstanding subsection (a), the Council or Board of Adjustment may at any time
consider a new application affecting the same property as an application previously denied. A new
application is one that differs in some substantial way from the one previously considered.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-15
Section 67 Applications to be Processed Expeditiously.
Recognizing that inordinate delays in acting upon appeals or applications may impose
unnecessary costs on the appellant or applicant, the town shall make every reasonable effort to
process appeals and permit applications within 180 days of the date the permit application fee is
paid to the town, consistent with the need to ensure that all development conforms to the
requirements of this chapter.
Section 68 Maintenance of Common Areas, Improvements, and Facilities.
The recipient of any zoning, special use, conditional use, or sign permit, or his successor,
shall be responsible for maintaining all common areas, improvements or facilities required by this
chapter or any permit issued in accordance with its provisions, except those areas, improvements or
facilities with respect to which an offer of dedication to the public has been accepted by the
appropriate public authority. As illustrations, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this
means that private roads and parking areas, water and sewer lines, and recreational facilities must
be properly maintained so that they can be used in the manner intended, and required vegetation
and trees used for screening, landscaping, or shading must be replaced if they die or are destroyed.
Sections 69 through 75 Reserved.
Part II. Major and Minor Subdivisions
Section 76 Regulation of Subdivisions.
(a) Major subdivisions are subject to a two step approval process. Physical improvements
to the land to be subdivided are authorized by a conditional use permit as provided in Part I of Article
IV of this chapter, and sale of lots is permitted after final plat approval as provided in Section 79.
Minor subdivisions, except for those located within CD, CH, and CN zoning districts, only require a
one step approval process: final plat approval (in accordance with Section 78). Minor subdivisions
within CD, CH, and CN zoning districts shall follow the same review and approval procedures as
major subdivisions. (Amendment 3/99)
(b) All minor and major subdivision final plats shall include, at minimum, all the following
information: Zoning of Tract; Name of Subdivision; Name of Owners; Name of Surveyor, registration
number, certificate, and seal; exact boundaries of the tract shown; streets; block number and lot
number; building setbacks; easements; accurate scale; monument and control corners; names and
vicinity map; appropriate certificates; proper size 18” x 24”; Reproducible (in ink on mylar or black
slick, no sepia, paper, velum or linen, no sticky back certifications); additional information required
by NCGS 47-30 & 39-32.3. (Amended 1/14/03)
Section 77 No Subdivision Without Plat Approval.
(a) As provided in NCGS § 160A-375, no person may subdivide his land except in
accordance with all of the provisions of this chapter. In particular, no person may subdivide his land
unless and until a final plat of the subdivision has been approved in accordance with the provisions
of Section 78 or Section 79 and recorded in the Chowan County Registry.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-16
(b) Any parcel of land ten (10) acres or less may not be subdivided into more than three (3)
parcels of land unless a major subdivision approval has been applied for. For example, a person
may not buy three (3) acres of a ten (10) acre parcel then divide that parcel into three (3) parcels of
land. At no time may the original parcel be divided into more than three (3) parcels unless as stated
a major subdivision is applied for and approved.
(c) In accordance with NCGS 160A-373, the register of deeds shall not file or record a
plat of a subdivision of land located within the territorial jurisdiction of a city that has not been
approved in accordance with the provisions of the adopted ordinance. The owner of land shown on
a subdivision plat submitted for recording, or his authorized agent, shall sign a statement on the plat
stating whether or not any land shown thereon is within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of any
city.
(d) In accordance with NCGS 160A-375, if a city adopts an ordinance regulating the
subdivision of land as authorized herein, any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of
any land located within the jurisdiction of that city, thereafter, subdivides his land in violation of the
ordinance or transfers or sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing
a subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under such ordinance and
recorded in the office of the appropriate register of deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the
process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The city
may bring action for injunction of any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance, or sale of land, and
the court shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an injunction and order requiring the offending party
to comply with the subdivision ordinance. (Amended 5/14/91)
Section 78 Minor Subdivision Approval.
(a) The administrator shall approve or disapprove minor subdivision final plats, except for
those located within CD, CH, and CN zoning districts, in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Minor subdivisions within CD, CH, and CN zoning districts shall follow the same review and
approval procedures as major subdivisions (Section 79). (Amended 3/99)
(b) The applicant for minor subdivision plat approval, before complying with subsection (c),
shall submit a sketch plan to the administrator for a determination of whether the approval process
authorized by this section can be and should be utilized. The administrator may require the
applicant to submit whatever information is necessary to make this determination, including, but not
limited to, a copy of the tax map showing the land being subdivided and all lots previously
subdivided from that tract of land within the previous five years.
(c) Applicants for minor subdivision approval shall submit to the administrator a copy of a
plat conforming to the requirements set forth in Subsections 79(b) and (c) (as well as two prints of
such plat), except that a minor subdivision plat shall contain the following certificates in lieu of those
required in Section 80:
(1) Certificate of Ownership
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property described hereon, which
property is within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of the Town of Edenton,
and that I freely adopt this plan of subdivision.
_______________________ _________________________________
Date Owner
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-17
(2) Certificate of Approval
I hereby certify that the minor subdivision shown on this plat does not involve the
creation of new public streets or any change in existing public streets, that the
subdivision shown is in all respects in compliance with Chapter 21 of the
Edenton Town Code, and that therefore this plat has been approved by the land
use administrator, subject to its being recorded in the Chowan County Registry
within sixty days of the date below.
_____________________ ___________________________________
Date Land Use Administrator
(3) Flood Damage Prevention Certificate of Approval for Recording
I certify that the plat shown hereon complies with the Town of Edenton Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance requirements and is approved by Edenton for
recording in the Register of Deeds office.
_____________________ ___________________________________
Date Land Use Administrator
(4) A Certificate of Survey and Accuracy, in the form stated in Subdivision 80(5).
(d) The administrator shall take expeditious action on an application for minor subdivision
plat approval as provided in Section 67. However, either the administrator or the applicant may at
any time refer the application to the major subdivision approval process.
(e) Not more than a total of three lots may be created out of one tract using the minor
subdivision plat approval process, regardless of whether the lots are created at one time or over an
extended period of time.
(f) Subject to subsection (d), the administrator shall approve the proposed subdivision
unless the subdivision is not a minor subdivision as defined in Section 15 or the application or the
proposed subdivision fails to comply with subsection (e) or any other applicable requirement of this
chapter.
(g) If the subdivision is disapproved, the administrator shall promptly furnish the applicant
with a written statement of the reasons for disapproval.
(h) Approval of any plat is contingent upon the plat being recorded within sixty days after
the date the Certificate of Approval is signed by the administrator or his designee.
Section 79 Major Subdivision Approval Process.
(a) The administrator shall approve or disapprove major subdivision final plats and minor
subdivision plats located within CD, CH, and CN zoning districts in accordance with the provisions of
this section. (Amended 3/99)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-18
(b) The applicant for major subdivision plat approval shall submit to the administrator a final
plat, drawn in waterproof ink on a sheet made of material that will be acceptable to the Chowan
County Register of Deeds Office for recording purposes, and having the following dimensions, 18" x
24". When more than one sheet is required to include the entire subdivision, all sheets shall be
made of the same size and shall show appropriate references to other sheets of the subdivision.
The scale of the plat shall be at one (1) inch equals not more than one hundred (100) feet. The
applicant shall also submit five prints of the plat. (Amended 5/12/92)
(c) In addition to the appropriate endorsements, as provided in Section 80, the final plat
shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the subdivision, which name shall not duplicate the name of any
existing subdivision as recorded in the Chowan County Registry;
(2) The name of the subdivision owner or owners;
(3) The township, county and state where the subdivision is located; and
(4) The name of the surveyor and his registration number and the date of survey.
(5) The scale according to which the plat is drawn in feet per inch or scale ratio in
words or figures and bar graph;
(6) All of the additional information required by NCGS § 47-30 and NCGS § 39-32.3.
(d) The administrator shall approve the proposed plat unless he finds that the plat or the
proposed subdivision fails to comply with one or more of the requirements of this chapter or that the
final plat differs substantially from the plans and specifications approved in conjunction with the
conditional use permit that authorized the development of the subdivision.
(e) If the final plat is disapproved by the administrator, the applicant shall be furnished with
a written statement of the reasons for the disapproval.
(f) Approval of a final plat is contingent upon the plat being recorded within sixty days after
the approval certificate is signed by the administrator or his designee.
Section 80 Endorsements on Major Subdivision Plats.
All major subdivision plats shall contain the endorsements listed in Subdivisions (1), (2), and
(3) herein. The endorsement listed in Subdivision (4) shall appear on plats of all major subdivisions
located outside the corporate limits of the town but within the planning jurisdiction.
(1) Certificate of Approval
I hereby certify that all streets shown on this plat are within the Town of
Edenton's planning jurisdiction, all streets and other improvements shown on this
plat have been installed or completed or that their installation or completion
(within twelve months after the date below) has been assured by the posting of a
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-19
performance bond or other sufficient surety, and that the subdivision shown on
this plat is in all respects in compliance with Chapter 21 of the Edenton Town
Code, and therefore this plat has been approved by the Edenton land use
administrator, subject to its being recorded in the Chowan County Registry within
sixty days of the date below.
____________________ ___________________________________
Date Land Use Administrator
(2) Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property described hereon, which
property is located within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of the Town of
Edenton, that I hereby freely adopt this plan of subdivision and dedicate to public
use all areas shown on this plat as streets, alleys, walks, parks, open space, and
easements, except those specifically indicated as private, and that I will maintain
all such areas until the offer of dedication is accepted by the appropriate public
authority. All property shown on this plat as dedicated for a public use shall be
deemed to be dedicated for any other public use authorized by law when such
other use is approved by the Edenton Town Council in the public interest.
_____________________ ___________________________________
Date Owner
_________________________________
(Notarized)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-20
(3) Certificate of Improvements
If the required improvements are completed prior to the submission of the Final
Plat, the following certificate shall be lettered on the plat above the signature of
the Town Engineer:
“Know all men by these present, that I hereby certify that on this, the ___ day of
__________, 20___, all of the improvements as required by the Edenton
subdivision regulations have been installed by the developer in an approved
manner.”
If the required improvements are not completed prior to the submission of the
Final Plat, the following certificate shall be lettered on the plat above the
signature of the City Manager:
“Know all men by these presents, that I hereby certify performance guarantees
sufficient to secure the amount of $__________ has been posted with the Town
of Edenton by the developer, thereby guaranteeing that all improvements
required by the Edenton subdivision regulations shall be constructed. Such
improvements shall be completed within ___ days from the date of this
statement.”
(4) Flood Damage Prevention Certificate of Approval for Recording
I certify that the plat shown hereon complies with the Town of Edenton Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance requirements and is approved by Edenton for
recording in the Register of Deeds office.
_____________________ ___________________________________
Date Land Use Administrator
(5) Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
I, _____________________________, certify that this plat was drawn under my
supervision from an actual survey made under my supervision (deed description
recorded in Book ______, page ____, etc.) (other); that the boundaries not
surveyed are clearly indicted as drawn from information found in Book ______,
page _____; that the ratio of precision as calculated is 1: _____; that this plat
was prepared in accordance with NCGS 47-30, as amended. Witness my
original signature, registration number and seal this _____ day of _________,
A.D., 19_____.
Seal or Stamp
Surveyor
Registration Number
The certificate of the Notary shall read as follows:
'North Carolina, ______________ County
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-21
I, a Notary Public of the County and State aforesaid, certify that
_______________________, a registered land surveyor, personally appeared
before me this day and acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument.
Witness my hand and official stamp or seal, this ______ day of _________,
19___.
Seal or Stamp _____________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires (Amended 6/13/95)
(6) Division of Highways District Engineer Certificate
I hereby certify that the public streets shown on this plat have been completed, or
that a performance bond or other sufficient surety has been posted to guarantee
their completion, in accordance with at least the minimum specifications and
standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of
Highways, for acceptance of subdivision streets on the state highway system for
maintenance.
_____________________ ___________________________________
Date District Engineer
(7) CAMA Consistency Certificate
I hereby certify that this subdivision conforms to the standards of the North
Carolina Coastal Area Management Act of 1974 and is _____ / is not _____
located within any area of environmental concern.
_____________________ ___________________________________
Date Local Permit Officer
(8) Offer of Dedication
Town Council approved offer of dedication by resolution adopted at meeting on
_____________, 20___.
_____________________ ___________________________________
Date Town Clerk
Section 81 Plat Approval Not Acceptance of Dedication Offers.
Approval of a plat does not constitute acceptance by the town of the offer of dedication of any
streets, sidewalks, parks or other public facilities shown on a plat. However, the town may accept
any such offer of dedication by resolution of the Council or by actually exercising control over and
maintaining such facilities.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-22
Section 82 Guarantees
(a) Performance Guarantees. In lieu of requiring the completion, installation, and
dedication of all improvements prior to final plat approval, the Town of Edenton may enter into an
agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete any remaining
required improvements as specified by the approved preliminary plat for that portion of the
subdivision to be shown on the final plat within a mutually agreed upon specified time period not to
exceed one (1) year. Once agreed upon by both parties and the security required herein is
provided, the final plat may be approved by the Board of Commissioners, if all other requirements of
this Ordinance are met. The town shall require a certified cost estimate from a licensed contractor
or engineer for the cost of completion of such improvements.
(1) The subdivider shall provide one of the following Performance Guarantees,
elected at the subdivider’s discretion, in lieu of installation:
(i) Surety bond issued by any company authorized to do business in this
State.
(ii) Letter of credit issued by any financial institution licensed to do
business in this State.
(iii) Other form of guarantee that provides equivalent security to a surety
bond or letter of credit.
(2) The performance guarantee shall be returned or released, as appropriate, in
a timely manner upon the acknowledgment by the town that the
improvements for which the performance guarantee is being required are
complete. If the improvements are not complete and the current
performance guarantee is expiring, the performance guarantee shall be
extended, or a new performance guarantee issued, for an additional period
until such required improvements are complete. A developer shall
demonstrate reasonable, good faith progress toward completion of the
required improvements that are the subject of the performance guarantee or
any extension. The form of any extension shall remain at the election of the
developer.
(3) The amount of the performance guarantee shall not exceed one hundred
twenty-five percent (125%) of the reasonably estimated cost of completion at
the time the performance guarantee is issued. Any extension of the
performance guarantee necessary to complete required improvements shall
not exceed one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the reasonably
estimated cost of completion of the remaining incomplete improvements still
outstanding at the time the extension is obtained.
(4) The performance guarantee shall only be used for completion of the required
improvements and not for repairs or maintenance after completion.
(5) The town may release a portion of any security posted as the improvements
are completed and recommended for approval by the UDO Administrator.
Within thirty (30) days after receiving the UDO Administrator’s
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 4-23
recommendation, the Board of Commissioners shall approve or not approve
said improvements. If the Board of Commissioners approves said
improvements, then it shall immediately release any security posted.
(6) For subdivisions which are underwritten or constructed with federal funds
and for which the specifications for facilities or improvements are equal to or
of a higher standard than those required by the town, the bond-posting
requirement may be waived and the final plat approved prior to completion of
facilities or improvements.
(b) Defects Guarantees. The owner of the subdivision shall require the contractor
constructing streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, and/or water and sewer lines to
give bond guaranteeing the work against defects.
(c) Claims. No person shall have or may claim any rights under or to any performance
guarantee provided pursuant to this section or in the proceeds of any such performance guarantee
other than the following:
(1) The local government to whom such performance guarantee is provided.
(2) The developer at whose request or for whose benefit such performance
guarantee is given.
(3) The person or entity issuing or providing such performance guarantee at the
request of or for the benefit of the developer.
Section 83 Maintenance of Dedicated Areas Until Acceptance.
As provided in Section 68, all facilities and improvements with respect to which the owner
makes an offer of dedication to public use shall be maintained by the owner until such offer of
dedication is accepted by the appropriate public authority.
Section 84 Commercial Subdivisions.
Major subdivisions of land, in any zoning district, are allowed by conditional use permit. Thus,
a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision should be reviewed according to the procedures
outlined for a conditional use permit. Building development on an individual lot within a commercial
or industrial subdivision approved through the conditional use permit process would, at the time of
actual building construction, require a separate approval. Thus, parking, signage, buffering, lot size,
etc. requirements for each lot would be determined based upon the specific proposed use of the lot.
All uses must conform to the underlying zone, and table of permissible uses. (Amended 2/09/93)
Sections 85 Subdivisions in the Historic District.
All subdivision of property within the locally designated Historic District is subject to the review
of the Edenton Historic Preservation Commission and may not be permitted without issuance of a
Certificate of Appropriateness according to the procedures outlined in Article XI, Section 168
Historic Overlay District Requirements. (Amended 08/09/2005)
Sections 86 through 90 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 5-1
ARTICLE V
APPEALS, VARIANCES, INTERPRETATIONS
Section 91 Appeals.
(a) Any person who has standing under NCGS 160A-393(d) or the Town may appeal a
decision of an administrative official charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance to the Board of
Adjustment. An appeal is taken by filing with the administrator and the Board of Adjustment a
written notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. A notice of appeal shall be considered filed
with the administrator and the Board of Adjustment when delivered to the administrator's office, and
the date and time of filing shall be entered on the notice by the administrator.
(b) The official who made the decision shall give written notice to the owner of the property
that is the subject of the decision and to the party who sought the decision, if different from the
owner. The written notice shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class
mail.
(c) The owner or other party shall have thirty days from receipt of the written notice within
which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing to appeal shall have thirty days from receipt
from any source of actual or constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.
(d) The official who made the decision shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment
all documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken.
The official shall also provide a copy of the record to the appellant and to the owner of the property
that is the subject of the appeal if the appellant is not the owner.
(e) An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays enforcement of the
action appealed from unless the official who made the decision certifies to the Board of Adjustment
after notice of appeal has been filed that because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would
cause immediate peril to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would
seriously interfere with enforcement of the Ordinance. In that case, enforcement proceedings shall
not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by a court. If enforcement
proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited hearing
of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within fifteen (15) days
after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting permit or
otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is consistent with the Ordinance shall not stay
the further review of an application for permits or permissions to use such property; in these
situations, the appellant may request and the Board of Adjustment may grant a stay of a final
decision of permit applications or building permits affected by the issue being appealed.
(f) Subject to the provisions of subsection (d), the Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
(g) The official who made the decision shall be present at the hearing as a witness. The
appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in the notice of appeal. If any party or
the Town would be unduly prejudiced by the presentation of matters not presented in the notice of
appeal, the Board of Adjustment shall continue the hearing. The Board of Adjustment may reverse
or affirm (wholly or partly) or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any order,
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 5-2
requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. The Board of Adjustment shall have
all the powers of the official who made the decision.
(h) When hearing an appeal pursuant to GS 160A-400.9(e) or any other appeal in the
nature of certiorari, the hearing shall be based on the record below and the scope of review shall be
as provided in GS 160A-393(k).
(i) The parties of an appeal that has been made under this subsection may request
mediation or other forms of alternative dispute resolution.
Section 92 Variances.
(a) An application for a variance shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment by filing a
copy of the application with the administrator. Applications shall be handled in the same manner as
applications for special use permits in conformity with the provisions of Sections 48, 49, and 56.
(b) A variance may be granted by the Board of Adjustment if it concludes that strict
enforcement of the ordinance would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships for the
applicant and that, by granting the variance, the spirit of the ordinance will be observed, public safety
and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. It may reach these conclusions if it finds that:
(1) Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the Ordinance.
It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no
reasonable use can be made of the property;
(2) The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as
location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances,
as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the
neighborhood may not be the basis for granting a variance;
(3) The hardship did not result from the applicant's or property owner’s own actions.
The act of purchasing property without knowledge that circumstances exist that
may justify the granting of a variance shall not be regarded as a self-created
hardship;
(4) The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the
Ordinance, such that public safety is secured and substantial justice is achieved;
and
(5) The variance will neither result in the extension of a nonconforming situation in
violation of Article VIII nor authorize the initiation of a nonconforming use of land.
(c) In granting variances, the Board of Adjustment may impose such reasonable conditions
as will ensure that the use of the property to which the variance applies will be as compatible as
practicable with the surrounding properties.
(d) A variance may be issued for an indefinite duration or for a specified duration only.
(e) The nature of the variance and any conditions attached to it shall be entered on the face
of the zoning permit, or the zoning permit may simply note the issuance of the variance and refer to
the written record of the variance for further information, and must be recorded with the Chowan
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 5-3
County Register of Deeds in the chain of title. All such conditions are enforceable in the same
manner as any other applicable requirement of this chapter.
Section 93 Variances From Floodplain or Floodway Requirements.
Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 92, a variance from any of the requirements set
forth in Article XVI, Part I may be granted by the Board of Adjustment only in accordance with the
provisions of Section 260.
Section 94 Interpretations.
(a) The Board of Adjustment is authorized to interpret the zoning map and to pass upon
disputed questions of lot lines or district boundary lines and similar questions. If such questions
arise in the context of an appeal from a decision of the administrator, they shall be handled as
provided in Section 91.
(b) An application for a map interpretation shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment by
filing a copy of the application with the office of the administrator. The application shall contain
sufficient information to enable the board to make the necessary interpretation.
(c) Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of alleys, streets,
highways, streams, or railroads shall be construed to follow such centerlines;
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines, town limits or
extraterritorial boundary lines, shall be construed as following such lines, limits or
boundaries;
(3) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such
shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as
following such shorelines;
(4) Where a district boundary divides a lot or where distances are not specifically
indicated on the Official Zoning Map, the boundary shall be determined by
measurement, using the scale of the Official Zoning Map;
(5) Where any street or alley is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the
regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to that
portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or
abandonment.
(d) Interpretations of the location of floodway and floodplain boundary lines may be made
by the administrator as provided in Section 258.
Section 95 Requests to be Heard Expeditiously.
As provided in Section 67, the Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide all appeals,
variance requests, and requests for interpretations as expeditiously as possible, consistent with the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 5-4
need to follow regularly established agenda procedures, provide notice in accordance with Article VI,
and obtain the necessary information to make sound decisions.
Section 96 Burden of Proof in Appeals and Variances.
(a) When an appeal is taken to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 91, the
administrator shall have the initial burden of presenting to the board sufficient evidence and
argument to justify the order or decision appealed from. The burden of presenting evidence and
argument to the contrary then shifts to the appellant, who shall also have the burden of persuasion.
(b) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to allow the Board of Adjustment to reach
the conclusions set forth in Subsection 92(b), as well as the burden of persuasion on those issues,
remains with the applicant seeking the variance.
Section 97 Board Action on Appeals and Variances.
The concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to grant a variance.
A majority of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-judicial matter or to determine
an appeal. For the purposes of this subsection, vacant positions on the Board and members who
are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered members of the board
for calculation of the requisite majority.
Sections 98 through 100 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 6-1
ARTICLE VI
HEARING PROCEDURES FOR APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS
Section 101 Hearing Required on Appeals and Applications.
(a) Before making a decision on an appeal or an application for a variance, special use
permit, or conditional use permit, or a petition from the administrator to revoke a special use permit
or conditional use permit, the Board of Adjustment or the Town Council as the case may be, shall
hold a hearing on the appeal or application.
(b) Subject to subsection (c), the hearing shall be open to the public and all persons
interested in the outcome of the appeal or application shall be given an opportunity to present
evidence and arguments and ask questions of persons who testify.
(c) The Board of Adjustment or Council may place reasonable and equitable limitations on
the presentation of evidence and arguments and the cross examination of witnesses so that the
matter at issue may be heard and decided without undue delay.
(d) The hearing board may continue the hearing until a subsequent meeting and may keep
the hearing open to take additional information up to the point a final decision is made. No further
notice of a continued hearing need be published unless a period of six weeks or more elapses
between hearing dates.
Section 102 Notice of Hearing.
The administrator shall give notice of any hearing required by Section 101 as follows:
(1) Notice shall be given to the appellant or applicant and any other person who
makes a written request for such notice by mailing to such persons a written
notice not later than ten days before the hearing.
(2) Notice shall be given to neighboring property owners by mailing a written notice
not later than ten days before the hearing to those persons who have listed for
taxation real property any portion of which is located within 100 feet of the lot that
is the subject of the application or appeal. Notice shall also be given by
prominently posting signs in the vicinity of the property that is the subject of the
proposed action. Such signs shall be posted not less than seven days prior to
the hearing.
(3) In the case of conditional use permits, notice shall be given to other potentially
interested persons by publishing notice in a newspaper having general
circulation in the area once a week for two successive weeks, not less than ten
days nor more than twenty-five days before the date for the hearing. (Amended
2/12/91)
(4) The notice required by this section shall state the date, time and place of the
hearing, reasonably identify the lot that is the subject of the application or appeal,
and give a brief description of the action requested or proposed.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 6-2
Section 103 Evidence.
(a) The provisions of this section apply to all hearings for which a notice is required by
Section 101.
(b) All persons who intend to present evidence to the decision-making board, rather than
arguments only, shall be sworn in by the Chair. The Chair of the Board or any member acting as
Chair and the Clerk to the Board are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter
coming before the Board. Any person who, while under oath during a proceeding before the
decision-making board, willfully swears falsely is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(c) All findings and conclusions necessary to the issuance or denial of the requested permit
or appeal (necessary findings) shall be based upon competent, substantial evidence. The term
“competent evidence,” as used in this subsection, shall not preclude reliance by the decision-making
board on evidence that would not be admissible under the rules of evidence as applied in the trial
division of the General Court of Justice if (1) the evidence was admitted without objection or (2) the
evidence appears to be sufficiently trustworthy and was admitted under such circumstances that it
was reasonable for the decision-making board to rely upon it. The term “competent evidence,” as
used in this subsection, shall not be deemed to include the opinion testimony of lay witnesses as to
any of the following:
(1) The use of property in a particular way would affect the value of other property.
(2) The increase in vehicular traffic resulting from a proposed development would
pose a danger to the public safety.
(3) Matters about which only expert testimony would generally be admissible under
the rules of evidence.
(d) The entirety of a quasi-judicial hearing and deliberation shall be conducted in open
session.
(e) Parties to a quasi-judicial hearing have a right to cross-examine witnesses.
(f) Factual findings must not be based on hearsay evidence which would be inadmissible
in a court of law.
(g) If a member of the decision-making board has prior or specialized knowledge about a
case, that knowledge should be disclosed to the rest of the decision-making board and parties at the
beginning of the hearing.
(h) The decision-making board through the Chair, or in the Chair’s absence, anyone acting
as the Chair may subpoena witnesses and compel the production of evidence. To request issuance
of a subpoena, persons with standing under GS 160A-393(d) may make a written request to the
Chair explaining why it is necessary for certain witnesses or evidence to be compelled. The Chair
shall issue requested subpoenas he or she determines to be relevant, reasonable in nature and
scope, and not oppressive. The Chair shall rule on any motion to quash or modify a subpoena.
Decisions regarding subpoenas made by the Chair may be appealed to the full decision-making
board. If a person fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued pursuant to this subsection, the
decision-making board or the party seeking the subpoena may apply to the General Court of Justice
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 6-3
for an order requiring that its subpoena be obeyed, and the court shall have jurisdiction to issue
these orders after notice to all property parties.
Section 104 Modification of Application at Hearing.
(a) ln response to questions or comments made in sworn testimony at the hearing, the
applicant may agree to modify his application, including the plans and specifications submitted.
(b) Unless such modifications are so substantial or extensive that the board cannot
reasonably be expected to perceive the nature and impact of the proposed changes without revised
plans before it, the board may approve the application with the stipulation that the permit will not be
issued until plans reflecting the agreed upon changes are submitted to the administrator.
Section 105 Record.
(a) A tape recording shall be made of all hearings required by Section 101, and such
recordings shall be kept as provided by state law. Accurate minutes shall also be kept of all such
proceedings. A transcript may be made, but is not required.
(b) , All documentary evidence, including any exhibits, presented at a hearing as well as all
other types of physical evidence shall be made a part of the record of the proceedings and shall be
kept by the town in accordance with NCGS 160A-393(I).
Section 106 Quasi-Judicial Decision.
The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within a reasonable time. Every
quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent, substantial evidence in the record. Each
quasi-judicial decision shall be reduced to writing and reflect the Board’s determination of contested
facts and their application to the applicable standards. The written decision shall be signed by the
Chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing
the written decision within the Clerk to the Board or such other office or official as this Ordinance
specifies. The decision of the Board shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by
first-class mail to the applicant, property owner, and to any person who has submitted a written
request for a copy, prior to the date the decision becomes effective. The person required to provide
notice shall certify that proper notice has been made.
Sections 107 through 110 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 7-1
ARTICLE VII
ENFORCEMENT AND REVIEW
Section 111 Complaints Regarding Violations.
Whenever the administrator receives a written, signed complaint alleging a violation of this
ordinance, he shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is warranted, and inform the
complainant in writing what actions have been or will be taken.
Section 112 Persons Liable.
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof and any architect,
builder, contractor, agent or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains
any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this ordinance may be held responsible for the
violation and suffer the penalties and be subject to the remedies herein provided.
Section 113 Procedures Upon Discovery of Violations.
(a) If the administrator finds that any provision of this ordinance is being violated, he shall
send a written notice to the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Additional written notices may be sent at
the administrator's discretion.
(b) The final written notice (and the initial written notice may be the final notice) shall state
what action the administrator intends to take if the violation is not corrected and shall advise that the
administrator's decision or order may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with
Section 91.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases when delay would seriously threaten the effective
enforcement of this ordinance or pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the
administrator may seek enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the penalties or
remedies authorized in Section 114.
(d) Limitations. Enforcement actions must be initiated within a prescribed timeframe based on
whether the violation is known to the Town, or could have been known to them.
(1) Five Years. If the Town of Edenton knew – directly through personnel or indirectly
through public records – about the violation, the time limit for filing a court action is
five years. The clock for legal action starts running on the earlier of the following:
(i) The facts constituting the violation are known to the Town Council, an agent,
or an employee of the Town of Edenton.
(ii) The violation can be determined from the public record of the Town of
Edenton.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 7-2
(2) Seven Years. If the violation is unknown to the Town of Edenton, but it is visible to
the public, then the time limit for filing a court action is seven years. In these cases,
the clock for legal action starts running on the earlier of the following:
(i) The violation is apparent from a public right-of-way.
(ii) The violation is in plain view from a place to which the public is invited.
Section 114 Penalties and Remedies for Violations.
(a) Violations of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violations of any conditions and safeguards established in connection with
grants of variances or special use or conditional use permits, shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of up to fifty dollars per day that the violation continues to exist, or a maximum
thirty days imprisonment.
(b) Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of this ordinance or a failure to comply
with any of its requirements, including violations of any conditions and safeguards established in
connection with the grants of variances or special use or conditional use permits, shall also subject
the offender to a civil penalty of fifty dollars. If the offender fails to pay this penalty within ten days
after being cited for a violation, the penalty may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the
nature of debt. A civil penalty may not be appealed to the Board of Adjustment if the offender was
sent a final notice of violation in accordance with Section 113 and did not take an appeal to the
Board of Adjustment within the prescribed time.
(c) This ordinance may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action.
(d) Each day that any violation continues after notification by the administrator that such
violation exists shall be considered a separate offense for purposes of the penalties and remedies
specified in this section.
(e) Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to
enforce this ordinance.
Section 115 Permit Revocation.
(a) A zoning, sign, special use, or conditional use permit may be revoked by the permit
issuing authority (in accordance with the provisions of this section) if the permit recipient fails to
develop or maintain the property in accordance with the plans submitted, the requirements of this
ordinance, or any additional requirements lawfully imposed by the permit issuing board.
(b) Before a conditional use or special use permit may be revoked, all of the notice and
hearing and other requirements of Article VI shall be complied with. The notice shall inform the
permit recipient of the alleged grounds for the revocation.
(1) The burden of presenting evidence sufficient to authorize the permit-issuing
authority to conclude that a permit should be revoked for any of the reasons set
forth in subsection (a) shall be upon the party advocating that position. The
burden of persuasion shall also be upon that party.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 7-3
(2) A motion to revoke a permit shall include, insofar as practicable, a statement
of the specific reasons or findings of fact that support the motion.
(c) Before a zoning or sign permit may be revoked, the administrator shall give the permit
recipient ten days notice of intent to revoke the permit and shall inform the recipient of the alleged
reasons for the revocation and of his right to obtain an informal hearing on the allegations. If the
permit is revoked, the administrator shall provide to the permittee a written statement of the decision
and the reasons therefor.
(d) No person may continue to make use of land or buildings in the manner authorized by any
zoning, sign, special use or conditional use permit after such permit has been revoked in
accordance with this section.
Section 116 Judicial Review.
(a) Every decision of the Town Council granting or denying a conditional use permit and every
final decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to review by the Superior Court of Chowan
County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari pursuant to NCGS 160A-393.
(b) A petition for review shall be filed with the Chowan County Clerk of Superior Court by the
later of thirty (30) days after the decision is effective or after a written copy thereof is give in
accordance with Section 106. When first class mail is used to deliver notice, three (3) days shall be
added to the time to file the petition.
(c) A copy of the writ of certiorari shall be served upon the Town of Edenton.
Sections 117 through 120 Reserved.

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-1
ARTICLE VIII
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
Section 121 Definitions.
Unless otherwise specifically provided or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this article.
(1) Dimensional Nonconformity. A nonconforming situation that occurs when the
height, size, or minimum floor space of a structure or the relationship between an
existing building or buildings and other buildings or lot lines does not conform to
the regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located.
(2) Effective Date of This Chapter. Whenever this article refers to the effective date
of this chapter, the reference shall be deemed to include the effective date of any
amendments to this chapter if the amendment, rather than this chapter as
originally adopted, creates a nonconforming situation.
(3) Expenditure. A sum of money paid out in return for some benefit or to fulfill
some obligation. The term also includes binding contractual commitments to
make future expenditures, as well as any other substantial changes in position.
(4) Nonconforming Lot. A lot existing at the effective date of this chapter (and not
created for the purposes of evading the restrictions of this chapter) that does not
meet the minimum area requirement of the district in which the lot is located.
(5) Nonconforming Project. Any structure, development, or undertaking that is
incomplete at the effective date of this chapter and would be inconsistent with
any regulation applicable to the district in which it is located if completed as
proposed or planned.
(6) Nonconforming Sign. A sign (see Section 15 for definition) that, on the effective
date of this chapter does not conform to one or more of the regulations set forth
in this chapter, particularly Article XVII, Signs. See Section 129 for specific
provisions regarding nonconforming signs.
(7) Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming situation that occurs when property is
used for a purpose or in a manner made unlawful by the use regulations
applicable to the district in which the property is located. (For example, a
commercial office building in a residential district may be a nonconforming use.)
The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the use made of the property.
(For example, all the activity associated with running a bakery in a residentially
zoned area is a nonconforming use.)
(8) Nonconforming Situation. A situation that occurs when, on the effective date of
this chapter, an existing lot or structure or use of an existing lot or structure does
not conform to one or more of the regulations applicable to the district in which
the lot or structure is located. Among other possibilities, a nonconforming
situation may arise because a lot does not meet minimum acreage requirements,

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-2
because structures exceed maximum height limitations, because the relationship
between existing buildings and the land (in such matters as density and set-back
requirements) is not in conformity with this chapter, because signs do not meet
the requirements of Article XVII of this chapter, or because land or buildings are
used for purposes made unlawful by this chapter.
Section 122 Continuation of Nonconforming Situations and Completion of Nonconforming
Projects.
(a) Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter (e.g., Section 129, Nonconforming
Signs), and subject to the restrictions and qualifications set forth in Sections 123 through 128,
nonconforming situations that were otherwise lawful on the effective date of this chapter may be
continued.
(b) Nonconforming projects may be completed only in accordance with the provisions of
Section 128.
Section 123 Nonconforming Lots.
(a) When a nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all of the regulations
applicable to the intended use, except that the lot is smaller than the required minimums set forth in
Section 181, then the lot may be used as proposed just as if it were conforming. However, no use
(e.g., a two-family residence) that requires a greater lot size than the established minimum lot size
for a particular zone is permissible on a nonconforming lot.
(b) When the use proposed for a nonconforming lot is one that is conforming in all other
respects but the applicable setback requirements (Section 184) cannot reasonably be complied
with, then the entity authorized by this chapter to issue a permit for the proposed use (the
administrator, Board of Adjustment, or Council) may allow deviations from the applicable setback
requirements if it finds that:
(1) The property cannot reasonably be developed for the use proposed without such
deviations;
(2) These deviations are necessitated by the size or shape of the nonconforming lot;
and
(3) The property can be developed as proposed without any significantly adverse
impact on surrounding properties or the public health or safety.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b), compliance with applicable building setback
requirements is not reasonably possible if a building that serves the minimal needs of the use
proposed for the nonconforming lot cannot practicably be constructed and located on the lot in
conformity with such setback requirements. However, mere financial hardship does not constitute
grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible.
(d) This section applies only to undeveloped nonconforming lots. A lot is undeveloped if it
has no substantial structures upon it. A change in use of a developed nonconforming lot may be
accomplished in accordance with Section 126.

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-3
(e) Subject to the following sentence, if, on the date this section becomes effective, an
undeveloped nonconforming lot adjoins and has continuous frontage with one or more other
undeveloped lots under the same ownership, then neither the owner of the nonconforming lot nor
his successors in interest may take advantage of the provisions of this section. This subsection
shall not apply to a nonconforming lot if a majority of the developed lots located on either side of the
street where such lot is located and within 500 feet of such lot are also nonconforming. The intent of
this subsection is to require nonconforming lots to be combined with other undeveloped lots to
create conforming lots under the circumstances specified herein, but not to require such
combination when that would be out of character with the way the neighborhood has previously
been developed.
Section 124 Extension or Enlargement of Nonconforming Situations.
(a) Except as specifically provided in this section, no person may engage in any activity that
causes an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming situation. In particular,
physical alteration of structures or the placement of new structures on open land is unlawful if such
activity results in:
(1) An increase in the total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming use; or
(2) Greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions such as setback
requirements, height limitations or density requirements or other requirements
such as parking requirements.
(b) Subject to subsection (d), a nonconforming use may be extended throughout any
portion of a completed building that, when the use was made nonconforming by this chapter, was
manifestly designed or arranged to accommodate such use. However, subject to Section 128
(authorizing the completion of nonconforming projects in certain circumstances), a nonconforming
use may not be extended to additional buildings or to land outside the original building.
(c) Subject to Section 128 (authorizing the completion of nonconforming projects in certain
circumstances), a nonconforming use of open land may not be extended to cover more land than
was occupied by that use when it became nonconforming, except that a use that involves the
removal of natural materials from the lot (e.g., a sand pit) may be expanded to the boundaries of the
lot where the use was established at the time it became nonconforming if ten percent or more of the
earth products had already been removed on the effective date of this chapter.
(d) The volume, intensity, or frequency of use of property where a nonconforming situation
exists may be increased and the equipment or processes used at a location where a nonconforming
situation exists may be changed if these or similar changes amount only to changes in the degree of
activity rather than changes in kind and no violations of other paragraphs of this section occur.
(e) Notwithstanding subsection (a), any structure used for single-family residential purposes
and maintained as a nonconforming use may be enlarged or replaced with a similar structure of a
larger size, so long as the enlargement or replacement does not create new nonconformities or
increase the extent of existing nonconformities with respect to such matters as setback and parking
requirements. This paragraph is subject to the limitations stated in Section 127 (abandonment and
discontinuance of nonconforming situations).

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-4
(f) Notwithstanding subsection (a), whenever: (i) there exists a lot with one or more
structures on it; and (ii) a change in use that does not involve any enlargement of a structure is
proposed for such lot; and (iii) the parking or loading requirements of Article XVIII that would be
applicable as a result of the proposed change cannot be satisfied on such lot because there is not
sufficient area available on the lot that can practicably be used for parking or loading, then the
proposed use shall not be regarded as resulting in an impermissible extension or enlargement of a
nonconforming situation. However, the applicant shall be required to comply with all applicable
parking and loading requirements that can be satisfied without acquiring additional land, and shall
also be required to obtain satellite parking in accordance with Section 297 if: (i) parking
requirements cannot be satisfied on the lot with respect to which the permit is required; and (ii) such
satellite parking is reasonably available. If such satellite parking is not reasonably available at the
time the zoning or special or conditional use permit is granted, then the permit recipient is
encouraged to obtain it if and when it does become reasonably available. This requirement shall be
a continuing condition of the permit. This requirement does not apply to the Historic District Overlay.
(Amended 7/99)
Section 125 Repair, Maintenance and Replacement.
(a) Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of property where nonconforming situations
exist are permitted and encouraged.
(b) Major renovation (i.e., work estimated to cost more than twenty-five percent of the
appraised valuation of the structure to be renovated) or total replacement may be done only in
accordance with a special use permit issued pursuant to subsection (e) of this section.
(c) Major repairs (i.e., work estimated to cost more than twenty-five percent of the
appraised valuation of the damaged structure) may be done only in accordance with a special use
permit issued pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. This subsection does not apply to
structures used for single-family residential purposes, since such structures may be reconstructed
pursuant to a zoning permit just as they may be enlarged or replaced as provided in Subsection
124(e).
(d) For purposes of subsections (a) through (c):
(1) The "cost" of renovation or repair or replacement shall mean the fair market
value of the materials and services necessary to accomplish such renovation,
repair, or replacement.
(2) The "cost" of renovation or repair or replacement shall mean the total cost of all
such intended work, and no person may seek to avoid the intent of subsections
(a) or (b) by doing such work incrementally.
(3) The "appraised valuation" shall mean either the appraised valuation for property
tax purposes, updated as necessary by the increase in the consumer price index
since the date of the last valuation, or the valuation determined by a
professionally recognized property appraiser.
(e) The board of adjustment shall issue a special use permit authorized by this section if it
finds that, in completing the major renovation, total replacement, or major repair:

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-5
(1) there is no increase in the total amount of lot area devoted to the nonconforming
use;
(2) there is no greater nonconformity with respect to dimensional restrictions such as
setback requirements, height limitations, or density requirements or other
requirements such as parking, loading and landscaping requirements; and
(3) there is no significant adverse impact on surrounding properties or the public
health or safety.
In issuing a special use permit, the board may affix other reasonable and appropriate
conditions such as, but not limited to, landscaping and buffering to separate dissimilar uses or to
screen parking and loading areas. (Amended 6/13/95)
Section 126 Change in Use of Property Where a Nonconforming Situation Exists.
(a) A change in use of property that is sufficiently substantial to require a new zoning,
special use, or conditional use permit in accordance with Section 46 may not be made except in
accordance with subsections (b) through (d). However, this requirement shall not apply if only a sign
permit is needed.
(b) If the intended change in use is to a principal use that is permissible in the district where
the property is located, and all of the other requirements of this chapter applicable to that use can be
complied with, permission to make the change must be obtained in the same manner as permission
to make the initial use of a vacant lot. Once conformity with this chapter is achieved, the property
may not revert to its nonconforming status.
(c) If the intended change in use is to a principal use that is permissible in the district where
the property is located, but all of the requirements of this chapter applicable to that use cannot
reasonably be complied with, then the change is permissible if the Board of Adjustment issues a
special use permit authorizing the change. This special use permit may be issued if the Board of
Adjustment finds, in addition to any other findings that may be required by this chapter, that:
(1) The intended change will not result in a violation of Section 124; and
(2) All of the applicable requirements of this section that can reasonably be complied
with will be complied with. Compliance with a requirement of this section is not
reasonably possible if compliance cannot be achieved without adding additional
land to the lot where the nonconforming situation is maintained or moving a
substantial structure that is on a permanent foundation. Mere financial hardship
caused by the cost of meeting such requirements as paved parking does not
constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonably possible. And in
no case may an applicant be given permission pursuant to this subsection to
construct a building or add to an existing building if additional nonconformities
would thereby be created.
(d) If the intended change in use is to another principal use that is also nonconforming,
then the change is permissible if the Board of Adjustment issues a special use permit authorizing
the change. The Board of Adjustment may issue the special use permit if it finds, in addition to other
findings that may be required by this chapter, that:

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-6
(1) The use requested is one that is permissible in some zoning district with either a
zoning, special use, or conditional use permit; and
(2) All of the conditions applicable to the permit authorized in subsection (c) of this
section are satisfied; and
(3) The proposed development will have less of an adverse impact on those most
affected by it and will be more compatible with the surrounding neighborhood
than the use in operation at the time the permit is applied for.
Section 127 Abandonment and Discontinuance of Nonconforming Situations.
(a) When a nonconforming use is (i) discontinued for a consecutive period of 180 days, or
(ii) discontinued for any period of time without a present intention to reinstate the nonconforming
use, the property involved may thereafter be used only for conforming purposes.
(b) If the principal activity on property where a nonconforming situation other than a
nonconforming use exists is (i) discontinued for a consecutive period of 180 days, or (ii)
discontinued for any period of time without a present intention of resuming that activity, then that
property may thereafter be used only in conformity with all of the regulations applicable to the
preexisting use unless the Board of Adjustment issues a special use permit to allow the property to
be used for this purpose without correcting the nonconforming situations. This special use permit
may be issued if the Board of Adjustment finds that eliminating a particular nonconformity is not
reasonably possible (i.e., cannot be accomplished without adding additional land to the lot where the
nonconforming situation is maintained or moving a substantial structure that is on a permanent
foundation). The special use permit shall specify which nonconformities need not be corrected.
(c) For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a nonconforming situation is
lost pursuant to this section, all of the buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a lot are
generally to be considered as a whole. For example, the failure to rent one apartment in a
nonconforming apartment building for 180 days shall not result in a loss of the right to rent that
apartment or space thereafter so long as the apartment building as a whole is continuously
maintained. But if a nonconforming use is maintained in conjunction with a conforming use,
discontinuance of a nonconforming use for the required period shall terminate the right to maintain it
thereafter.
(d) When a structure or operation made nonconforming by this chapter is vacant or
discontinued at the effective date of this chapter, the 180-day period for purposes of this section
begins to run on the effective date of this chapter.
Section 128 Completion of Nonconforming Projects.
(a) All nonconforming projects on which construction was begun at least 180 days before
the effective date of this chapter as well as all nonconforming projects that are at least ten percent
completed in terms of the total expected cost of the project on the effective date of this chapter may
be completed in accordance with the terms of their permits, so long as these permits were validly
issued and remain unrevoked and unexpired. If a development is designed to be completed in
stages, this subsection shall apply only to the particular phase under construction. In addition, as

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-7
provided in NCGS 160A-385, neither this ordinance nor any amendment to it shall, without the
consent of the property owner, affect any lot with respect to which a building permit has been issued
pursuant to NCGS 160A-417 prior to the enactment of the ordinance making the change so long as
the building permit remains valid, unexpired, and unrevoked.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (a), all work on any nonconforming project shall cease
on the effective date of this chapter, and all permits previously issued for work on nonconforming
projects may begin or may be continued only pursuant to a zoning, special use, conditional use, or
sign permit issued in accordance with this section by the individual or board authorized by this
chapter to issue permits for the type of development proposed. The permit issuing authority shall
issue such a permit if it finds that the applicant has in good faith made substantial expenditures or
incurred substantial binding obligations or otherwise changed his position in some substantial way in
reasonable reliance on the land use law as it existed before the effective date of this chapter and
thereby would be unreasonably prejudiced if not allowed to complete his project as proposed. In
considering whether these findings may be made, the permit issuing authority shall be guided by the
following, as well as other relevant considerations:
(1) All expenditures made to obtain or pursuant to a validly issued and unrevoked
building, zoning, sign, or special or conditional use permit shall be considered as
evidence of reasonable reliance on the land use law that existed before this
chapter became effective.
(2) Except as provided in subdivision (b)(1), no expenditures made more than 180
days before the effective date of this chapter may be considered as evidence of
reasonable reliance on the land use law that existed before this chapter became
effective. An expenditure is made at the time a party incurs a binding obligation
to make that expenditure.
(3) To the extent that expenditures are recoverable with a reasonable effort, a party
shall not be considered prejudiced by having made those expenditures. For
example, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by having made some
expenditure to acquire a potential development site if the property obtained is
approximately as valuable under the new classification as it was under the old,
for the expenditure can be recovered by a resale of the property.
(4) To the extent that a nonconforming project can be made conforming and that
expenditures made or obligations incurred can be effectively utilized in the
completion of a conforming project, a party shall not be considered prejudiced by
having made such expenditures.
(5) An expenditure shall be considered substantial if it is significant both in dollar
amount and in terms of (i) the total estimated cost of the proposed project, and
(ii) the ordinary business practices of the developer.
(6) A person shall be considered to have acted in good faith if actual knowledge of a
proposed change in the land use law affecting the proposed development site
could not be attributed to him.
(7) Even though a person had actual knowledge of a proposed change in the land
use law affecting a development site, the permit issuing authority may still find
that he acted in good faith if he did not proceed with his plans in a deliberate

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-8
attempt to circumvent the effects of the proposed ordinance. The permit issuing
authority may find that the developer did not proceed in an attempt to undermine
the proposed ordinance if it determines that (i) at the time the expenditures were
made, either there was considerable doubt about whether any ordinance would
ultimately be passed, or it was not clear that the proposed ordinance would
prohibit the intended development, and (ii) the developer had legitimate business
reasons for making expenditures.
(8) In deciding whether a permit should be issued under this section, the permit
issuing authority shall not be limited to either denying a permit altogether or
issuing a permit to complete the project (or phases, sections, or stages thereof)
as originally proposed or approved. Upon proper submission of plans by the
applicant, the permit issuing authority may also issue a permit authorizing a
development that is less nonconforming than the project as originally proposed
or approved but that still does not comply with all the provisions of the ordinance
making the project nonconforming.
(c) When it appears from the developer's plans or otherwise that a project was intended to
be or reasonably could be completed in phases, stages, segments, or other discrete units, the
developer shall be allowed to complete only those phases or segments with respect to which the
developer can make the showing required under subsection (b). ln addition to the matters and
subject to the guidelines set forth in Subdivisions (1) through (6) of subsection (b), the permit issuing
authority shall, in determining whether a developer would be unreasonably prejudiced if not allowed
to complete phases or segments of a nonconforming project, consider the following in addition to
other relevant factors:
(1) Whether any plans prepared or approved regarding uncompleted phases
constitute conceptual plans only or construction drawings based upon detailed
surveying, architectural, or engineering work.
(2) Whether any improvements, such as streets or utilities, have been installed in
phases not yet completed.
(3) Whether utilities and other facilities installed in completed phases have been
constructed in such a manner or location or such a scale, in anticipation of
connection to or interrelationship with approved but uncompleted phases, that
the investment in such utilities or other facilities cannot be recouped if such
approved but uncompleted phases are constructed in conformity with existing
regulations.
(d) The permit issuing authority shall not consider any application for the permit authorized
by subsection (b) that is submitted more than sixty days after the effective date of this chapter. The
permit issuing authority may waive this requirement for good cause shown, but in no case may it
extend the application deadline beyond one year.

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-9
(e) The administrator shall send copies of this section to the persons listed as owners for
tax purposes (and developers, if different from the owners) of all properties in regard to which
permits have been issued for nonconforming projects or in regard to which a nonconforming project
is otherwise known to be in some stage of development. This notice shall be sent by certified mail
not less than fifteen days before the effective date of this chapter.
(f) The permit issuing authority shall establish expedited procedures for hearing
applications for permits under this section. These applications shall be heard, whenever possible,
before the effective date of this chapter, so that construction work is not needlessly interrupted.
Section 129 Nonconforming Signs.
Signs in existence on the effective date of this chapter which do not conform to the provisions
of this ordinance, but which were constructed, erected, affixed or maintained in compliance with all
previous regulations, shall be regarded as nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs are subject
to the following:
(1) No nonconforming sign shall be changed to another nonconforming sign.
(2) No nonconforming sign shall have any changes made in the words or symbols
used or the message displayed on the sign unless the sign is specifically
designed for periodic change of message.
(3) No nonconforming sign shall be structurally altered so as to change the shape,
size, type or design of the sign.
(4) No nonconforming sign shall be re-established after the activity, business or use
to which it relates has been discontinued and such sign shall be removed.
(5) No nonconforming sign shall be re-established and all remains of the sign must
be removed after damage or destruction, if the estimated expense of repairs
exceeds fifty percent of the estimated total value of the sign at the time of
destruction. If damaged by less than fifty percent, but repairs are not made
within three months of the time such damage occurred, the nonconforming sign
shall not be allowed to continue and must be removed.
(6) No nonconforming sign shall be relocated inside the town limits or ETJ.
Signs located on premises which come within the zoning jurisdiction of the Town of
Edenton after the effective date of this chapter and which signs do not comply with the provisions of
this ordinance shall be subject to the requirements listed above.
Any nonconforming sign which is structurally altered, relocated or replaced shall
immediately be brought into compliance with all the provisions of this ordinance.
Signs in existence on the effective date of this chapter which do not comply with
provisions of Section 287 (b), flags, streamers, banners, or pennants shall be made to conform
within ninety days from the effective date of this chapter.
The administrator shall order the removal of any sign maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter for which removal procedures are herein prescribed, accordingly: the

Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 8-10
administrator shall give ninety days written notice to the owner or lessee to remove the sign or to
bring it into compliance with this chapter. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign within ninety
days after the ninety-day written notice has been given, the administrator or his duly authorized
representative may institute removal proceedings according to the procedures specified in NCGS
160A-175. (Amended 1/99)
Section 130 Termination of Miscellaneous Nonconforming Situations.
(a) Within one year after the effective date of this chapter, any use as described in
Subsection 149(c)(3) shall cease, and thereafter any situation in violation of that subdivision shall no
longer be regarded as a lawful nonconforming situation.
(b) Within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, any use as described in
Subsection 149(c)(4) shall cease, and thereafter any situation in violation of that subdivision shall no
longer be regarded as a lawful nonconforming situation.
Section 131 Nonconforming Manufactured Homes (Class C) and Manufactured Home Parks.
(a) A nonconforming manufactured home (Class C) or manufactured home park shall not
be altered as to change the size, shape or type of park.
(b) When a nonconforming manufactured home (Class C), other than in a manufactured
home park, use is discontinued for a consecutive period of 180 days, or discontinued for any period
of time without a present intention to reinstate the nonconforming use, the property involved may
thereafter be used only for conforming purpose.
(c) For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a nonconforming use is lost
pursuant to this section, all of the lots are generally to be considered a manufactured home park.
For example, the failure to rent one lot in a nonconforming park for 180 days shall not result in a loss
or the right to rent that space thereafter so long as the park is continuously maintained.
(d) Each nonconforming manufactured home (Class C) in Edenton or in the exterritorial
jurisdiction shall have skirting installed in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Skirting shall be of a noncombustible material that will not support combustion.
Skirting material shall be durable and suitable for exterior exposure.
(2) Any wood framing used to support skirting shall be of approved moisture
resistance treated wood.
(3) The skirting shall be vented.
(4) Skirting shall be installed no later than ninety (90) days after the effective date of
this section. (Amended 5/14/91)
Sections 132 through 134 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 9-1
ARTICLE IX
ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
Part 1. Zoning Districts
Section 135 Residential Districts Established.
(a) The following residential districts are hereby established: RA, R-20, R-14, R-10, and
R-5. Each of these districts is designed and intended to secure for the persons who reside there a
comfortable, healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live, sheltered from incompatible
and disruptive activities that properly belong in nonresidential districts. Other objectives of some of
these districts are explained in the remainder of this section.
(b) The RA District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for very
low-density, single-family residential and agricultural purposes (1 dwelling unit per 5 acres). The
regulations of this district are intended to protect prime agricultural land, as defined by the Soil
Conservation Service, from an influx of users likely to render it undesirable for farms and
low-density residential development.
(c) The R-20 District is established to allow a variety of single-family residential agricultural
land uses, at a low-density of approximately 2.1 dwelling units per acre, which are interspersed with
large, undeveloped open areas.
(d) The R-14 District is established to allow principally single-family residences and other
compatible uses permitted by conditional use permit at a density of approximately 3.1 dwelling units
per acre.
(e) The R-10 District is established as a district in which to allow primarily single-family and
two-family residences and other compatible uses permitted by conditional use permit at a density of
approximately 4.13 dwelling units per acres.
(f) The R-5 District is established as a district in which to allow primarily single-family,
two-family and multi-family residences at a medium density of approximately 8.7 dwelling units per
acre.
(g) The R-40 District is established as a district in which to allow primarily single-family
residential and agricultural land uses, at a low-density of one dwelling per acre. (Amended 5/12/92)
Section 136 Commercial Districts Established.
(a) The following commercial districts are hereby established: MA, CD, CN, CH, OS, and
SC. Each of these districts is created to accomplish the purposes and serve the objectives set forth
in the remainder of this section.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 9-2
(b) The MA District is established as a district in which to allow health care facilities
including hospitals, medical and dental offices and clinics, and related health care uses.
(c) The CD District is established as a district in which to accommodate a wide variety of
commercial activities (particularly those that are pedestrian-oriented) in an intensive development
pattern in the town's central business district. The regulations of this district are intended to (i)
preserve the general character and integrity of the current development in the central business
district; (ii) encourage land uses which provide for a multi-purpose central business district including
retail, offices, services, entertainment, and living space; (iii) encourage land uses which do not
require large amounts of outdoor use areas; and (iv) encourage common or shared off-street
parking.
(d) The CN District is established as a district in which to allow small, limited retail service
land uses which provide goods and services primarily to surrounding residential neighborhoods.
The major objectives of this district are to (i) encourage the location of convenience retail
establishments, professional services, and professional offices so as to be as compatible as
possible with surrounding residential uses; (ii) discourage intensive land uses which require large
amounts of land area; and (iii) limit large vehicular traffic-generating uses to major streets
(e) The CH District is established as a district in which to accommodate highway-oriented
retail and commercial service businesses which generally have as their market area the entire town
and surrounding area. The major objectives of this district are to (i) encourage planned commercial
and office parks; (ii) discourage small lot development on major highways; (iii) encourage vehicular
access from service drives and other local commercial streets rather than directly from arterial
streets; and (iv) provide a location for major shopping facilities and land uses requiring large
outdoor spaces.
(f) The OS District is designed to accommodate office and service uses as well as
medium-density residential uses. The major objectives of this district are to (1) encourage land
uses which serve as an adequate buffer between intensive non-residential and residential uses; (2)
provide aesthetic controls and dimensional requirements to ensure compatible office and service
development with surrounding residential uses; and (3) encourage a mixture of medium-density
residential uses with offices and services.
(g) The CS District is designed to accommodate well planned shopping centers serving the
community and regional marketplace. The major objectives of this district are to (1) encourage
attractive and orderly shopping center development, (2) promote unified site design, pedestrian
circulation and traffic control within the shopping center complex, (3) provide opportunities for
coordinated transportation planning for ingress and egress, and (4) promote urban design and
corridor landscape improvements which are compatible with the Town’s comprehensive planning
goals. (Amended 3/99)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 9-3
Section 137 Industrial Districts Established.
The IW District is established as a district in which to allow primarily light manufacturing,
assembly, research, warehousing, and intensive commercial uses. The regulations of this district
are intended to (i) encourage light manufacturing and intensive commercial uses as well as
accessory land uses incidental to and in support of manufacturing uses; (ii) exclude heavy industry,
major retail, and residences as acceptable land uses; and (iii) preserve locations that are best
suited for industrial development. Land uses in the IW District are limited to those determined to be
compatible with the character of the community. Uses permitted in the IW Districts are restricted to
the SIC code-designated uses delineated in Section 166.
Section 138 Overlay Districts Established
(a) Four special control overlay districts are hereby established: FHO (Flood Hazard
Overlay), AHO (Airport Hazard Overlay) HO (Historic Overlay) and BSR (South Broad Street
Residential Overlay). These special control overlay districts are intended to be superimposed over
the underlying general zoning district and the land so encumbered may be used in a manner
permitted in the underlying district only if and to the extent such use is also permitted in the
applicable overlay district. The specific objectives of each of these overlay districts are explained in
the remainder of this section.
(b) The FHO District is established as an overlay district of all general zoning districts for
the purpose of protecting people and property from the hazards of flooding. The flood hazard
districts are further described in Part I of Article XVI of this ordinance.
(c) The AHO District is established as an overlay district of all general zoning districts in
the vicinity of the Edenton Municipal Airport. The purpose of the AHO is to protect the airport
environs from encroachment of incompatible land uses which present hazards to users of the
airport as well as to persons residing or working in the airport vicinity. The additional regulations
imposed in the AHO are designed to (i) place additional height restrictions on buildings and trees;
(ii) control the above-ground storage of flammable materials; and (iii) control the locations of
high-density residential uses and places of assembly. The additional regulations governing land
development in the AHO district are delineated in Section 167.
(d) The HO District is established as an overlay district for all general zoning districts that
contain structures or other facilities of historic significance. The purpose of the HO is to protect and
conserve the heritage and character of the Edenton community by providing for the preservation of
designated areas within the planning jurisdiction. No new historic districts nor any change to the
boundaries of any existing historic district shall be designated until the North Carolina Department
of Cultural Resources shall have been given an opportunity, in accordance with Chapter 160A,
Article 19, Part 3A of the N.C. General Statutes, to make recommendations with respect to the
establishment of such new district or change in the boundaries of an existing district. The additional
regulations governing land development in the HO district are delineated in Section 168.
(e) The RCO District is established as an overlay district of all general zoning districts for
the purpose of establishing streetscape appearance and pedestrian and bicycle circulation
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 9-4
recommendations along six main road corridors that lead into downtown Edenton. The additional
regulations governing land development in the RCO districts are delineated in Section 180.8.
(ee) The BSR overlay district is established as an overlay district for an area of Broad Street
located in the CD (Downtown Commercial) zoning district. The purpose of the overlay district is to
prohibit residential uses in the first floor of structures fronting on South Broad Street.
Section 139 Conditional Use District Zoning District Established (Amended 1/14/03)
The conditional Use District rezoning process in hereby established to recognized that certain
types of zoning districts would be inappropriate at particular locations in the absence of special
conditions. Where the applicant for rezoning desires property to be rezoned to such a district in
such situations, the Conditional Use District Classification will be considered only on
request/acceptance of the applicant for rezoning. Conditional Use Districts (bearing the designation
C.U.) correspond to an identical district, for example Conditional Use Highway Commercial District
shall be labeled C.U.CH. However, any use or development in the Conditional Use District shall
require a Conditional Use Permit. If for any reason any condition imposed pursuant to the
regulations is found to be illegal or invalid, or if the applicant should fail to accept any condition, it is
the intent of this article that the authorization of such conditional use Permit shall be null and void
and of no effect and that proceedings be instituted to rezone the property to its previous zoning
classification. The procedure of approval of Conditional Use Districts is outlined in Section 27 of
Article XX.
Section 140 through 141 Reserved.
Part II. Zoning Map
Section 142 Official Zoning Map.
(a) There shall be a map known and designated as the Official Zoning Map, which shall
show the boundaries of all zoning districts within the town's planning jurisdiction. This map shall be
drawn on acetate or other durable material from which prints can be made, shall be dated, and shall
be kept in the office of the Edenton Building Inspector and Edenton Town Clerk.
(b) The Official Zoning Map dated November 14, 1989 is adopted and incorporated herein
by reference. Amendments to this map shall be made and posted in accordance with Section 143.
(c) Should the Official Zoning Map be lost, destroyed, or damaged, the administrator may
have a new map drawn on acetate or other durable material from which prints can be made. No
further Council authorization or action is required so long as no district boundaries are changed in
this process.
Section 143 Amendments to Official Zoning Map.
(a) Amendments to the Official Zoning Map are accomplished using the same procedures
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 9-5
that apply to other amendments to this ordinance, as set forth in Article XX.
(b) The administrator shall update the Official Zoning Map as soon as possible after
amendments to it are adopted by the Board. Upon entering any such amendment on the map, the
administrator shall change the date of the map to indicate its latest revision. New prints of the
updated map may then be issued.
(c) No unauthorized person may alter or modify the Official Zoning Map.
(d) The building inspection department shall keep copies of superseded prints of the
zoning map for historical reference.
Sections 144 and 145 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 12/23/98 10-1
ARTICLE X
PERMISSIBLE USES
Section 146 Table of Permissible Uses.
The Table of Permissible Uses (see pages 10-6 through 10-16) should be read in close
conjunction with the definitions of terms set forth in Section 15 and the other interpretative provisions
set forth in this article.
Section 147 Use of the Designations Z, S, C in Table of Permissible Uses.
(a) Subject to Section 148, when used in connection with a particular use in the Table of
Permissible Uses (Section 146), the letter "Z" means that the use is permissible in the indicated
zone with a zoning permit issued by the administrator. The letter "S" means a special use permit
must be obtained from the Board of Adjustment, and the letter "C" means a conditional use permit
must be obtained from the Town Council.
(b) When used in connection with multi-family residential uses, the designation "ZC" means
that such developments within the CD zoning district of two dwelling units or less must be pursuant
to a zoning permit and developments of three or more units need a conditional use permit. Within
all other zoning districts, such developments of four dwelling units or less must be pursuant to a
zoning permit and developments of five or more units need a conditional use permit. (Amended
1/99)
Section 148 Board of Adjustment Jurisdiction Over Uses Otherwise Permissible With a
Zoning Permit.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, whenever the Table of Permissible Uses
(interpreted in the light of Section 147 and the other provisions of this article) provides that a use in a
nonresidential zone or a nonconforming use in a residential zone is permissible with a zoning permit,
a special use permit shall nevertheless be required if the administrator finds that the proposed use
would have an extraordinary impact on neighboring properties or the general public. In making this
determination, the administrator shall consider, among other factors, whether the use is proposed
for an undeveloped or previously developed lot, whether the proposed use constitutes a change
from one principal use classification to another, whether the use is proposed for a site that poses
peculiar traffic or other hazards or difficulties, and whether the proposed use is substantially unique
or is likely to have impacts that differ substantially from those presented by other uses that are
permissible in the zoning district in question.
Section 149 Permissible Uses and Specific Exclusions.
(a) The presumption established by this chapter is that all legitimate uses of land are
permissible within at least one zoning district in the town's planning jurisdiction. Therefore, because
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 12/23/98 10-2
the list of permissible uses set forth in Section 146 (Table of Permissible Uses) cannot be
all-inclusive, those uses that are listed shall be interpreted liberally to include other uses that have
similar impacts to the listed uses.
(b) If a use cannot be interpreted by the administrator for inclusion in the Table of Permissible
Uses (Section 146) as provided for in subsection (a), that use shall be prohibited. Section 146
(Table of Permissible Uses) shall not be interpreted to allow a use in one zoning district when the
use in question is more closely related to another specified use that is permissible in other zoning
districts.
(c) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing provisions, the following uses are
specifically prohibited in all districts:
(1) Any use that involves the manufacture, handling, sale, distribution, or storage of
any highly combustible or explosive materials in violation of the town's fire
prevention code.
(2) Stockyards, slaughterhouses, rendering plants.
(3) Use of a travel trailer as a temporary or permanent residence. (Situations that do
not comply with this subdivision on the effective date of this chapter are required
to conform within one year. See Section 130.)
(4) Use of a motor vehicle parked on a lot as a structure in which, out of which, or
from which any goods are sold or stored, any services are performed, or other
business is conducted. (Situations that do not comply with this subdivision on
the effective date of this chapter are required to conform within thirty days. See
Section 130.)
(Amended 5/29/90, 8/13/91)
Section 150 Accessory Uses.
(a) The Table of Permissible Uses (Section 146) classifies different principal uses according to
their different impacts. Whenever an activity (which may or may not be separately listed as a
principal use in this table) is conducted in conjunction with another principal use and the
former use (i) constitutes only an incidental or insubstantial part of the total activity that takes
place on a lot, or (ii) is commonly associated with the principal use and integrally related to it,
then the former use may be regarded as accessory to the principal use and may be carried
on underneath the umbrella of the permit issued for the principal use. For example, a
swimming pool/ tennis court complex is customarily associated with and integrally related to
a residential subdivision or multi-family development and would be regarded as accessory to
such principal uses, even though such facilities, if developed apart from a residential
development, would require a special use permit. (Amended 1/99)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 12/23/98 10-3
(b) For purposes of interpreting subsection (a):
(1) A use may be regarded as incidental or insubstantial if it is incidental or
insubstantial in and of itself or in relation to the principal use;
(2) To be "commonly associated" with a principal use it is not necessary for an
accessory use to be connected with such principal use more times than not, but
only that the association of such accessory use with such principal use takes
place with sufficient frequency that there is common acceptance of their
relatedness.
(c) Without limiting the generality of subsections (a) and (b), the following activities are
specifically regarded as accessory to residential principal uses so long as they satisfy the general
criteria set forth above:
(1) Offices or studios within an enclosed building and used by an occupant of a
residence located on the same lot as such building to carry on administrative or
artistic activities of a commercial nature, so long as such activities do not fall
within the definition of a home occupation.
(2) Hobbies or recreational activities of a non-commercial nature.
(3) Yard sales or garage sales, so long as such sales are not conducted on the
same lot for more than three days (whether consecutive or not) during any ninety
day period.
(d) Without limiting the generality of subsections (a) and (b), the following activities shall not
be regarded as accessory to a residential principal use and are prohibited in residential districts:
(1) Storage outside of a substantially enclosed structure of any motor vehicle that is
neither licensed nor operational.
(2) Parking outside a substantially enclosed structure of more than four motor
vehicles between the front building line of the principal building and the street on
any lot used for single-family detached dwellings, townhouse dwellings, or
two-family dwellings. (Proposed Amendment 1/99)
Section 151 Permissible Uses Not Requiring Permits.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no zoning, special use, or conditional
use permit is necessary for the following uses:
(1) Streets.
(2) Electric power, telephone, telegraph, cable television, gas, water, and sewer
lines, wires or pipes, together with supporting poles or structures, located within
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 12/23/98 10-4
a public right of way.
(3) Neighborhood utility facilities located within a public right of way with the
permission of the owner (state or town) of the right of way.
Section 152 Change in Use.
(a) A substantial change in use of property occurs whenever the essential character or
nature of the activity conducted on a lot changes. This occurs whenever:
(1) The change involves a change from one principal use category to another.
(2) If the original use is a combination use (26.000), the relative proportion of space
devoted to the individual principal uses that comprise the combination use
changes to such an extent that the parking requirements for the overall use are
altered. (Amended 1/99)
(3) If the original use is a combination use, the mixture of types of individual principal
uses that comprise the combination use changes.
(4) If the original use is a planned residential development, the relative proportions
of different types of dwelling units change.
(5) If there is only one business or enterprise conducted on the lot (regardless of
whether that business or enterprise consists of one individual principal use or a
combination use), that business or enterprise moves out and a different type of
enterprise moves in (even though the new business or enterprise may be
classified under the same principal use or combination use category as the
previous type of business). For example, if there is only one building on a lot and
a florist shop that is the sole tenant of that building moves out and is replaced by
a clothing store, that constitutes a change in use. However, if the florist shop
were replaced by another florist shop, that would not constitute a change in use
since the type of business or enterprise would not have changed. Moreover, if
the florist shop moved out of a rented space in a shopping center and was
replaced by a clothing store, that would not constitute a change in use since
there is more than one business on the lot and the essential character of the
activity conducted on that lot (shopping center--combination use) has not
changed. (Admended 1/99)
(b) A mere change in the status of property from unoccupied to occupied or vice-versa
does not constitute a change in use. Whether a change in use occurs shall be determined by
comparing the two active uses of the property without regard to any intervening period during which
the property may have been unoccupied, unless the property has remained unoccupied for more
than 180 consecutive days or has been abandoned.
(c) A mere change in ownership of a business or enterprise or a change in the name shall
not be regarded as a change in use.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 12/23/98 10-5
Section 153 Reserved.
Section 154 Combination Uses.
(a) When a combination use comprises two or more principal uses that require different
types of permits (zoning, special use, or conditional use), then the permit authorizing the
combination use shall be:
(1) A conditional use permit if any of the principal uses combined requires a
conditional use permit.
(2) A special use permit if any of the principal uses combined requires a special use
permit but none requires a conditional use permit.
(3) A zoning permit in all other cases.
(b) When a combination use consists of a single-family detached residential subdivision
that is not architecturally integrated (see Section 188) and two-family or multi-family uses, the total
density permissible on the entire tract shall be determined by having the developer indicate on the
plans the portion of the total lot that will be developed for each purpose and calculating the density
for each portion as if it were a separate lot.
(c) When a combination use consists of a single-family detached, architecturally integrated
subdivision and two-family or multi-family uses, then the total density permissible on the entire tract
shall be determined by dividing the area of the tract by the minimum square footage per dwelling unit
specified in Section 182.
Section 155 More Specific Use Controls.
Whenever a development could fall within more than one use classification in the Table of
Permissible Uses (Section 146), the classification that most closely and most specifically describes
the development controls. (Amended 1/99)
Sections 156 and 157 Reserved.
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
AGRICULTURAL USES
Agricultural Production (crops) 0100 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z
Agricultural Production (livestock) 0200 Z S C
Agritourism 0000 Z
Bona Fide Farm 0000 Z
Fish Hatchery 0920 Z S S S S S S S S Z S
Forestry 0810 Z S S S S
MINING USES
Mining, Quarrying, Sand Pits, and Mineral Extraction 1000 C
RESIDENTIAL USES
Bed and Breakfast 7011 C C C C Section 162
Family Care Home 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Granny Pods/Temporary Health Care Structures 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Section 162.1
Group Care Facility 0000 C C C C C C C C Section 163
Homeless Shelter 0000 C C Section 163
Inn C C Section 162.2
Manufactured Home, Class A (Modular Home) 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z
Manufactured Home, Class B 0000 Z Z
Manufactured Home, Class C 0000 S Z
Manufactured Home Park 0000 S Section 159
Multifamily Dwelling 0000 ZC ZC ZC ZC Section 169
Planned Residential Developments 0000 C C C C C C C Section 158
Rooming Houses 0000 C
Single-Family Detached Dwelling 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z
Condominiums & Townhouses 0000 ZC ZC ZC ZC
Single-Family Conversion to Condominiums 0000 C C C C
Single-Family Conversion to Duplex or Apartments 0000 C C C C
Temporary Shelter 0000
Tiny Houses 0000 Z Section 162.3
Two-Family Dwelling (New Construction) 0000 S Z Z Z Z
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory Uses and Structures (customary) 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z
Caretaker Dwelling 0000 Z C Z
Home Occupation 0000 S S S S S S Z Z S
Satellite Dish Antenna, 18" Diameter or Less 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z
Satellite Dish Antenna, Greater Than 18" Diameter 0000 S S S S S S S S S S Section 180
Swimming Pool 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z
RECREATIONAL USES
Athletic Fields 0000 C C C C C C C C C C
Auditorium, Coliseum or Stadium 0000 C C C C C
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-6
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
Batting Cages 7999 C C C
Billiard Parlor/Pool Hall 7999 Z Z C Z
Bingo Games 7999 C Z Z
Bowling Center 7933 C Z Z
Club (Civic, Social, Fraternal) 8640 S S S S S S Z Z S Z
Coin Operated Amusement 7993 S Z Z
Country Club with Golf Course 7997 S S S Section 171
Dance School 7911 S S Z Z S Z
Electronic Gaming Operations 7993 C Section 180.13
Fairgrounds 7996 C C C C C C Section 180.8
Fortune Tellers, Astrologers 7999 Z S Z
Go-Cart Raceway 7999 C
Golf Course 7992 S S S Section 171
Golf Course, Miniature 7999 S S S
Golf Driving Range 7999 S S S S S S
Physical Fitness Center 7991 Z Z S Z Z Z
Private Club or Recreation Facility, Other 7997 S S S
Public Park or Recreational Facility, Other 7990 C C C C C C Z Z Z Z Z Z
Riding Academy 7999 Z S S
Shooting Range, Indoor 7999 S S
Skating Rink 7999 C Z Z
Sports and Recreation Club, Indoor 7997 Z Z C C
Swim and Tennis Club, Outdoor 7997 S S S S S S S S S
EDUCATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Ambulance Service 4119 Z Z Z Z
Cemetery or Mausoleum 0000 C C C C C C Section 165
Cemetery on Same Property as Church 0000 S S S S S S
Church 8661 S S S S S S C Z Z Z Z Z
College, University, Technical Institute 8220 C C C C C C C C Z
Correctional Institution 9223 C
Day Care Center, Adult and Child 8322 S S S S S S S Z Z Z Z Z Section 164
Elementary or Secondary School 8211 S S S S S S
Fire Station 9224 C C C C C C Z Z Z Z Z Z
Government Office 9000 C Z Z Z Z Z Z
Hospital 8062 Z Section 170
Library 8231 S S S S S Z Z Z Z Z
Museum or Art Gallery 8412 Z Z Z Z Z
National Guard /Military Reserve Center 0000 C Z
Nursing, Convalescent and Group Care Institution 8050 S S S Z Section 170
Orphanage 8361 C C C C C C Section 170
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-7
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
Police Station/Law Enforcement Office 9221 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Post Office 0000 Z Z Z Z
Psychiatric Hospital 8063 C Section 170
School Administration Facility 9411 C C C Z Z Z
BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL and PERSONAL SERVICES
Accounting, Auditing or Bookkeeping 8721 Z Z Z Z Z
Administrative or Management Services 8740 Z Z Z Z Z
Advertising, Outdoor Services 7312
Automobile Parking (Commercial) 7521 C C C C
Automobile Rental or Leasing 7510 Z Z Z
Automobile Repair Services 0000 Z Z Z
Automobile Towing Services 7549 Z Z
Bank, Savings and Loan, or Credit Union, w/ Drive-Thru 6000 C C C C C C
Bank, Savings and Loan, or Credit Union, w/o Drive-Thru 6000 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Barber Shop 7241 Z Z Z Z
Beauty Shop 7231 Z Z Z Z
Blacksmith 7699 Z C Z
Boat Repair 3730 Z Z
Building Maintenance/Cleaning Services, No Outside Storage 7349 Z Z Z Z Z
Car Wash 7542 Z Z
Clothing Alteration or Repair 0000 Z Z Z Z
Computer Maintenance and Repair 7378 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Computer Services 7370 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Crematorium 7261 S S
Employment Agency, Personnel Agency 7360 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Engineering, Architect or Survey Service 8710 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Equipment Rental and Leasing (no outside storage) 7350 C Z Z Z
Equipment Rental and Leasing (with outside storage) 7350 S Z
Equipment Repair 7690 S Z
Finance or Loan Office 6100 Z Z Z Z Z
Funeral Home 7261 Z
Furniture Refinishing & Repair Shop 7641 Z Z
Hotel or Motel 7011 C Z C Z
Insurance Agency 6411 Z Z Z Z Z
Landscape and Horticultural Services 0780 Z Z Z
Laundromat, Coin-Operated 7215 Z C Z
Laundry or Dry Cleaning Plant 7211 Z Z Z
Law Office 8111 Z Z Z Z Z
Medical, Dental or Related Office 8000 Z Z Z Z Z
Medical or Dental Laboratory (Non-hazardous) 8071 Z Z Z Z
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-8
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
Medical or Dental Laboratory (Hazardous) 8071 C C C C
Motion Picture Production Studio 7810 Z
Office Uses Not Otherwise Classified 0000 S S S S S
Pest or Termite Control Services 7342 S Z
Pet Cemetery 6553 Z
Pet Grooming 0752 Z C Z Z Z Z
Photocopying and Duplicating Services 7334 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Photofinishing Laboratory 7384 S S S Z S
Photography, Commercial Studio 7335 Z Z Z Z
Real Estate Office 6500 Z Z Z Z Z
Refrigerator or Large Appliance Repair (No outside storage) 7623 Z Z Z Z
Research, Development or Testing Services 8730 C C C C C C
Shoe Repair or Shoeshine Shop 7251 Z Z Z Z
Tattoo Parlor C Section 173
Taxidermist 7699 Z C Z Z Z
Television, Radio or Electronics Repair (No outside storage) 7620 Z Z Z
Theater (indoor) 7832 Z Z Z
Theater (outdoor) 7833 C C
Tire Recapping 7534 Z
Truck Driving School 8249 C
Truck and Utility Trailer Rental and Leasing 0000 C Z C
Truck Washing 7542 Z
Veterinary Clinic or Kennels 0742 Z C C
Vocational, Business or Secretarial School 8240 S S S S S S
RETAIL TRADE
ABC Store (liquor) 5921 Z Z Z
Antique Store 5932 Z Z Z Z
Appliance Store 5722 Z Z Z
Arts and Crafts 0000 Z Z Z Z
Auto Supply Sales 5531 Z Z Z
Bakery 5461 Z Z Z Z Z
Bar, Night Club, Tavern 5813 C C C Section 180.3
Boat Sales 5551 Z Z
Bookstore 5942 Z Z Z Z Z
Building Supply Sales 5211 Z C
Computer Sales 5734 Z Z
Convenience Store 5411 C Z Z
Department, Variety or General Merchandise, <25,000
sq.ft.
5300 Z Z Z
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-9
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
Department, Variety or General Merchandise, 25,000
sq.ft. or more
5300 C C C
Section 180.5
Drugstore/Pharmacy 5912 Z Z C C Z
Drugstore/Pharmacy with Drive-Thru 5912 C C C C
Fabric or Piece Goods Store 5949 Z Z Z
Farm Supplies and Equipment 0000 Z Z Z
Floor Covering, Drapery or Upholstery 5710 Z Z S Z
Florist 5992 Z Z S S Z
Food Store 5400 Z Z Z Z
Food Truck 72233 Z Z Z Z Z Z Section 180.12
Fuel Oil Sales/Propane Sales 5980 C C C Section 174
Furniture Sales 5712 Z Z Z
Garden Center or Retail Nursery 5261 Z Z Z Z Z Z
Hardware Store 5251 Z Z Z
Home Furnishings, Miscellaneous 5719 Z Z Z
Manufactured Home Sales 5271 C C Section 180.1
Microbrewery 0000 C C Section 166
Miscellaneous Retail Sales, not otherwise specified 5999 C C C C
Motor Vehicle Sales (new and used) 5511 C
Motorcycle Sales 5571 C
Musical Instrument Sales 5736 Z Z Z Z
Newsstand 5994 Z Z Z Z
Office Machine Sales 5999 Z Z Z
Optical Goods Sales 5995 Z Z Z Z Z
Paint and Wallpaper Sales 5231 Z Z Z Z
Pet Store 5999 Z Z Z Z
Record and Tape Store 5735 Z Z Z Z
Recreational Vehicle Sales 5561 C
Restaurant (with drive-thru) 5812 C C
Restaurant (without drive-thru) 5812 Z Z Z Z
Service Station, Gasoline Sales 5541 C Z S Z C Section 160
Sporting Goods Store, Bicycle Shop 5941 Z Z Z Z
Tire Sales 5531 Z Z Z
Truck Stop 5541 Z Z
Used Merchandise Store/Antique Store, w/o outside storage 5932 Z Z Z Z
Video Tape Rental and Sales (Except Adult Video Store) 7841 Z Z Z Z
WHOLESALE TRADE
Agricultural Chemicals, Pesticides or Fertilizers 5191 C
Agricultural Products, Other Including Tobacco Auction Warehousing 5159 Z Z
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-10
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
Apparel, Piece Goods and Notions 5130 Z
Bees and Honey (five (5) or fewer hives) 112910 Z Z Z Z Z Z Section 180.11
Bees and Honey (more than five (5) hives) 112910 S
Beer, Wine or Distilled Alcoholic Beverages 5180 Z
Books, Periodicals and Newspapers 5192 Z
Chemicals and Allied Products 5169 C
Drugs and Sundries 5122 Z
Durable Goods 5099 Z
Electrical Goods 5060 Z
Farm Supplies, Other Than Chemicals 5191 Z
Flowers, Nursery Stock and Florist Supplies 5193 Z Z
Forest Products 5099 Z
Furniture and Home Furnishings 5020 Z
Grain and Field Beans 5153 Z
Groceries and Related Products 5140 Z
Hardware 5072 Z
Jewelry, Watches, Precious Stones and Metals 5094 Z
Lumber and Other Construction Materials 5030 Z
Lumber, Millwork and Veneer 5031 Z
Machinery, Construction and Mining 5082 Z
Machinery, Equipment and Supplies 5080 Z
Machinery, Farm and Garden 5083 Z
Market Showroom (furniture, apparel, etc.) 0000 Z
Metals 5051 Z
Minerals 5052 Z
Motor Vehicles 5012 Z
Motor Vehicles, Parts and Supplies 5010 Z
Motor Vehicles, Tires and Tubes 5014 Z
Paints and Varnishes 5198 C
Paper and Paper Products 5110 Z
Petroleum and Petroleum Products 5170 C
Plastic Materials 5162 Z
Plumbing and AC/Heating Equipment 5070 Z
Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies 5040 Z
Resins 5162 C
Scrap and Waste Materials 5093 C
Sporting and Recreational Goods and Supplies 5091 Z
Tobacco and Tobacco Products 5194 Z
Toys and Hobby Goods and Supplies 5092 Z
Wallpaper and Paint Brushes 5198 Z
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-11
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
TRANSPORTATION, WAREHOUSING AND UTILITIES
Airport or Air Transportation Facility 4500 C C
Bulk Mail and Packaging 4212 S S Z
Bus Terminal 4100 S S S
Courier Service 4215 S S Z
Farm Product Warehousing and Storage 4221 S S
Heliport 4522 C
Landing Strip, Flying Field 0000 S
Marina 4493 S S S S S S S S S S Section 175
Moving and Storage Service 4214 Z
Outside Bulk Storage (Non-Hazardous) 0000 S C Z
Railroad Terminal or Yard 4010 S
Recycling Materials Collection/Processing Operations C Z
Refrigerated Warehousing 4222 Z
Solar Farm C Section 180.10
Taxi Terminal 4121 S S S
Trucking or Freight Terminal 4213 S Z
Utility Company Office (No Outside Storage) 0000 Z Z Z Z Z
Utility Equipment and Storage Yards 0000 Z
Utility Lines 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z
Utility Service Facility (no outside storage) 0000 Z
Utility Related Appurtenances, Substation 0000 C C C C C C C C C
Warehouse (general storage, enclosed) 4220 S Z
Warehouse (self-storage) 4225 C
Water Treatment Plant 0000 C C C C C C C C C C C C
MANUFACTURING and INDUSTRIAL USES
Aircraft and Parts 3720 Z
Ammunition, Small Arms 3482 C
Animal Feeds (including dog and cat) 2048 C
Apparel and Finished Fabric Products 2300 Z
Arms and Weapons 3480 Z
Asbestos, Abrasive and Related Products 3290 C
Asphalt Plant 2951 C
Audio, Video and Communications Equipment 3600 Z
Bakery Products 2050 C Z
Batteries 3691 S
Beverage Products (alcoholic) 2080 C C Z
Beverage Products (nonalcoholic) 2086 C C Z
Bicycle Assembly, Parts and Accessories 3751 Z
Boat and Ship Building 3730 S Z
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-12
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
Brooms and Brushes 3991 Z
Burial Caskets 3995 Z
Chemicals, Paints and Allied Products 2800 C
Coffee 2095 Z
Computer and Office Equipment 3570 Z
Concrete, Cut Stone and Clay Products 3200 S
Contractors (no outside storage) 0000 Z
Contractors, General Building 1500 Z
Contractors, Heavy Construction 1600 Z
Contractors, Special Trade 1700 Z
Costume Jewelry and Notions 3960 Z
Dairy Products 2020 Z
Drugs 2830 Z
Electrical Components 3670 Z
Electrical Equipment 3600 Z
Electrical Industrial Apparatus, Assembly 3620 Z
Electrical Industrial Apparatus, Manufacturing 3620 Z
Explosives 2892 C
Fabricated Metal Products 3400 Z
Fabricated Valve and Wire Products 3490 Z
Fats and Oils, Animal 2077 S
Fats and Oils, Plant 2070 Z
Fish, Canned, Cured or Frozen 2091 C
Floor Coverings (excluding carpet) 3996 Z
Food and Related Products, Miscellaneous 2090 Z
Furniture and Fixtures 2500 Z
Furniture and Fixtures Assembly 0000 Z
Furniture Framing 2426 Z
Glass 3200 Z
Glass Products from Purchased Glass 3231 Z
Grain Mill Products 2040 S
HVAC, Equipment and Plumbing Fixtures 3430 Z
Household Appliances 3630 Z
Ice 2097 Z
Industrial and Commercial Machinery 3500 Z
Jewelry and Silverware (no platting) 3910 Z
Leather and Leather Products (no tanning) 3100 Z
Leather and Leather Products (tanning) 3100 C
Lighting and Wiring Equipment 3640 Z
Manufactured Housing and Wood Buildings 2450 C
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-13
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
Measurement, Analysis and Control Instruments 3800 Z
Medical, Dental and Surgical Equipment 3840 Z
Metal Coating and Engraving 3470 S
Metal Fasteners (screws, bolts, etc.) 3450 Z
Metal Processing 3350 S
Millwork, Plywood and Veneer 2430 Z
Motor Vehicle Assembly (No Outside Storage) 3710 Z
Motor Vehicle Parts and Accessories (No Outside Storage) 3714 Z
Motorcycle Assembly 3751 Z
Musical Instruments 3930 Z
Paper Products 2670 C
Paperboard Containers and Boxes 2650 C
Pens and Art Supplies 3950 Z
Petroleum and Related Industries 2900 C
Pharmaceutical Preparations 2834 C
Photographic Equipment 3861 Z
Photographic Supplies 3861 C
Pottery and Related Products 3260 Z
Preserved Fruits and Vegetables (no can manufacture) 2030 Z
Primary Metal Products and Foundries 3300 C
Printing and Publishing 2700 C C Z
Rubber and Plastics, Miscellaneous 3000 C
Sawmill or Planing Mills 2420 Z
Signs 3993 C Z
Soaps and Cosmetics 2840 Z
Sporting Goods and Toys 3940 Z
Sugar and Confectionery Products 2060 Z
Textile Products (no dying and finishing) 2200 Z
Textile Products (with dying and finishing) 2260 C
Tires and Inner Tubes 3011 C
Tobacco Products 2110 Z
Wood Containers 2440 Z
Wood Products, Logging 2411 C
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
New Wireless Towers 0 C C C C C C Section 180.7
Modified Wireless Towers 0 C C C C C C Section 180.7
Small Wireless Facilities 0 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Section 180.7
Co-location of WTA on existing Wireless Tower or AASS 0 Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Z Section 180.7
OTHER USES
Animal Shelter S
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-14
Section 146 Edenton UDO Table of Permitted Uses
Ref. Zoning Districts Supplemental
Use Type SIC RA R-40 R-20 R-14 R-10 R-5 CD CH CN MA IW SC Regulations
Resort/Conference Facility 0000 C C C C Section 180.6
Special Events 7999 C C Section 161
Outdoor Fruit and Vegetable Markets 5431 Z S Z Z
Sexually-Oriented Businesses 0000 C Section 180.2
Shopping Center, <80,000 sq.ft. 0000 Z Section 180.4
Shopping Center, 80,000 sq.ft. or more 0000 C Section 180.4
Subdivision, Major (Residential and Commercial) 0000 C C C C C C C C C C C C Section 176, 177
Subdivision, Minor 0000 Z Z Z Z Z Z C C C Z Z C
Temporary Uses/Sales 0000 Z Z Z Section 161.1
Z = Use permitted by Zoning Administrator. ZC = For Multi-family and Townhouse Dwellings Only:
S = Special Use Permit by Board of Adjustment. Within CD District : Z = 2 units or less
C = Conditional Use Permit by Town Council. C = 3 units or more
All Other Districts: Z = 4 units or less
C = 5 units or more
Refer to the following sections for supplemental regulations for overlay districts:
Airport Hazard Overlay District - Section 167
Historic Overlay District - Section 168
South Broad Street Residential Overlay District - Section 168A
Roadway Corridor Overlay District - Section 180.9
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance (10/99) 10-15
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-1
ARTICLE XI
SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS
Section 158 Planned Residential Developments.
(a) Planned residential developments (PRD's) are permissible only as a conditional use on tracts
of at least five acres located within a R-20, R-14, R-10, or R-5 zoning district.
(b) The overall density of a tract developed by a PRD shall be determined as provided in Section
182 for the underlying district in which the PRD is located.
(c) Permissible types of residential uses within a PRD include single-family detached dwellings,
two-family residences, townhouse dwellings, and multi-family residences. At least fifty percent of the total
number of dwelling units must be single-family detached residences on lots of at least 5,000 square feet.
(d) A PRD shall be an architecturally integrated subdivision.
(e) To the extent practicable, the two-family and multi-family portions of a PRD shall be
developed more toward the interior rather than the periphery of the tract so that the single-family detached
residences border adjacent properties.
(f) In a planned residential development, the screening requirements that would normally apply
where two-family or multi-family development adjoins a single-family development shall not apply within the
tract developed as a planned residential development, but all screening requirements shall apply between
the tract so developed and adjacent lots.
Section 159 Manufactured Home Parks.
(a) The minimum lot area for a manufactured home park is 3 acres; the minimum number of
manufactured home spaces for a manufactured home park is 10 spaces.
(b) Manufactured home parks shall contain only Class C manufactured homes.
(c) Each manufactured home space shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet. (Amended
2/12/91)
(d) No manufactured home shall be located closer than 20 feet from another manufactured home
or any other principal building within the manufactured home park. No manufactured home shall be
located closer than 60 feet from a public street right-of-way or 15 feet from a private, interior manufactured
home park street.
(e) Recreational space in each manufactured home park shall be provided in accordance with
Article XIII.
(f) Except for management office and/or management services associated with the
manufactured home park, no manufactured home shall be used for nonresidential purposes.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-2
(g) The area beneath a manufactured home must be fully enclosed with durable skirting within 60
days of placement in the manufactured home park.
Section 160 Service Stations/Gas Sales Operations.
(a) Air compressors, hydraulic hoists, pits, repair equipment, greasing and lubrication equipment,
auto washing equipment and similar equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a building.
(b) Certification by a registered engineer shall be required to ensure the prevention of petroleum
and petroleum related product runoffs into the existing municipal storm drainage system.
(c) All garbage and refuse shall be stored in mechanical loading containers located near the rear
of the lot or building, but not less than twenty feet from any adjacent property lines.
Section 161 Special Events.
(a) In deciding whether a permit for a special event should be denied for any reason specified in
Subsection 54(d), or in deciding what additional conditions to impose under Section 60, the permit-issuing
authority shall ensure that, (if the special event is conducted at all):
(1) The hours of operation allowed shall be compatible with the uses adjacent to the
activity.
(2) The amount of noise generated shall not disrupt the activities of the adjacent land
uses.
(3) The applicants shall guarantee that all litter generated by the special event be
removed at no expense to the Town.
(4) The permit issuing authority shall not grant the permit unless it finds that the
parking generated by the event can be accommodated without undue disruption to
or interference with the normal flow of traffic or with the right of adjacent and
surrounding property owners.
(5) The zoning permit shall be issued for a specific number of calendar days, not to
exceed fourteen (14) calendar days.
(b) In cases where it is deemed necessary, the permit-issuing authority may require the applicant
to post a bond to ensure compliance with the conditions of the conditional use permit.
(c) If the permit applicant requests the Town to provide extraordinary services or equipment or if
the Town Manager otherwise determines that extraordinary services or equipment should be provided to
protect the public health or safety, the applicant shall be required to pay to the Town a fee sufficient to
reimburse the Town for the costs of these services. This requirement shall not apply if the event has been
anticipated in the budget process and sufficient funds have been included in the budget to cover the cost
incurred.
Section 161.1 Temporary Use/Sales.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-3
(a) All temporary use/sales require the issuance of a zoning permit. The Land Use Administrator
may impose requirements in the zoning permit intended to ensure compliance with this Ordinance.
(b) A zoning permit for a temporary use may also authorize one temporary sign, not to exceed 40
square feet in sign surface area, associated with the temporary use. Such temporary sign shall conform to
the requirements of Article XVII.
(c) Temporary sales are permitted on CD, CH, and CN zoned property provided that no more
than four (4) events occur within a 365-day period on an individual parcel. Each individual sales event
shall be limited to two (2) calendar days duration. The operator of each temporary sales event shall have
the written permission of the property owner or manager of the principal business located on the property
on which the temporary sale is to be conducted. If more than four (4) events occur within a 365 calendar
day period, they must be located on a property owned or leased by a registered 501(c)(3) for tax purposes
and the permit shall be issued only to the 501(c)(3) organization. Christmas tree and accessory natural
ornamental sales may be conducted from three (3) calendar days prior to Thanksgiving until 5:00 pm on
Christmas Eve.
(d) Temporary uses for which the primary purpose is not the sale of commodities shall have a
maximum specified time (specified by zoning permit) limit of seven (7) calendar days. Such temporary
uses shall include assembly of people for entertainment, holiday festivals, social, political, religious or
similar activities. Temporary uses, described in this section, which include the sale/use of alcoholic
beverages shall submit all ABC permits with the application for a zoning permit. No permanent building
shall be located on any lot for the exclusive purpose of operating any temporary use(s). Temporary uses
may be unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property where the temporary
use is to be located. Any use intended for temporary and limited duration, operated as an accessory or
principal use, shall be subject to applicable location, setback, parking, land use and other standards for
the district in which it is located.
(e) Temporary sales conducted on the grounds of a church, synagogue, temple, or other religious
building or schools for the purpose of raising funds for the support of the principal use are considered
accessory services. The religious institution or school must request the zoning permit.
(f) Temporary uses are not allowed on any OI zoned parcel which is adjacent to any residentially
zoned or used parcel, excluding parcels separated by a public right-of-way.
Section 162 Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
(a) A bed and breakfast shall be permitted only in a principal residential structure.
(b) One parking space for each guest room plus two parking spaces for the resident owners or
manager shall be provided.
(c) A bed and breakfast shall be located in a dwelling in which there is a resident owner or
resident manager.
(d) Food service shall be available only to guests and not to the general public.
(e) Signage shall be limited to one identification sign not to exceed four square feet in area nor
four feet in height.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-4
(f) A bed and breakfast shall have vehicular access to a subcollector or higher classified
street.
(g) The right to operate any bed and breakfast use, whether conforming or nonconforming,
shall be fully transferable with the property and shall furthermore run with the land.
(h) The bed and breakfast must be located in a principal structure containing two thousand
five hundred (2,500) or more square feet of gross enclosed floor area
(i) The use of the dwelling unit for the bed and breakfast shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use as a principal residence. The maximum number of guest rooms
allowed is four (4).
Section 162.1 Granny Pods/Temporary Health Care Structures.
Granny pods, also called temporary health care structures, are permitted under the authority of
NC General Statutes Section 160A-383.5. Granny pods are considered a temporary health care
structure used by a caregiver in providing care for a mentally or physically impaired person on property
owned or occupied by the caregiver as the caregiver’s residence and shall be permitted as an
accessory use in accordance with Section 146 Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the following
standards:
(a) The granny pod must comply with all district standards that apply to the principal
dwelling unit.
(b) Structures must be transportable residential units assembled off-site and built to the
standards of the North Carolina State Building Code.
(c) The structure must be no more than three hundred (300) gross square feet and must
not be placed on a permanent foundation.
(d) The structure shall be connected to any public water, sewer, and electric utilities
serving the property or water and/or wastewater systems approved by Chowan County.
(e) Only one accessory temporary family care structure is allowed per lot.
(f) No signage regarding the presence of the structure is allowed.
(g) The structure must be removed within sixty (60) days after care-giving on the site
ceases.
(h) The caregiver must be at least 18 years old and must be a first or second degree
relative of the impaired person (a spouse, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, aunt,
uncle, nephew, or niece). A legal guardian of the impaired person also qualifies.
(i) In the commercial districts, granny pods shall only be permitted for properties in singlefamily
residential use.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-5
(j) Documentation of compliance with this section is required on an annual basis as long
as the granny pod/temporary health care structure remains on the property. This
documentation includes an annual renewal of the doctor’s certification. The Town may
make periodic inspections at times convenient to the caregiver to assure on-going
compliance.
Section 162.2. Inn.
(a) An inn shall be located in a dwelling in which there is a resident owner or resident
manager.
(b) One parking space for each guest room plus two parking spaces for the resident
owners or manager shall be provided.
(c) Signage shall be limited to one identification sign not to exceed four square feet in area
nor four feet in height.
(d) An inn shall have vehicular access to a subcollector or higher classified street.
(e) The right to operate any inn use, whether conforming or nonconforming, shall be fully
transferable with the property and shall furthermore run with the land.
Section 162.3 Tiny Houses.
Tiny houses (200 square feet to 699 square feet in size), including container homes, shall be
allowed in accordance with Section 146 Table of Permitted Uses, subject to the following:
(a) A tiny house must comply with the North Carolina State Building Code.
(b) A tiny house must be situated on a permanent foundation with secure wind-resistant tiedowns
and connected to public water, sewer, and electric utilities.
(c) If the tiny house is constructed on a travel chassis with wheels, the wheels must be
removed for permanent location on a foundation.
(d) A tiny house must comply with all UDO requirements for the zoning district in which it is
located.
Section 163 Special Services Homes.
(a) Special services homes include group care facilities and homeless shelters. (Amended
3/19/99)
(b) The minimum room sizes in a special services home shall be 150 square feet for a living or
principal room, 100 square feet for a kitchen and dining room combination, 100 square feet for the first
bedroom, and 70 square feet for each additional bedroom.
(c) The issuance of a permit for a special services home shall be conditioned upon the applicant
obtaining any required state license within ninety days after approval of the permit.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-6
(d) No special services home shall house mentally ill persons who are determined to be
dangerous to others as defined in NCGS 122C-3(11)b.
(e) Signage shall be limited to a nameplate not to exceed two square feet in area.
(f) The applicant shall submit to the permit issuing authority a statement addressing (1) the
number of staff personnel to reside in the facility and their backgrounds and qualifications; (2) the number
of individuals to be housed in the facility, the purpose of the facility, and the nature of the handicap of the
individuals who will reside there; and (3) the intake criteria which have been or will be used in screening
the persons who will live in and benefit from the facility.
Section 164 Day Care Centers, Adult and Child.
(a) There shall be a minimum of 25 square feet of indoor space, exclusive of closets,
passageways, kitchens, and bathrooms per client.
(b) There shall be a minimum of 75 square feet of outdoor recreational space for each child. The
outdoor recreational area shall be located in a side or rear yard and shall be enclosed by a fence of at
least four feet in height.
(c) The hours of operation of a day care center may be limited by the permit issuing authority for
facilities located in residential neighborhoods.
Section 165 Cemeteries.
(a) A cemetery shall contain not less than thirty acres of land in contiguous ownership.
(b) Chapels, mortuaries, mausoleums, and sales and administrative offices may be developed
within the cemetery. Not more than two such buildings shall be permitted in any cemetery. Access to the
buildings shall be from within the cemetery. No building permitted by these requirements shall be located
closer than one hundred fifty feet to any residential dwelling on land adjoining the cemetery.
I. Access to the cemetery shall be provided by-way-of private drives extending from a public street and of
sufficient width to accommodate two-way traffic. Parking shall be provided entirely on private internal
roads.
(c) A perimeter buffer strip of fifty feet in depth shall be maintained around the entire cemetery.
There shall be no burial sites, buildings or other structures located within the buffer strip, and the strip shall
be planted in accordance with Article XIX so as to effectively screen the cemetery and burial activities
therein from view from outside of the cemetery.
Section 166 Microbreweries.
Microbreweries shall be permitted in the CD and CH districts as a conditional use, subject to the
following location, size, and design requirements:
(a) Microbreweries shall not be located within two hundred (200) feet of a public park; and
(b) Outside gathering areas shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential
district; and
(c) Shall be limited to those meeting the criteria for a microbrewery or a restaurant; and
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-7
(d) Required parking shall be calculated based on square footage proposed for each use; and
(e) Storage of materials, including silos, products for distribution and other items requiring longterm
storage shall be allowed in areas behind the building, in enclosed buildings, or otherwise screened
from the public right-of-way or pedestrian way; and
(f) Shall include one or more accessory uses such as a tasting room, tap room, restaurant, retail,
demonstration area, education and training facility or other use incidental to the brewery and open and
accessible to the public; and
(g) Shall be designed such that all newly constructed loading and unloading facilities are internal
to the site or in service alleys or back of building.
Section 167 Airport Hazard Overlay District Requirements.
(a) The Airport Hazard Overlay (AHO) District shall encompass the approach zones at the
Edenton Municipal Airport. The approach zone shall have a length of 10,000 feet beginning at a point 200
feet outward from the ends of the runways and extending outward to a point 10,200 feet from the end of
the runways on the extended centerline of the runways. The width of the approach zone shall be 1,000
feet at a distance of 200 feet from the end of the runways, uniformly widening thereafter to a width of 4,000
feet at a distance of 10,200 feet beyond the end of the runways. The upper surface of the approach zone
shall be an inclined plane sloping one foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a
point 200 feet from and at the elevation of the runways, extending to a distance of 10,200 feet from the
end of the runways.
(b) No structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in the approach
zone to a height which projects above the upper surface of the approach zone.
(c) Within the approach zone defined in subsection (a) is a clear zone. The clear zone shall have
a length of 1,700 feet beginning at a point 200 feet outward from the end of the runways and extending
outward to a point 1,900 feet from the end of the runways on the extended centerline of the runways. The
width of the clear zone shall be 1,000 feet at a distance of 200 feet from the end of the runways, uniformly
widening thereafter to a width of 1,510 feet at a distance of 1,900 feet beyond the end of the runways.
(d) Land uses permitted within the clear zone shall be as allowed in the underlying zoning district
except that the following uses and activities are prohibited:
(1) residential uses
(2) educational, cultural, religious, philanthropic uses
(3) recreation, amusement, and entertainment uses
(4) institutional residences or care or confinement facilities
(5) restaurants, bars, and nightclubs
(6) nursery schools and day care centers
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-8
(7) special temporary events
(8) the permanent above-ground storage of flammable liquids and gases.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, no use may be made of land or
water within any zone established by this section in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and other lights, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport,
impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or
interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
Section 168 Historic Overlay District Requirements.
(a) The use and development of any land or structure within the Historic Overlay District shall
comply with the use regulations and intensity regulations applicable to the underlying zoning district except
that (i) no manufactured home shall be located within an Historic Overlay District, (ii) no building or part of
a building shall extend nearer to or be required to be set back further from the front street right-of-way than
the average distance of the setbacks of the nearest principal structures in the vicinity of such building and
fronting on the same side of the street, and (iii) no principal or accessory building shall be required to be
set back further from a side or rear property line than the average distance of the setbacks of the nearest
principal or accessory structures in the vicinity of such building.
(b) No exterior portion of any building or other structure (including masonry walls, fences, light
fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features), or any above-ground utility structure, or any
type of outdoor advertising sign shall be erected, altered, restored, moved, or demolished within the
Historic District until after an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness as to exterior architectural
features has been submitted to and approved by the Historic District Commission.
For purposes of this article, "exterior architectural features" shall include the architectural
style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the
kind and texture of the building material, the size and scale of the building, and the type and style of all
windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and other appurtenant fixtures. In the case of outdoor advertising
signs, "exterior architectural features" shall be construed to mean the style, material, size, and location of
all such signs. Such ‘exterior features’ may, in the discretion of the Town Council, include historic signs,
color, and significant landscape, archaeological, and natural features of the area.
Such a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be issued by the Commission prior to the issuance
of a building permit or any other permit granted for purposes of constructing, altering, or demolishing
buildings or structures. A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building permit
is required. Any building permit or other permit not issued in conformity with this section shall be invalid.
The Town and all public utility companies shall be required to obtain a Certificate of
Appropriateness prior to initiating any changes in the character of street paving, sidewalks, utility
installations, lighting, walls, fences, structures, and buildings on property, easements, or streets owned or
franchised by the Town of Edenton or public utility companies.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-9
(c) Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any
exterior architectural feature in the Historic District that does not involve a change in design, material, or
outer appearance thereof, or to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving, or
demolition of any such feature that the Building Inspector or similar official shall certify is required by the
public safety because of unsafe or dangerous condition. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
prevent property owners from making any use of their property that is not prohibited by other law. Nothing
is this article shall be construed to prevent the maintenance, or in the event of an emergency the
immediate restoration, of any existing above-ground utility structure without approval by the Historic District
Commission. (Adopted 5/97)
On the basis of preliminary sketches or drawings and other supporting data, the administrator
may exempt from requirements for a Certificate of Appropriateness projects involving the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature that does not involve a change in design,
material, or outer appearance thereof. The administrator shall notify the Commission of all such
exemptions.
(d) Procedures for Approval of Certificates of Appropriateness:
(1) Application Submittal Requirements:
Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness shall be filed with the administrator.
The administrator shall prescribe the form(s) on which applications are made, as well
as any other material which may reasonably be required to determine the nature of the
application. When an authorized agent files an application on behalf of a property
owner, the agent shall provide the Town with written documentation that the owner of
the property has authorized the filing of the application.
The Commission may specify criteria for situations in which the administrator may
waive any of the application material requirements.
No application shall be accepted by the administrator unless it complies with such
requirements. Applications which are not complete shall be returned forthwith to the
applicant, with a notation of the deficiencies in the application.
(2) Notification of Affected Property Owners:
Prior to approval or denial of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the
Commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the
owners of any property likely to be materially affected by the application, and shall give
the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard.
(3) Public Hearing:
In cases where the Commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing
concerning the application.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-10
(4) Commission Action:
Within one hundred eighty (180) days of the acceptance of an application, or within
such further time consented to by written notice from the applicant, the Commission
shall take action on the application. Such action shall be based upon the review
criteria established in Section (c) of this article, and shall be one of the following:
(Amended 1/99)
(a) Approval.
(b) Approval subject to conditions.
(c) Denial.
Failure of the Commission to take final action on an application within the prescribed
time limit, or extensions thereof, shall result in approval of the application as submitted.
The Commission may impose such reasonable conditions on its approval of an
application as will ensure that the spirit and intent of this article are achieved.
An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness authorizing the demolition of a
building or structure within the Historic District may not be denied. However, the
effective date of such a certificate may be delayed for a period of up to three hundred
sixty-five (365) days from the date of approval. The maximum period of delay
authorized by this section shall be reduced by the Commission where it finds that the
owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use
of or return from such property by virtue of the delay. During such period, the
Commission may negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an effort to find
a means of preserving the building. If the Commission finds that the building has no
particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the Historic District,
it shall waive all or part of such period and authorize earlier demolition or removal.
(Amended 1/99)
An application for a Certificate of Appropriateness authorizing the demolition or
destruction of a building, site, or structure determined by the State Historical
Preservation Officer as having statewide significance as defined in the criteria of the
National Register of Historic Places may be denied except where the commission finds
that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all
beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial. (Amended 3/06)
In every case, the record of the Commission's action shall include the reasons for its
action.
(5) Actions Subsequent to Decision:
The administrator shall notify the applicant of the Commission's decision in writing, and
shall file a copy of it with the Town's Planning Department. If the applicant is denied,
the notice shall include the reasons for such action.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-11
(6) Appeal of Decision:
A decision by the Commission on an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of
Article V.
(7) Submission of New Application:
If the Commission denies an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, a new
application affecting the same property may be submitted only if substantive change is
made in plans for the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or
moving.
(8) Modifications to applications:
An approved or pending application for a Certificate of Appropriateness may be
modified by a written request from the applicant to the Commission. Such a request
shall include a description of the proposed change and shall be accompanied by
elevations, plans or sketches, where necessary. If the Commission finds that the
modification constitutes a substantial change which might affect surrounding property
owners, it shall request the applicant to notify affected property owners following the
procedures set out in subsection (d)(2) before taking action on the modification. The
Commission shall thereupon treat the request in the same manner as any other
application as outlined in subsection (d).
(e) Review Criteria. In considering an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the
Commission shall take into account the historical and/or architectural significance of the structure under
consideration and the exterior form and appearance of any proposed additions or modifications to that
structure that are visible from a public right-of-way. The Commission shall not consider interior
arrangement or use.
The Commission, using the criteria below, shall make findings of fact indicating the extent to
which the application is or is not congruous with the historic aspects of the Historic District.
The following criteria shall be considered, when relevant, by the Commission in review
applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness:
(1) The height of the building in relation to the average height of the nearest adjacent and
opposite buildings.
(2) The setback and placement on lot of the building in relation to the average setback and
placement of the nearest adjacent and opposite buildings.
(3) Exterior construction materials, including texture and pattern.
(4) Architectural detailing, such as lintels, cornices, brick bond, and foundation materials.
(5) Roof shapes, forms, and materials.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-12
(6) Proportion, shape, positioning and location, pattern, and size of any elements of
fenestration.
(7) General form and proportions of buildings and structures.
(8) Appurtenant fixtures and other features such as lighting.
(9) Structural conditions and soundness.
(1) Architectural scale.
Section 168A South Broad Street Residential Overlay District Requirements
The South Broad Street residential overlay district applies to all parcels of property fronting on the
South Broad Street right-of-way from the West Church Street/Broad Street intersection to 501 South
Broad Street (Edenton Office Supply property) and 504 South Broad Street (Edenton Municipal
Building/Council Chambers). Within the South Broad Street Residential Overlay District, residential
use of the first floor of a building is prohibited.
However, residential use as an accessory to commercial/retail use is permitted by Special Use Permit.
No more than 33% of the first floor gross area shall be devoted to residential living area. Residential
living area shall not be visible from South Broad Street-window and door views from the street shall be
of the commercial and retail space. The combination of residential and commercial/retail space shall
comply with all NC Building Codes and Fire Codes. A floor plan must be submitted as part of the
application for a Special Use Permit.
Section 169 Multi-Family Dwellings.
(a) Multi-family dwellings located in any permitted nonresidential zoning district shall comply with
the minimum lot area, width, and setback requirements of the R-5 district.
(b) The minimum spacing between multi-family residential structures shall be 20 feet.
Section 170 Institutional Care Facilities.
(a) Institutional care facilities include (1) hospitals, clinics, and other medical treatment facilities in
excess of 10,000 square feet; (2) nursing, convalescent and group care institutions, (3) orphanages, and
(4) psychiatric hospitals. (Amended 12/3/98)
(b) The minimum lot area requirements for institutional care facilities shall be 8,000 square feet
for the first nine patient beds plus 1,000 square feet for each additional patient bed. This standard shall
apply to institutions providing individual patient rooms or suites of patient rooms that also include
congregate kitchen and dining facilities.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-13
(c) In addition to facilities providing patient beds, institutional care facilities may include
single-family and multi-family dwellings. Such dwellings may be allowed in accordance with the minimum
lot area standards of the MA zoning district. Residential building setbacks may be waived between
individual buildings but the setbacks on the perimeter of the development shall be the same as that for the
zoning district in which located. The minimum spacing between nonresidential buildings should be at least
twenty feet.
Section 171 Golf Courses.
(a) All golf course greens and fairways shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property line.
(b) All tees and structures shall meet the minimum building setback requirements for the district in
which located.
Section 172 Solid Waste Disposal.
(a) No refuse shall be deposited and no building or structure shall be located within 50 feet of the
nearest property line.
(b) The operation of a landfill or incinerator shall be in accordance with applicable State
regulations.
Section 173 Tattoo Parlors.
Tattoo parlors shall be permitted in the IW zoning district as a conditional use, subject to the
following requirements:
(a) The tattoo parlor may not be located or operated within five hundred (500) feet of:
(1) A church, synagogue, or regular place of worship.
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(3) A public library;
(4) A boundary of any residential district;
(5) A publicly owned park, beach, beach access, or other recreation area or facility;
(6) A licensed day care center;
(7) An entertainment business that is oriented primarily towards children.
(b) For the purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as part of the
premises where a tattoo parlor is to be conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of any use
listed in (A) above.
(c) Tattoo parlors must comply with the following:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-14
(1) Hours of operation must be limited to 8:00 AM to 2:00 AM (Monday through 2 AM
Sunday). Such establishment shall not be open from 2:01 am Sunday until 8:00 AM on
Monday.
(2) Must be fully licensed by the state of North Carolina.
(3) All necessary parking must be provided on-site.
(4) Parking lot must be lighted to meet the requirements of Article XV, Utilities.
Section 174 Fuel Oil/Propane Sales.
(a) The use must meet the requirements established by the fire prevention code of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters and the latest edition of the "Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, NFPA
30" of the National Fire Protection Association.
(b) All storage tanks and loading facilities will be located at least 200 feet from any property line.
The required buffer area shall contain a sufficient amount of natural or planted vegetation so that such
facilities are screened visually from an adjoining property not located in an industrial district.
(c) Vehicle access to the use will be provided only by way of a U.S. or N.C. numbered highway.
(d) All principal and accessory structures and off-street parking and service areas will be
separated by a 25-foot buffer from any abutting property.
Section 175 Marina.
(a) The marina must meet the specific standards of Title 15, Subchapter 7H, Section .0208(b) (5)
of the N.C. Administrative Code and the General Use Standards for coastal wetlands, estuarine waters,
and public trust areas.
(b) The marina shall include public restroom facilities and a public telephone.
Section 176 Waterfront Subdivisions.
(a) Where a residential subdivision which adjoins a waterfront contains interior lots, which do not
adjoin the water's edge but any part of which is within 400 feet of the water's edge, one or more lots which
adjoin the water's edge shall be reserved to provide water access for the owners of interior properties.
Such lots shall hereafter be called water access lots.
(b) If property which is in the same ownership adjoins said subdivision, this property shall be
construed as being a part of the subdivision for purposes of determining requirements of water access
lots.
(c) The water access lots shall equal in area not less than ten percent (10%) of the area
(exclusive of streets) of all the interior property which lies within four hundred fifty (450) feet of the water's
edge. However, where the 10% would equal less than 15,000 square feet, the developer shall not be
required to provide any water access lots. All water access lots shall have a minimum frontage at the
water's edge of one hundred (100) feet.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-15
(d) Before approval of the final plat can be given, the developer shall submit to the administration
a covenant stating that he will (1) dedicate the required amount of water access lots to the purchasers of
each interior lot, said purchasers to have common ownership of the water access lots with undivided fee
simple interest and shall be equally responsible for the maintenance of water access lots or (2) transfer the
required amount of water access lots to a homeowner's association for ownership and maintenance.
(e) The final subdivision plat shall designate the following: (1) the lot or lots that are to serve as
water access lots, and (2) the lots the owners of which are to have common title to the water access lots.
(Example: Owners of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. to have Undivided Fee Simple Title to this water access lot.)
(f) Public water access shall be provided in accordance with Section 177, if applicable.
Section 177 Public Water Access.
(a) All residential developments which adjoin a waterfront for 1,000 feet or more shall be required
to include in the proposed development a plan for public water access.
(b) The permit-issuing authority shall review and approve the plan for public water access.
Section 178 Compliance with State Guidelines for Areas of Environmental Concern.
(a) Prior to the issuance of any initial zoning, special use, or conditional use permit, the
administrator and local AEC Permit Officer shall determine whether the proposed use or structure is
located within an area of environmental concern. This determination shall result from both an on-site
investigation and a review of the official AEC overlay map. If the proposed use or structure is located in an
area of environmental concern, the administrator and local AEC Permit Officer shall certify that the
proposed use or structure complies with development standards of the State Guidelines for Areas of
Environmental Concern and the CAMA permit shall be issued to the developer prior to the issuance of any
zoning, special use, or conditional use permits.
(b) The Coastal Resources Commission has adopted use standards for development along
estuarine shorelines and development within coastal wetlands, estuarine waters, and public trust areas.
Use standards have been adopted for the following development activities: hydraulic dredging; navigation
channels, canals, and boat basins; docks and piers; bulkheads and shoreline stabilization; groins;
marinas; drainage ditches; and beach nourishment.
Section 179 Walls and Fences.
The setback requirements for these regulations shall not prohibit any necessary retaining wall or
prohibit any planted buffer strip, fence or wall. However, in a residential district (excluding the Gateway
Corridor properties and the Historic District) no fence or wall shall exceed the following heights: (a) Three
(3) feet in any front or side yard measured from the front building line to lot line that abuts a street, unless
specified elsewhere in this ordinance, PROVIDED, however that the fences in such areas may extend to a
height not to exceed four (4) feet as long as that portion thereof shall be deemed not to significantly impair
vision through the fence. A fence or portion thereof shall be deemed not to significantly impair vision if its
material does not exceed that of a standard chain link fence. (b) Six (6) feet in any rear or side yard
measured from the front building line to lot line which does not abut a street. These restrictions shall not
apply to a bona fide farm. Within the Historic Overlay District, the Historic District Commission will regulate
the height of all fences. (Amended 10/03)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-16
Section 180 Satellite Dish Antenna.
(a) The provisions of this section shall apply only to satellite dish antenna that are greater than 18
inches in diameter. (Amended 12/3/98)
(b) In all zoning districts, a satellite dish antenna shall be installed only in a side or rear yard and
shall not be located within any required building setback. In all zoning districts, a satellite dish antenna
may not be installed abutting a street. (Amended 12/3/98)
(c) In all nonresidential districts, a satellite dish antenna may be installed on the roof of the
principal structure provided it is sufficiently anchored to a rafter, girder, or other superstructure member of
the building so as to be structurally secure.
(d) A satellite dish antenna shall be permanently ground or roof mounted (where permitted), and
no antenna shall be installed on a portable or moveable structure except to transport an antenna to a
permanent site or to provide a temporary on-site antenna for testing purposes not to exceed seven days in
duration.
(e) A satellite dish antenna shall be painted with a dull, non-glossy finish. No lettering, numerals
or pattern shall be permitted on the dish surface other than the name of the manufacturer in letters not to
exceed two inches in height.
(f) No satellite dish antenna shall exceed an overall height of 5 feet above existing grade when
located on the ground, and when located on the roof of a building in a nonresidential district, shall exceed
the building height limitation for the district in which it is located. (Amended 3/19/99)
Section 180.1 Manufactured Homes Sales.
(a) The manufactured homes located on a sales lot shall not occupy an area greater than 50
percent of the total lot area.
(b) Individual manufactured homes located on a sales lot shall be set back 50 feet from the public
street right-of-way.
Section 180.2 Sexually-Oriented Businesses.
(a) No sexually-oriented business shall locate within 1,320 feet of any other sexually-oriented
business.
(b) No sexually-oriented business shall locate within 1,000 feet of a church, public or private
school, day care center or nursery school, public park, or residentially-zoned or used property. (Amended
3/99)
(c) No sexually-oriented business shall locate within an historic district.
(d) Except for adult motels, no sexually-oriented business shall have sleeping quarters.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-17
(e) There shall not be more than one sexually-oriented business in the same building, structure,
or portion thereof. No other principal or accessory use may occupy the same building, structure, property,
or portion thereof with any sexually-oriented business.
(f) Except for business identification signs permitted in accordance with Section 280 or Section
281 of Article XVII, no other exterior advertising, promotional materials, or signage that is visible to the
public from a street, sidewalk, or walkway shall be permitted.
(g) The hours of operation shall be compatible with the land uses adjacent to the proposed site.
(h) The use shall be sited and operated so as to not produce noise or sound which would
adversely impact adjoining and surrounding properties.
(i) Outdoor lighting structures shall be located, angled, shielded, or limited in intensity so as to
cast no direct light upon adjacent property and to avoid the creation of a visual safety hazard to passing
motorists.
Section 180.3 Bars, Night Clubs, and Taverns.
(a) No bar, night club or tavern shall be located within 500 feet (measured property line to
property line) of any other bar, night club or tavern.
(b) No such establishment shall be located within 500 feet (measured property line to property
line) of a church, elementary or secondary school, public park or residentially-zoned property.
(c) The main entrance of the building housing the use shall be faced towards a street zoned
predominantly for non-residential use.
(d) Screening of abutting residences shall be installed per the Tree Committee after consultation
with neighboring property owners. (Amended 7/99)
(e) Parking areas related to the establishment shall be located no closer than 30 feet to the
property line of abutting residences.
(f) The hours of operation allowed shall be compatible with the adjacent land uses.
(g) The amount of noise generated by the use shall not disrupt the activities of the adjacent land
uses. (Amendment 1/99)
Section 180.4 Shopping Centers.
(a) Shopping Centers are classified into three categories according to the definitions section of
this ordinance (Section 15): Neighborhood, Community, & Regional. Each of the following requirements
are identified with one or more of the shopping center categories in parenthesis making that particular
regulation applicable to that particular shopping center category.
(b) Zoning & Conditional Use Permit Required (Section 146).
(c) The minimum development area for a shopping center shall be 5 acres (Regional).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-18
(d) The maximum building height is 35 feet. However, building heights up to a maximum of 50
feet may be permitted provided that one additional foot of building setback is provided for each one foot in
building height over 35 feet (Community & Regional).
(e) Twenty (20) percent of the gross site area shall be landscaped open space (Neighborhood,
Community & Regional).
(f) Shopping center developments that are adjacent to or across a public street right-of-way from
a residential zoning district shall provide a minimum building setback of 60 feet (Community & Regional).
(g) The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.30. Floor area ratio is the gross floor area of all
buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area (Community & Regional).
(h) In addition to the screening and landscaping requirements of Article XIX, there shall be a
minimum landscaped buffer strip of 30 feet in width along all public street right-of-way lines and 15 feet in
width along all side and rear property lines. No parking is permitted within the buffer strip (Community &
Regional). (Amended 7/99)
(i) All refuse shall be contained in completely enclosed facilities. Refuse containers and refuse
storage shall be located in a paved area and screened from public view by means of natural vegetation,
fences, walls, or berms. Such screening shall be installed, located, or constructed so as to create an
effective screen (Neighborhood, Community & Regional).
(j) On a corner lot, no curb cut shall be located closer than 75 feet to the closest right-of-way line
extended from the intersecting public or private street. No curb cut shall be located closer than 25 feet to
a side or rear lot line, unless a common curb cut serves adjacent uses, and in no instance shall the
distance between separate curb cuts serving adjacent uses be less than 125 feet (Community &
Regional).
(k) A freestanding use within the shopping center development shall have no more than 2 curb
cuts on any single public right-of-way, and such curb cuts shall have a minimum distance of 125 feet
between them (Community & Regional).
(l) The outdoor area devoted to storage, loading, and display of retail goods shall be limited to a
maximum 15 percent of the net developable lot area and shall provide screening in accordance with the
provisions of Article XIX (Neighborhood, Community, & Regional).
(m) A traffic impact assessment shall be provided in accordance with the guidelines delineated in
Appendix J (Community & Regional).
(n) An environmental review shall be provided in accordance with the guidelines delineated in
Appendix K (Regional).
(o) A fiscal impact assessment shall be provided in accordance with the guidelines delineated in
Appendix L (Regional).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-19
(p) New buildings shall be constructed of materials that are consistent with the materials used in
the construction of existing buildings within the community. Those portions of buildings visible from a
public street right-of-way shall be sheathed in materials such as wood siding, stone, brick, tilt-up concrete
panels, and sandstone and tinted/textured CMU’s in a low reflective, subtle or neutral color. Building
facades that extend greater than 100 linear feet shall incorporate into the design recesses and projections
to cover at least 20 percent of the total building frontage. No more than 40 percent of the façade of any
principal building facing a public street right-of-way shall be glass or reflective material (Neighborhood,
Community, & Regional).
(q) An architectural rendering of the proposed project shall be submitted for review at the time of
site plan submission (Neighborhood, Community, & Regional). (Amendment 3/99)
(r) A detailed lighting plan shall be submitted for review at the time of site plan submission.
Lighting plan shall illustrate the following requirements: 90% cutoff on pole lighting; a maximum height of
30’ on all pole lighting; colors and elevation details of poles and fixtures are to be standard aluminum gray
or black; the intensity of the lighting at the property lines and public streets shall be minimized to a
maximum of 3-foot candles at the property lines; no lighting elements shall be directly visible from any
public roadway, sidewalk, or adjacent property; any floodlighting attached to the building walls shall be
angled so as to not cast light directly onto adjacent properties and/or right of ways (Neighborhood,
Community, & Regional).
(s) All signage, regardless of zoning district shall meet the signage requirements for shopping
centers as noted in Section 282 of this ordinance.
Section 180.5 Department, Variety or General Merchandise Stores 25,000 Square
Feet or Larger.
(a) The provisions of this section are applicable only to department, variety or general
merchandise retail stores that encompass 25,000 square feet or more of gross floor area and to the
redesign or expansion of such stores that involves increasing gross floor space by 10 percent.
(b) The maximum building height is 35 feet. However, building heights up to a maximum of 50
feet may be permitted provided that one additional foot of building setback is provided for each one foot in
building height over 35 feet.
(c) Fifteen percent of the gross site area shall be landscaped open space.
(d) Developments that are adjacent to or across a public street right-of-way from a residential
zoning district shall provide a minimum building setback of 60 feet.
(e) The maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.30. Floor area ratio is the gross floor area of all
buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area.
(f) In addition to the screening and landscaping requirements of Article XIX, there shall be a
minimum landscaped buffer strip of 30 feet in width along all public street right-of-way lines and 15 feet in
width along all side and rear property lines. No parking is permitted within the buffer strip.
(g) No more than 50 percent of the parking provided shall be located between the front of the
principal building and the primary abutting public street.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-20
(h) All refuse shall be contained in completely enclosed facilities. Refuse containers and refuse
storage shall be located in a paved area and screened from public view by means of natural vegetation,
fences, walls, or berms. Such screening shall be installed, located, or constructed so as to create an
effective screen.
(i) Trailers used for the storage of retail goods may be located in the rear of the principal
building provided that such trailers are screened from abutting public streets or adjacent residential
properties.
(j) On a corner lot, no curb cut shall be located closer than 75 feet to the closest right-of-way line
extended from the intersecting public or private street. No curb cut shall be located closer than 25 feet to
a side or rear lot line, unless a common curb cut serves adjacent uses, and in no instance shall the
distance between separate curb cuts serving adjacent uses be less than 125 feet.
(k) The outdoor area devoted to storage, loading, and display of retail goods shall be limited to a
maximum 15 percent of the net developable lot area and shall provide screening in accordance with the
provisions of Article XIX.
(l) A traffic impact assessment shall be provided in accordance with the guidelines delineated in
Appendix J.
(m) An environmental review shall be provided in accordance with the guidelines delineated in
Appendix K.
(n) New buildings shall be constructed of materials that are consistent with the materials used in
the construction of existing buildings within the community. Those portions of buildings visible from a
public street right-of-way shall be sheathed in materials such as wood siding, stone, brick, tilt-up concrete
panels, and sandstone and tinted/textured CMU’s in a low reflective, subtle or neutral color. Building
facades that extend greater than 100 linear feet shall incorporate into the design recesses and projections
to cover at least 20 percent of the total building frontage. No more than 40 percent of the façade of any
principal building facing a public street right-of-way shall be glass or reflective material.
(o) A rendering of the proposed project shall be submitted for review at the time of site plan
submission. (Amended 3/99)
Section 180.6 Resort/Conference Facility
(a) The intent of the resort/conference facility use category is to accommodate a variety of land
uses that compliment a conference center or other similar meeting or assembly hall. Consequently, this
use type must, at a minimum, include a conference center or assembly hall as a principal use. A
resort/conference facility may contain a combination of land uses that includes two or more principal uses.
However, the individual principal uses that comprise a resort/conference facility shall comply with all of the
requirements that are specifically delineated in this Ordinance for such individual uses. For example, a
marina that is proposed to be part of a resort/conference facility shall also conform to the requirements of
Section 175. Whenever a resort/conference facility includes more than one principal use, it shall be
considered a combination use.
(b) The minimum development area for a resort/conference facility shall be five acres in R-10
and R-5 zoning districts and 30,000 square feet in CH zoning districts
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-21
(c) A resort/conference facility may include the following types of dwelling units: multi-family
dwellings (including condominiums) and townhouse dwellings. The residential density of any multi-family
and townhouse component of the proposed use shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section
182, Residential Density. Such residential component of a resort/conference facility shall be considered a
Planned Residential Development and shall adhere to the requirements of Section 158, Planned
Residential Developments.
(d) Nonresidential components of a resort/conference facility located within an R-10 or R-5
district shall be sited and sized so as to be appropriate to the scale of the facility and to be compatible with
adjoining and surrounding residential properties. As a general guideline, permissible retail uses should
normally account for no more than 15 to 25 percent of the total gross acreage of a resort/conference
facility proposed in R-10 and R-5 zoning districts. This general ratio may be exceeded if, in the opinion of
the City Council, site conditions and circumstances warrant a higher proportion of retail acreage.
(e) Minimum lot sizes, lot widths, building setbacks, building height, etc. of the proposed use
shall conform to the requirements of Article XII, Density and Dimensional Regulations.
(f) The proposed use shall have primary vehicular access to a collector or higher capacity street.
(g) Any golf course included with the proposed use shall conform to the requirements of Section
171, Golf Courses.
(h) Any marina included with the proposed use shall conform to the requirements of Section 175,
Marina.
(i) For Resort/Conference Facilities located in the R-5 or R-10 zoning districts, signs shall
be in accordance with Chapter XVII, Section 279. For Resort/Conference Facilities located in the CH
zoning district, signs shall be in accordance with Chapter XVII, Section 280 or Chapter XVII, 281,
whichever district applicable.
(j) Screening and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Article
XIX, Screening, Landscaping and Trees.
(k) Off-street parking for the individual uses comprising the resort/conference facility shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 291 (e), Table of Parking Requirements.
(l) The hours of operation allowed shall be compatible with the adjacent land uses.
(m) The proposed use shall be sited and operated so as to not produce noise or sound which
would adversely impact adjoining and surrounding properties.
(n) Any single or combination of individual uses that comprise a resort/conference facility shall
comply with the requirements of Appendix J, Guidelines for the Preparation of a Traffic Impact
Assessment; Appendix K, Guidelines for the Preparation of an Environmental Impact Assessment; and
Appendix L, Guidelines for the Preparation of a Fiscal Impact Assessment.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-22
(o) The site plan submitted with the conditional use permit application shall include the following
information in addition to that required in Appendix A: the floor area devoted to each type of use (i.e.,
conference center, retail businesses, etc.), the number of hotel/motel units, and the number of residential
dwellings by type (single-family detached, townhouse, multi-family, etc). The site plan shall also indicate
the amount of acreage devoted to each use type that comprises the resort/conference facility. (Adopted
7/99)
Section 180.7 Wireless Communications (Adopted 2/02)
(a) DEFINITIONS.
Alternative Antenna Support Structures (AASS). Structures which are functionally and legally capable
of supporting wireless communication antennae, including, but not limited to buildings, water towers,
and utility poles as an ancillary use of the primary structure.
American Mobile Telecommunications Association (AMTA). A Washington, D.C. based industry trade
group which serves to support its specialized mobile radio (SMR) operator members through lobbying
and networking efforts.
American National Standards Institute (ANSI). A private sector federation for voluntary standardization
of measurements.
Applicable Codes. The North Carolina State Building Code and any other uniform building, fire,
electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization
together with State or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address imminent threats of
destruction of property or injury to persons.
Application, Telecommunication Facilities. A request that is submitted by an applicant to the Town for
a permit to collocate wireless facilities or to approve the installation, modification, or replacement of a
utility pole, Town utility pole, or wireless support structure.
Camouflaged Tower. A tower which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, such as a
tower designed to resemble a tree or, if erected on an existing structure, an integral part of the
building.
Co-location. The placement, installation, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of
wireless facilities on, under, within, or on the surface of the earth adjacent to existing structures,
including utility poles, Town utility poles, water towers, buildings, and other structures capable of
structurally supporting the attachment of wireless facilities in compliance with applicable codes. The
term “collocation” does not include the installation of new utility poles, Town utility poles, or wireless
support structures.
Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association (CTIA). A family of representative companies that
support the cellular, PCS, and enhanced SMR carriers industry through lobbying, research and policy
efforts.
Communications Facility. The set of equipment and network components, including wires and cables
and associated facilities used by a communications service provider to provided communications
service.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-23
Communications Service. Cable service as defined in 47 USC § 522(6), information service as defined
in 47 USC § 153(24), telecommunications service as defined in 47 USC § 153(53), or wireless
services.
Communications Service Provider. A cable operator as defined in 47 USC § 522(5); a provider of
information service, as defined in 47 USC § 153(24); a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47
USC § 153(51); or a wireless provider.
Environmental Assessment (EA). An assessment of a project's environmental impact as defined in the
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The Federal Agency responsible for regulating aviation in the
United States.
Fall radius. A physical radius prescribed by the total effective height of any tower which includes an
area which theoretically could be penetrated by the collapse of that tower.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The Federal Agency responsible for regulating
telecommunications in the United States.
High Definition Television (HDTV). Digital television signals transmitted in the very high frequency
band by national and local television stations.
Lattice-type structure. A self-supporting, three- or four-sided open steel frame structure used to
support telecommunications equipment.
Local and State Government Advisory Committee (LSGAC). An FCC-established group which works
with both carriers and communities on antenna siting solutions.
Micro Wireless Facility. A small wireless facility that is no larger in dimension than 24 inches in length,
15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11
inches.
Monopole Towers. A slender, open telescoping, self-supporting tower used to support
telecommunications equipment.
NEPA. The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
Personal Communications Industry Association (PCIA). A trade group which represents PCS, SMR,
private radio and other wireless users and carriers.
Small Wireless Facility. A wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
(a) Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in
volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of
its exposed elements, if enclosed, could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6)
cubic feet.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-24
(b) All other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a cumulative volume of no
more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet. For purposes of this subdivision, the following
types of ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume:
electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes,
ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cut-off
switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, or other
support structures.
Telecommunications Act of 1996. A broad-scoped federal act which regulates the placement of
wireless communications antennae and their facilities, and which provides certain mandates on local
authorities while preserving considerable local zoning authority.
TOW AIR. Landing facility slope calculations designed to avoid obstruction by towers to aircraft.
Town Right-of-Way. A right-of-way owned, leased, or operated by the Town, including any public street
or alley that is not a part of the State highway system.
Town Utility Pole. A pole owned by the Town in the Town right-of-way that provides lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
Utility Pole. A structure that is designed for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires, lighting facilities,
or small wireless facilities for telephone, cable television, or electricity, or to provide lighting, or
wireless services.
Wireless Facility. The set of equipment and network components, exclusive of the underlying wireless
support structure or tower, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies,
cabling, and associated equipment necessary to provide wireless data and wireless
telecommunication services to a discrete geographic area. Equipment at a fixed location that enables
wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including (i)
equipment associated with wireless communications and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, wires,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment,
regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term shall
not include any of the following:
(a) The structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to which the equipment is
collocated.
(b) Wireline backhaul facilities.
(c) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or Town
utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a
particular antenna.
Wireless Infrastructure Provider. Any person with a certificate to provide telecommunications service in
the State who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, or
wireless support structures for small wireless facilities but that does not provide wireless services.
Wireless Provider. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
Wireless Services. Any services, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of
WI-FI, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using wireless facilities.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-25
Wireless Services Provider. A person who provides wireless services.
Wireless Support Structure. A new or existing structure, such as a monopole, lattice tower, or guyed
tower that is designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. A utility pole or a Town
utility pole is not a wireless support structure.
Wireless Telecommunications Support Structure (WTSS). All freestanding monopole, self-supported,
guyed, or similar structures whose primary design is to provide for support and placement of wireless
telecommunications antennae.
Wireless Telecommunications Attachments (WTA). Devices mounted onto a support structure,
principally intended to radiate or receive a source of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER),
and accessory equipment related to broadcast services, including but not limited to private radio
services, cellular or digital telephone services, pagers, beepers, wireless data repeaters and common
carriers (as regulated by the FCC), including AM, FM, two-way radio, fixed point microwave dishes,
commercial satellite, HDTV, cellular and PCS communication systems. The term WTA does not
include electrical or telephone transmission lines or supporting distribution structures, antennae of
amateur radio (ham) operators, and amateur club services licensed by the FCC.
(b) INTENT.
In compliance with the Federal Communications Act of 1996 and all other relevant state and
federal law, rules and regulations, it is the intent of the Town of Edenton to allow telecommunication
providers the opportunity to locate wireless telecommunications antenna and related facilities within its
jurisdiction in order to provide an adequate level of service to its customers while protecting the health,
safety, and welfare of its citizens, and the aesthetics of the community.
This section shall not be construed to authorize the Town of Edenton to require the
construction or installation of wireless facilities or to regulate wireless services other than as set forth
herein.
(c) APPLICANT’S RESPONSIBLITIES AND COMFORMANCE.
It shall be the responsibility of all applicants and operators of the telecommunications
equipment described herein to make all possible efforts to maintain consistency with the
characteristics of the Town of Edenton.
No WTA or WTSS shall be constructed or modified from and after the effective date of this
chapter except in conformance to the provisions stated herein.
(d) ENFORCEMENT.
This section may be enforced by any and every remedy provided by Article VIII of the Town of
Edenton Unified Development Ordinance (UDO).
(e) CERTIFICATION OF NEED.
Any applicant(s) requesting a new WTA or WTSS or any modification to an existing WTA or
WTSS shall be required to provide substantial evidence of need for such structures both in terms of
coverage and capacity.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-26
(f) CO-LOCATION.
WTA placement on an existing structure (either AASS or WTSS) is required unless the
applicant(s) can clearly demonstrate with substantial, clear and convincing evidence that all colocation
opportunities have been exhausted. The town will attempt to maintain by its own efforts or
through its agents an up-to-date inventory of buildings and structures suitable for WTA installations.
Maps are available showing these locations, as well as relative flood zones and flight approach
vectors to neighboring airfields.
(g) NEW CONSTRUCTION PROVISION FOR CO-LOCATION(S).
All new WTSS shall be constructed to permit a minimum of three (3) new WTA. The owner(s)
of the new WTSS shall submit a notarized letter to the town declaring that these additional sites shall
be available to new tenants and shall be negotiated in good faith at reasonable terms to other
providers, and that if good faith negotiations fail, both parties may be subject to commercial arbitration.
They shall further state that as a condition of sale or transfer of the proposed structure to any new
owner(s), operator(s), or agent(s) that a statement of intent to provide for shared use of tower shall be
required of any new owner(s), operator(s), or agent(s) and shall be delivered to the town prior to
closing.
(h) FEDERAL CERTIFICATION.
Any new WTA or WTSS, or any modification to an existing structure, which would effect an
increase in height shall require certification in writing by the FAA that such addition or modification
constitutes "No Hazard" to air navigation both by its physical structure and by its potential for radio
frequency interference with aviation communication signals. The proposed structure shall also satisfy
all TOWAIR requirements. If operator(s) of the proposed structure can reasonably show that the FAA
cannot produce such certification, then certification of "No Hazard" to air navigation from a certified
private agency shall suffice.
(i) CERTIFICATION OF COMPIANCE WITH FCC's IMPLEMENTATION OF NEPA of 1969.
The applicant(s) for any new WTA or WTSS or modification to any existing WTA or WTSS are
required to file with the FCC if the structure location is within any definition provided in section 1.1307
of the NEPA. If the structure is located in any area defined by this Act, full compliance with the Act's
requirements for environmental assessments (EA) shall be required.
(j) RADIO FREQUENCY.
Radio frequency exposure levels shall not exceed the lesser of FCC and ANSI exposure
standards at any potential point of exposure to the general public. The owner(s) and operator(s) of all
WTA shall make all reasonable attempts by design, fencing, signage, and the like to limit the public's
exposure. An engineer prepared and sealed document attesting to the fact that the calculated and
proposed radio frequency levels shall remain at the lesser of the FCC and ANSI standards is required.
This letter shall be required following completion of the structure's construction, and before a
certificate of occupancy is issued.
(k) STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-27
An engineer's prepared and sealed complete site plan document which denotes compliance
with all technical specifications provided in federal, state, and Town Code, and a certification that the
proposed structure and all proposed and potential occupant structures are stable and capable of
withstanding a fifty-year hurricane is required.
(l) INSURANCE REQUIRMENTS.
New WTSS shall require a minimum of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) general liability
insurance with a letter from the insurer attesting to this fact shall be required prior to receipt of a
certificate of occupancy. This same letter shall acknowledge that the insurer shall notify the town thirty
(30) days prior to cancellation of this insurance.
(m) STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBLITY.
The owner(s), and their representative(s) shall be required to provide proof of financial
responsibility for all wireless telecommunication structures constructed or maintained within the town.
This statement shall be completed upon initial application, and renewed each year. If full financial
responsibility cannot clearly be demonstrated to the full satisfaction of the town, a surety bond for one
hundred ten (110) percent of the total cost of all structure(s) removal and associated cleanup may be
required by the town. The owner(s) and their representative(s) shall be fully responsible for all
maintenance, and continued assurance that the structure(s) continually remain in compliance with
Town Code.
(n) NEW CONSTRUCTION OR MODIFICATION OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION
SUPPORT STRUCTURES (WTSS)
Zoning & Conditional Use Permits:
See Article X. Section 146. Table of Permitted Uses. of the Town of Edenton Unified Development
Ordinance (UDO).
Demonstration of Need.
Applicants shall provide substantial evidence as to the current need for the proposed WTSS both in
terms of coverage area and capacity, and must demonstrate why all currently available WTSS and
AASS co-location opportunities can not provide adequate coverage and capacity.
New WTSS shall be permitted only after clear demonstration that all potential opportunities for colocation
have been exhausted, and that no suitable existing support structures exist within the
coverage area which may be used, including all WTSS and AASS. The applicant(s) shall identify and
assess all potential opportunities for co-location within a 3-mile radius around the proposed point of
construction for the new WTSS.
An engineer's prepared and sealed letter shall be required, attesting to the fact that it is technically
impossible to co-locate on any existing WTSS and all other AASS within the search area, with a map
showing all potential sites, and stating why each is technically unfeasible.
A notarized letter from the applicant(s) listing all technically feasible sites, noting for each site that the
applicant(s) attempted, in good faith, to negotiate terms of co-location with the owner(s) of the
potential site, and negotiation has failed.
Requirement of Notification:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-28
Applicants shall be required to notify, by certified mail with return receipt requested, all property
owners within one hundred (100) feet and all adjacent property owners of their application for
construction of a new, or modification of an existing WTSS. Exceptions to this requirement shall
include, but shall not be limited to, co-location of new WTA on an existing WTSS, reductions in height
or size of the WTSS, or any issues of routine maintenance to either the WTA or WTSS.
Minimum Lot Area:
Parcels used for placement of new or modified WTSS shall be the greater of a minimum of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet, or shall be capable of meeting the minimum lot size necessary to
accommodate the minimum setback requirements defined below.
Minimum Setbacks:
When the proposed structure is located adjacent to any church, school, public facility, or residential
zone, the center of the support structure shall be located a distance from the nearest property line a
minimum of one and one-quarter (1.25) times the greatest height of the structure including any WTA
or devices which would add to the total height of the structure. The engineer's site plan for the tower
shall indicate that the fall radius for the tower lies within the tower site, and that the fall radius zone
does not include any of the aforementioned structures or zones. Otherwise, the center of structure
shall be located as close as possible to then the geometric center of the property, with minimum
setbacks from all sides of fifty (50) feet.
Support Structure Type:
Only "stealth" WTSS or monopole support structures shall be used. Structures involving the use of guy
wires for either internal or external bracing and support, or lattice type structures, or any other type of
support structure shall be prohibited.
Height:
The WTSS may not exceed the maximum height of one hundred and ninety-nine (199) feet.
Illumination:
No WTSS or WTA shall be illuminated unless specifically directed by the FAA or other federal agency.
If required, lighting must be to the minimum specified by a federal agency. Strobe lights shall be
prohibited unless specifically required. When strobe lights are required by the specifying agency, they
shall be dual strobes, with white strobes for daytime use, and red strobes for nighttime use. All lighting
shall be directed toward the structure, and upward and outward from any public areas. A copy of the
FAA lighting requirements letter shall be submitted with the application.
Color:
Unless otherwise specified by a federal agency, all WTSS shall be painted a flat gray color.
(o) APPLICANT REQUIREMENTS: NEW CONSTRUCTION OR MODIFICATION OF WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATION SUPPORT STRUCTURES (WTSS).
Limitation:
Every conditional use permit for freestanding WTSS shall be limited to the applicant(s). Any
assignment or transfer of the conditional use permit or any of the rights there under may be made only
upon the approval of the Town of Edenton.
Complete application:
The requirements for a complete application for a WTSS are provided below:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-29
 Application Fee
 Complete application for WTSS.
 Copy of FCC license.
 Copy of all applications filed with federal and state agencies.
 FAA letter ascertaining "No Hazard" to air navigation.
 Statement of financial responsibility or surety bond.
 Engineer's letter describing lack of technically feasible co-location opportunities within a three
thousand-foot radius of the proposed site location.
 Owner(s) letter describing inability to negotiate in good faith co-location on all possible site which are
technically feasible.
 Owner(s) letter describing and the availability and opportunity for co-location-sites on the proposed
structure.
 Engineer's site plan for the proposed WTSS depicting the location parcel, its size, zoning, adjacent
zoning, and fall radius.
 FAA or other federal agency letter describing minimal lighting and color requirements for the proposed
WTSS.
 Engineer's letter denoting structural integrity of the proposed WTSS and all potential tenants, and
certification of its integrity in a fifty-year storm.
 Engineer's letter attesting to the fact that exposures to the public of any radio frequency levels will at or
below the lesser of the FCC and ANSI standards.
 Letter from insurer that the owner(s) will have a minimum two million dollar ($2,000,000.00) general
liability policy, and that the insurer will notify the town thirty (30) days prior to cancellation of this
insurance.
 Engineer's scaled site plan including elevations, visual analysis, rendering, or photo simulation of the
proposed WTSS from varying distances as viewed by the public.
 Engineer's site plan including elevations, and showing total heights of the proposed WTA and its
support structure, and the WTA proposed color(s) and illumination scheme.
(p) CO-LOCATION ON EXISTING STRUCTURES
Zoning & Permitted Uses:
See Article X. Section 146. Table of Permitted Uses. of the Town of Edenton Unified Development
Ordinance (UDO).
Height Limitations:
WTA located on an existing WTSS or AASS shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet above the structure’s apex.
Color:
The color of all WTA's shall match the color of the supporting WTSS or AASS.
Illumination:
Illumination requirements for new WTA co-located on existing structures shall be subject to the same
requirements for freestanding WTSS.
Lease Agreement:
A copy of the lease agreement between the owner(s) of the WTA and the owner(s) of the support structure
shall be submitted with the application. The financial terms of the agreement need not be disclosed,
however, review by the town board and/or town attorney shall be required for initial lease agreement and
all future lease transfers.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-30
Complete application. The checklist of requirements for New Telecommunication Antenna (WTA) is listed
below:
 Application fee.
 Complete application for WTA.
 Copy of FCC license.
 Copy of all applications filed with federal and state agencies.
 FAA letter ascertaining "No Hazard" to air navigation.
 FAA or other federal agency letter describing minimal lighting and color requirements for the
proposed WTA.
 Engineer's letter denoting structural integrity of the proposed WTA and all potential tenants, and
certification of its integrity in a fifty-year storm.
 Engineer's letter attesting to the fact that exposures to the public of any radio frequency levels will
at or below the lesser of the FCC and ANSI standards.
 A copy of the lease agreement between the owner(s) of the WTA and the owner(s) of the structure
on placement is proposed.
 Engineer's depiction of the minimal size and other requirement for equipment housing structures.
 Engineer's site plan including elevations, and showing total heights of the proposed WTA and its
support structure, and the WTA proposed color(s) and illumination scheme.
(q) EQUIPMENT HOUSING STRUCTURES
Visibility:
The base of the support structure to a minimum height of six (6) feet shall not be Visible from any public
right-of-way or area of public congregation, and must be hidden from view either by natural vegetation or
by vegetative screening. All equipment necessary for the functional operation of the technology employed
shall be located in either a lawfully pre-existing structure, or in an equipment housing structure. The colors
and external characteristics of the equipment housing structures shall be harmonious with, and blend with,
the natural features, buildings, and structures surrounding it.
Access Drives:
Roads and drives used to gain access from public right-of-way to the equipment housing structures shall be
designed to minimize, as much as possible, viewing of the equipment housing structures by the public.
Size:
Equipment housing structures shall be the minimum size necessary to accommodate the closed storage of
all ground-based equipment, and necessary materials for the primary occupant's technical needs, and for
the technical needs of all potential tenants. Depiction of the minimum size necessary to accomplish these
technical objectives shall be included in the engineer's site plan details.
Fencing and Screening:
The accessory building and its fencing shall be fully surrounded (excepting a single point of access) by a
planted vegetative screening, as described below, or by a minimum of ten (10) feet existing natural
vegetation. Whether natural or planted, the vegetative buffer shall have the effect of fully obscuring the
structure and its fencing from public view. All planted buffers shall be at least eight (8) feet tall at planting,
and shall be a combination of evergreen trees and shrubs. Continued maintenance and replacement of
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-31
the vegetative buffer, as needed, shall be required for the permitted life of the structure. A security fence
shall be installed along the full perimeter of the support structure and shall be no less than six (6) feet and
no more than eight (8) feet high. The fencing shall incorporate designs for structure security and for
making all possible efforts to minimize public exposure to radio frequency radiation. Any and all
accessories and all materials relating to the use of the WTA or WTSS shall be installed within the building,
unless technically impractical. All road or drive, gate, fence, and vegetative screening details shall be
noted within the engineer's site plan.
Signage:
No advertising signs are permitted on the support structure, the fence, building, or at any location on the
site, with the exception of one sign which is attached to the gate, and one sign which is attached to the
gate-face of the building for the purposes of safety and information. These two signs shall clearly identify
the dangers, and shall provide the names of emergency contact persons and their phone numbers. The
sign regulations in this section do not apply to signs required by local, state, or federal agencies.
Two-Way and Microwave Antennae:
Two-way and microwave antennae shall be located within accessory buildings whenever technically
feasible.
Outdoor Storage:
Storage of any equipment or materials on the accessory building site or support structure site is prohibited.
Noise Producing Equipment:
Noise producing equipment shall be sited and/or insulated to minimize to the maximum practicable extent
any increase in noise above ambient levels as measured at the property line.
Electrical and Phone Connections:
Electrical connections and land phone lines to and from the accessory building shall be installed
underground.
(r) SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Applicability:
(a) The Town of Edenton shall not adopt or enforce any ordinance, rule, regulation, or
resolution that regulates the design, engineering, construction, installation, or operation of any small
wireless facility located in an interior structure or upon the site of any stadium or athletic facility. This
subsection does not apply to a stadium or athletic facility owned or otherwise controlled by the Town. This
subsection does not prohibit the enforcement of applicable codes.
(b) Nothing contained in this Article shall amend, modify, or otherwise affect any easement
between private parties. Any and all rights for the use of a right-of-way are subject to the rights granted
pursuant to an easement between private parties.
(c) Except as provided in this Article or otherwise specifically authorized by the General
Statutes, the Town of Edenton may not adopt or enforce any regulation on the placement or operation of
communications facilities in the rights-of-way of State-maintained highways or Town rights-of-way by a
provider authorized by State law to operate in the rights-of-way of State-maintained highways or Town
rights-of-way and may not regulate any communications services.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-32
(d) Except as provided in this Article or specifically authorized by the General Statutes, the
Town may not impose or collect any tax, fee, or charge to provide a communications service over a
communications facility in the right-of-way.
(e) The approval of the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of a small wireless
facility pursuant to this Article does not authorize the provision of any communications services or the
installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of any communications facility, including a wireline
backhaul facility, other than a small wireless facility, in the right-of-way.
Permitting Process:
(a) Small wireless facilities that meet the height requirements of Section 13.5(C)(1)(b) shall
only be subject to administrative review and approval under subsection 13.5(B)(2) of this section if they are
collocated (i) in a Town right-of-way within any zoning district or (ii) outside of Town rights-of-way on
property other than single-family residential property.
(b) The Town of Edenton shall require an applicant to obtain a permit to collocate a small
wireless facility. The Town shall receive applications for, process, and issue such permits subject to the
following requirements:
(1) The Town may not, directly or indirectly, require an applicant to perform services
unrelated to the collocation for which approval is sought. For purposes of this
subdivision, “services unrelated to the collocation,” includes in-kind contributions to
the Town such as the reservation of fiber, conduit, or pole space for the Town.
(2) The wireless provider completes an application as specified in form and content by
the Town. A wireless provider shall not be required to provide more information to
obtain a permit than communications service providers that are not wireless
providers.
(3) A permit application shall be deemed complete unless the Town provides notice
otherwise in writing to the applicant within thirty (30) days of submission or within
some other mutually agreed upon time frame. The notice shall identify the
deficiencies in the application which, if cured, would make the application
complete. The application shall be deemed complete on resubmission if the
additional materials cure the deficiencies identified.
(4) The permit application shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall
be deemed approved if the Town fails to approve or deny the application within
forty-five (45) days from the time the application is deemed complete or a mutually
agreed upon time frame between the Town and the applicant.
(5) The Town may deny an application only on the basis that it does not meet any of
the following: (i) the city’s applicable codes, (ii) local code provisions or regulations
that concern public safety, objective design standards for decorative utility poles,
Town utility poles, or reasonable and nondiscriminatory stealth and concealment
requirements, including screening or landscaping for ground-mounted equipment;
or (iii) public safety and reasonable spacing requirements concerning the location
of ground-mounted equipment in a right-of-way. The Town must (i) document the
basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions on which the denial was
based and (ii) send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-33
Town denies an application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by
the Town and resubmit the application within 30 days of the denial without paying
an additional application fee. The Town shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days of the date on which the application was resubmitted.
Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the prior denial.
(6) An application must include an attestation that the small wireless facilities shall be
collocated on the utility pole, Town utility pole, or wireless support structure and
that the small wireless facilities shall be activated for use by wireless services
provider to provide service no later than one year from the permit issuance date,
unless the Town and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by a lack of commercial power at the site.
(7) An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities at multiple locations within
the jurisdiction of the Town shall be allowed at the applicant discretion to file a
consolidated application for no more than 25 separate facilities and receive a
permit for the collocation of all the small wireless facilities meeting the requirements
of this section. The Town may remove small wireless facility collocations from a
consolidated application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations (i)
for which incomplete information has been provided or (ii) that are denied. The
Town may issue a separate permit for each collocation that is approved.
(8) The permit shall specify that collocation of the small wireless facility shall
commence within six months of approval and shall be activated for use no later
than one year from the permit issuance date, unless the Town and the wireless
provider agree to extend this period or a delay is caused by a lack of commercial
power at the site.
(c) The Town may charge an application fee that shall not exceed the lesser of (i) the actual,
direct, and reasonable costs to process and review applications for collocated small wireless facilities; (ii)
the amount charged by the Town for permitting of any similar activity, or (iii) one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per facility for the first five small wireless facilities addressed in an application, plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each additional small wireless facility addressed in the application. In any dispute concerning the
appropriateness of a fee, the Town has the burden of proving that the fee meets the requirements of this
subsection.
(d) The Town may impose a technical consulting fee for each application, not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00), to offset the cost of reviewing and processing applications required by this
section. The fee must be based on the actual, direct, and reasonable administrative costs incurred for the
review, processing, and approval of an application. The Town may engage an outside consultant for
technical consultation and the review of an application. The fee imposed by the Town for the review of the
application shall not be used for either of the following:
(1) Travel expenses incurred in the review of a collocation application by an outside
consultant or other third party.
(2) Direct payment or reimbursement for an outside consultant or other third party
based on a contingent fee basis or results-based arrangement.
In any dispute concerning the appropriateness of a fee, the Town has the burden of proving
that the fee meets the requirements of this subsection.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-34
(e) The Town shall require a wireless services provider to remove an abandoned wireless
facility within 180 days of abandonment. Should the wireless services provider fail to timely remove the
abandoned wireless facility, the Town shall cause such wireless facility to be removed and may recover
the actual cost of such removal, including legal fees, if any, from the wireless services provider. For
purposes of this subsection, a wireless facility shall be deemed abandoned at the earlier of the date that
the wireless services provider indicates that it is abandoning such facility or the date that is 180 days after
the date that such wireless facility ceases to transmit a signal, unless the wireless services provider gives
the Town reasonable evidence that it is diligently working to place such wireless facility back in service.
(f) The Town shall not require an application or permit or charge fees for (i) routine
maintenance; (ii) the replacement of small wireless facilities with small wireless facilities that are the same
size or smaller; or (iii) installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that
are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles or Town utility poles in compliance with
applicable codes by or for a communications service provider authorized to occupy the Town rights-of-way
and who is remitting taxes under NCGS 105-164.4(a)(4c) or NCGS 105-164.4(a)(6).
(g) Nothing in this section shall prevent a Town from requiring a work permit for work that
involves excavation, affects traffic patterns, or obstructs vehicular traffic in the Town right-of-way.
Use of Town of Edenton Public Right-of-Way:
(a) The Town shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person for use of Town
rights-of-way for the construction, operation, marketing, or maintenance of wireless facilities or wireless
support structures or the collocation of small wireless facilities.
(b) Subject to the requirements of Section 13.5(B), a wireless provider may collocate small
wireless facilities along, across, upon, or under any Town right-of-way. Subject to the requirements of this
section, a wireless provider may place, maintain, modify, operate, or replace associated utility poles, Town
utility poles, conduit, cable, or related appurtenances and facilities along, across, upon, and under any
Town right-of-way. The placement, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of utility poles
and Town utility poles associated with the collocation of small wireless facilities, along, across, upon, or
under any Town right-of-way shall be subject only to review or approval under Section 13.5(B)(2) if the
wireless provider meets all the following requirements:
(1) Each new utility pole and each modified or replacement utility pole or Town utility
pole installed in the right-of-way shall not exceed 50 feet above ground level.
(2) Each new small wireless facility in the right-of-way shall not extend more than 10
feet above the utility pole, Town utility pole, or wireless support structure on which it
is collocated.
(c) In no instance in an area zoned single-family residential where the existing utilities are
installed underground may a utility pole, Town utility pole, or wireless support structure exceed forty (40)
feet above ground level, unless the Town grants a waiver or variance approving a taller utility pole, Town
utility pole, or wireless support structure.
(d) The Town may assess a right-of-way charge under this section for use or occupation of the
right-of-way by a wireless provider. The right-of-way charge shall not exceed $50.00 per year.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-35
(e) Nothing in this section is intended to authorize a person to place, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace a privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure or to collocate small wireless facilities
on a privately owned utility pole, a privately owned wireless support structure, or other private property
without the consent of the property owner.
(f) The Town shall require a wireless provider to repair all damage to a Town right-of-way
directly caused by the activities of the wireless provider, while occupying, installing, repairing, or
maintaining wireless facilities, wireless support structures, Town utility poles, or utility poles and to return
the right-of-way to its functional equivalence before the damage. If the wireless provider fails to make the
repairs required by the Town within a reasonable time after written notice, the Town may undertake those
repairs and charge the applicable party the reasonable and documented cost of the repairs. The Town
shall maintain an action to recover the costs of the repairs.
(g) A wireless provider may apply to the Town to place utility poles in the Town rights-of-way, or
to replace or modify utility poles or Town utility poles in the public rights-of-way, to support the collocation
of small wireless facilities. The Town shall accept and process the application in accordance with the
provisions of Section 13.5(B)(2), applicable codes, and other local codes governing the placement of utility
poles or Town utility poles in the Town rights-of-way, including provisions or regulations that concern
public safety, objective design standards for decorative utility poles or Town utility poles, or reasonable
and nondiscriminatory stealth and concealment requirements, including those relating to screening or
landscaping, or public safety and reasonable spacing requirements. The application may be submitted in
conjunction with the associated small wireless facility application.
Access to Town Utility Poles to Install Small Wireless Facilities:
(a) The Town may not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person for the right to
collocate small wireless facilities on Town utility poles. The Town shall allow any wireless provider to
collocate small wireless facilities on its Town utility poles at just, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory rates,
terms, and conditions, but in no instance may the rate exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per city utility pole per
year.
(b) A request to collocate under this section may be denied only if there is insufficient capacity
or for reasons of safety, reliability, and generally applicable engineering principles, and those limitations
cannot be remedied by rearranging, expanding, or otherwise reengineering the facilities at the reasonable
and actual cost of the Town to be reimbursed by the wireless provider. In granting a request under this
section, the Town shall require the requesting entity to comply with applicable safety requirements,
including the National Electrical Safety Code and the applicable rules and regulations issued by the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
(c) Following receipt of the first request from a wireless provider to collocate on a Town utility
pole, the Town shall, within 60 days, establish the rates, terms, and conditions for the use of or attachment
to the Town utility poles that it owns or controls. Upon request, a party shall state in writing its objections
to any proposed rate, terms, and conditions of the other party.
(d) In any controversy concerning the appropriateness of a rate for a collocation attachment to
a Town utility pole, the Town has the burden of proving that the rates are reasonably related to the actual,
direct, and reasonable costs incurred for use of space on the pole for such period.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-36
(e) The Town shall provide a good-faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable
the Town utility pole to support the requested collocation, including pole replacement if necessary, within
60 days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall
be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the good-faith estimate by the applicant. For
purposes of this section, the term "make-ready work" means any modification or replacement of a Town
utility pole necessary for the Town utility pole to support a small wireless facility in compliance with
applicable safety requirements, including the National Electrical Safety Code, that is performed in
preparation for a collocation installation.
(f) The Town shall not require more make-ready work than that required to meet applicable
codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work shall not include costs related to preexisting or
prior damage or noncompliance. Fees for make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall not
exceed actual costs or the amount charged to other communications service providers for similar work and
shall not include any consultant fees or expenses.
(g) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to apply to an entity whose poles, ducts, and
conduits are subject to regulation under Section 224 of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151,
et seq., as amended, or under NCGS 62-350.
(h) This section shall not apply to an excluded entity. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to affect the authority of an excluded entity to deny, limit, restrict, or determine the rates, fees, terms, and
conditions for the use of or attachment to its utility poles, Town utility poles, or wireless support structures
by a wireless provider. This section shall not be construed to alter or affect the provisions of NCGS 62-
350, and the rates, terms, or conditions for the use of poles, ducts, or conduits by communications service
providers, as defined in NCGS 62-350, are governed solely by NCGS 62-350. For purposes of this
section, "excluded entity" means (i) a Town that owns or operates a public enterprise pursuant to Article 16
of this Chapter consisting of an electric power generation, transmission, or distribution system or (ii) an
electric membership corporation organized under Chapter 117 of the General Statutes that owns or
controls poles, ducts, or conduits, but which is exempt from regulation under Section 224 of the
Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended.
(s) APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS
Fees:
Fees for the review process for each new or modified WTSS shall be two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00) for the initial application plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the Conditional Use Permit,
and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each annual renewal. Fees for the review process for each colocated
WTA shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial application, and fifty dollars ($50.00)
for each annual renewal. Irrevocable payment of all fees shall be due with each appropriate
application or annual renewal. Except that, as needed, the town may require remuneration for fees
charged by outside technical consultants to assist the town in their review of an application.
Review Process:
All applications will first be checked for compliance by the Planning & Inspections Department.
Following public advertisement of meeting agenda, the application will then be reviewed by the
planning board at its next regular meeting. Discussion and recommendation for approval or denial will
then be made to the town council. At their next regular meeting, the town council will review all findings
and, following their discussion, decide upon approval or denial of the application. As previously
described, the application will be treated as either a permitted or conditional use, dependent upon the
type of structure, and the time frame will approximate that of any other permitted use or conditional
use within the town. Public comment for any permitted use or conditional use is always allowed at
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-37
public meetings. In determining whether a WTSS application should be approved or denied, the town
council shall take into account the structure's harmony with the surrounding area, its compatibility with
adjacent properties, and the availability, or lack thereof of more suitable sites. The aesthetic effects of
the WTSS, as well as any mitigating factors concerning aesthetics, may be used to evaluate the
application. In reaching a decision, the town council may request modification of the
height, design, screening, placement, or other characteristics of the WTSS to produce a more
harmonious situation.
Edenton Preservation Committee (EPC) Review:
Any new or modified WTSS application proposed in the Historic Overlay District (HO) requires review
and a recommendation from the EPC Chairman. Upon application submittal, the EPC Chairman shall
review the request and shall make a recommendation to the Planning Board and Town Council. If the
request is approved by the Town Council, a Certificate of Appropriateness application shall be
completed by the applicant and reviewed by the EPC at such time. In no way shall the
recommendation of the EPC Chairman delay the review process of the Planning Board or Town
Council.
All applications to co-locate a WTA in the Historic Overlay District (HO) requires a major Certificate of
Appropriateness (COA) for review by the EPC.
Notice:
Notice of approval or disapproval will be provided in writing by the board of commissioners following their
decision. All discussion and review notes from both the planning board and board of commissioners shall
be maintained in writing as part of the public record, and shall be available for review by all interested
parties.
Building Permits:
Following approval by the Town Council and COA issuance (if applicable), the Planning & Inspections
Department shall issue a building permit. Construction of the WTA or WTSS shall commence within one
(1) year from the date of issue of the building permit. Entire construction of the tower and all it’s supporting
structures shall be completed within one (1) year and six (6) months of the issuance of the building permit,
if the construction is not fully completed, the building permit shall be considered null and void. An
application for a one-time extension of six (6) months may be made by petition to the board of adjustment.
If the construction has not commenced by the end of this extension period, then the permit shall be
considered null and void and a new application shall be required to begin the review process again. The
Planning & Inspections Department shall issue a certificate of occupancy following satisfactory completion
of the structure and all other site improvements according to design and stated intent. Any unapproved
changes to the structure shall prohibit issue of a certificate of occupancy, and shall require a new
application and fees to reinitiate the entire review process.
Town Code:
Nothing in this section shall have the effect of releasing in whole, or in any part, any applicant's or their
facilities' obligations to comply with Town Code.
Severability:
Should any clause(s) or component of this chapter be deemed unlawful or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such clause(s) shall not affect the validity of any other components of this chapter.
(t) APPLICANT'S REMEDY
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-38
Board of Adjustment:
Minor variances from the requirements of this section may be addressed to the board of adjustment.
Informal dispute resolution process:
All parties shall attempt to adhere to the agreement adopting an informal dispute resolution process as
described in the 1998 meeting between the LSGAC, the CTIA, the PCIA, and the AMTA. This process is
designed to arrive at a mutual agreement while avoiding lengthy and costly court proceedings. Both parties
retain their full legal rights should this remediation process fail.
(u) ANNUAL RENEWAL
Annual Renewal Required:
All WTA and WTSS shall be reviewed by the town on an annual basis. An application for annual renewal
must be submitted to the town no later than ninety (90) days prior to the date of last renewal or the date of
the original certificate of occupancy. Structures will be re-permitted for the next three hundred sixty-five
(365) days following review by the inspections office, the planning board, and the board of commissioners.
Application for Renewal:
The checklist of requirements for renewal of Wireless Telecommunications Antennae and Wireless
Telecommunication Support Structures is listed below:
 Renewal application fee.
 Complete renewal application form.
 Letter of continued insurance coverage for minimal general liability.
 Letter from the inspections department that the WTSS or WTA has remained in compliance with
Town Code since the later of the last renewal or the certificate of occupancy.
 Engineers letter stating that the WTSS or WTA had remained in compliance with all federal, state,
and Town Code requirements for structural integrity, and for radio frequency exposure
requirements.
 Letter from the owner(s) that the WTSS or WTA has remained in compliance with all FCC, FAA,
and NEPA requirements since the later of either the last renewal or the certificate of occupancy.
Letter from the owner(s) that they intend to maintain full financial responsibility for the WTSS or
WTA for the entire renewal period.
(v) ABANDONMENT
Any WTA or WTSS that is not operated for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days, or that is not maintained according to Town Code for one hundred eighty (180)
cumulative during the calendar year, or any structure for whom the owner(s) or representative(s) fail to
make annual renewal shall be considered abandoned. Removal of the abandoned structure to the
satisfaction of the Planning & Inspections Department shall be required within ninety (90) days. The
owner(s) shall be responsible for all costs of removal. If the abandoned tower is not removed within
the allotted time frame, the Town of Edenton shall take actions to remove such tower and the
applicant’s expense. Petition for a one-time extension of ninety (90) days may be made to the board
of adjustment.
Section 180.8 Fairgrounds (Adopted 5/04)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-39
(a) A minimum of twenty-five (25) acres shall be required, and no more than ten percent (10%)
of that twenty-five (25) acres may be dedicated to the sale of goods, regardless of the amount of land
the enterprise may own.
(b) The amount of noise generated shall not disrupt the activities of the adjacent land uses.
(c) Parking generated by any outdoor flea market/yard sale must be accommodated on site
without undue disruption to or interference with the normal flow of traffic or with the right of adjacent
and surrounding property owners.
(d) Principal access must be from a collector of higher capacity road.
(e) Conditions of permits shall include hours of operation allowed which are compatible with
the land uses adjacent to any outdoor flea market.
(f) Signs must be compliant with Section 281, and with the Gateway Corridor Plan, if
applicable.
(g) If applicant holds a current conditional use permit for Fairgrounds as of the date of this
amendment, a Conditional Use Permit is necessary to grant permission for additional uses allowed by
the amended definition.
Section 180.9 Roadway Corridor Overlay District Requirements (Adopted 8/03)
(a) The use and development of any land or structure within the Roadway Corridor Overlay
District shall comply with the use regulations and intensity regulations applicable to the underlying
zoning district except as stipulated in (b) of this Section.
(b) The Roadway Corridor Master Plan, composed of corridor plans, illustrative drawings,
and written recommendations, indicates the general objectives for planting, pedestrian and bicycle
circulation, and appearance and signage. They should be used as guidelines to achieve the intent of
the Edenton Gateway Corridors Master Plan’s objectives. If the objectives indicated in the Edenton
Gateway Corridors Master Plan exceed similar or related minimum standards found elsewhere in this
code, the objectives of the Edenton Gateway Corridors Master Plan.
(c) The requirements of the RCO District shall be reviewed in accordance with standard
staff and public review procedures.
(d) All components of streetscape shall be designed to minimize conflict between trees,
utilities, roadways, driveways, sidewalks, parallel trails, sight distance, and streetlights.
(e) Sight distance and clear zones as related to traffic safety and the interaction of
pedestrian and traffic at intersections and anytime where potential conflicts exist are the first priority in
the design of streetscape. Town of Edenton and North Carolina Department of Transportation codes
and specifications shall be followed.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-40
Section 180.10 Solar Farms (Adopted 3/16)
Solar Farms shall be regulated as to location in the following manner in addition to other requirements
of this ordinance:
(A) Height. Solar array structures shall not exceed the height of 10 feet. Solar array structures shall
not be located so as to negatively affect aircraft operations as determined by the Federal Aviation
Authority (FAA).
(B) Setback. Solar array structures, including security fencing, must meet the minimum setback
requirements for the R-A District & Industrial Warehouse District. In addition, solar project must meet
a minimum 500-foot setback from an occupied residence unless a written waiver of the increased
setback requirements, signed by the affected property owner of the residential property, is submitted
with the Conditional Use Permit Application. A minimum 500-foot setback from the center line of a
public right-of-way is also required.
(C) Visibility. In addition to the requirements set forth in Article XIX, Screening and Trees
Requirements, solar array structures shall be screened with an opaque screen to screen structures
from routine view from public right-of-ways. The screen shall consist of on-site mature vegetation
existing at a minimum height of 15 feet and depth of 100 feet and a minimum of 50 feet inside buffer
shall be planted with indigenous trees. The 50-foot-wide buffer plan shall be approved by the NC
Division of Forestry to ensure that the buffer looks like a natural forest from ground to the height of six
feet and consist of plantings expected to be opaque in all seasons of the year and reach height
maturity within 5 years. Screening & Maintenance plan detailing species of plants, planting plant and
plan for maintenance of the opaque screen for the life of the project is required. Applicant will seek
advice and input from Chowan County Cooperative Extension Horticultural Agent on plant
selection/species that in the Agent’s opinion are appropriate and most likely to survive and thrive on
the site. Plan will be reviewed and approved by the Town in accordance with Article XIX and related
Town of Edenton UDO requirements. Opaque Screening and Maintenance Plan must be approved
prior to issuance of Zoning Permit.
(D) Site Plan. A site plan shall be submitted as part of the Conditional Use Permitting process
demonstrating compliance with:
Setback and height limitations established
Applicable zoning district requirements such as lot coverage
Locations of on-site facilities and accessory structures
Applicable solar requirements per Section 180.10.
Proposed driveway opening and service roads
Site plan shall delineate the location and dimensions of the solar array structures and the location
accessory structures or buildings. Site Plan shall also show existing conditions to ensure site will be
restored to pre-solar farm condition when solar farm is decommissioned.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-41
(E) Components: Electric solar energy system components must have a UL listing.
(F) Compliance with Building and Electrical Codes – all solar farms shall meet all requirements of
the International Building Code with North Carolina Amendments
(G) Decommissioning. A decommissioning plan signed by the CUP Applicant and the landowner (if
different) addressing the following shall be submitted with permit application to be reviewed and
approved by the Town Council as part of the CUP approval process:
Defined conditions upon which decommissioning will be initiated (i.e., end of land lease, no
power production for six months, termination of purchase power agreement, default, etc.).
Defining if Applicant or Land Owner is Responsible Party responsible for removal of all solar
array structures, non-utility owned equipment, conduit, other structures, fencing, roads and
foundations. Responsibility party will have six months from date solar farm ceases operation to
complete decommissioning work and restore property to pre-solar farm condition.
Define if Applicant or Land Owner is Party responsible for notifying Town if project is
abandoned
Changes or modifications to the Decommissioning Plan must be approved by the Town.
Changes will be considered in accordance with Section 65 of the UDO, Amendments & Modifications
to Conditional Use Permits.
(i) Prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit, the Applicant must provide the Town with a
performance guarantee as provided in Subsection (ii) below. The amount of the guarantee shall be
1.10 times the estimated decommissioning cost minus the salvageable value, or $100,000, whichever
is greater. Estimates for decommissioning the site and salvage value shall be determined by a North
Carolina licensed engineer or a licensed contractor who is qualified and sufficiently licensed to
address decommissioning. It is the responsibility of the Applicant to provide the Town with the certified
cost estimate.
(ii) The following types of performance guarantees are permitted:
(a) A surety or performance bond that renews automatically, includes a minimum
60-day notice to the Town prior to cancellation, is approved by the Town Attorney, and is from
a company on the U.S. Department of Treasury’s Listing of Certified Companies. A bond
certificate must be submitted to the Planning Department each year verifying the bond has
been properly renewed.
(b) A certified check deposited with the Town Finance Officer, as escrow agent,
who will deposit the check in an interest-bearing account of the Town, with all interest accruing
to the Applicant. Funds deposited will be returned when the solar farm is decommissioned
and any necessary site restoration is completed.
(c) The full amount of the bond, certified check, or letter of credit must remain in full
force and effect until the solar farm is decommissioned and any necessary site restoration is
completed.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-42
(H) Water Infiltration & Soil Conservation.
The applicant must obtain all applicable NC Department of Environmental Quality permits,
including storm water, soil erosion control & sedimentation control permits.
Section 180.11 Beekeeping (Adopted 6/2018)
(a) Up to five (5) hives will be permitted by zoning permit on any single lot within the Town’s
planning jurisdiction. More than five (5) hives may be allowable in the RA, Residential Agricultural zoning
district, subject to the provisions of this section and Special Use Permit review by the Town’s Board of
Adjustment.
(b) No hive shall be located in the front yard, and no hive shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet
from any property lines.
(c) All bee hives shall be placed at ground level or securely attached to an anchor or stand and
must be maintained in good order and condition.
(d) Beekeepers should seek training and certification through the North Carolina State
Beekeepers Association, or similar organization
(e) Hives will be screened from public streets and rights-of-way by an opaque fence not less than
four (4) feet in height and/or an equivalent screening of existing buildings or vegetation.
(f) Every effort shall be made to direct flight patterns to and from the hive away from sidewalks,
public rights-of-way, and the like.
(g) Beekeepers shall maintain a suitable water source on site.
(h) Hives are required to be removed if the owner or beekeeper is no longer maintaining the
hives in good order and condition for a period of thirty (30) days or more, or if removal is necessary to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
Section 180.12 Food Trucks (Adopted 5/2018)
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, food trucks may only conduct business on privately
owned non-residential property subject to the written approval of the property owner;
(b) Vendors must operate in a safe, sanitary, and non-offensive manner. Complaints of unsafe
conditions, excessive water or noise (from patrons or machinery), or other disruptive conditions to
neighboring owners or occupants will be investigated and may be the cause for revoked permits or
denied permit renewal.
(c) Permit requests shall be submitted to the Town Planning Department staff and shall be
referred to the Health Department, Tax Department, Police Department, Public Works Department
and/or Fire Marshall for review prior to action. All permits will be displayed during the food truck’s
hours of operation.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-43
(d) A food truck may not be located in any portion of a parking lot when and where such
location would prevent use of parking spaces during regular hours of operation of the primary
businesses on the lot; unless the vendor provides documentation that the property owner permits use
of the parking spaces.
(e) The food truck shall be positioned on designated parking spaces and shall not block drive
aisles, other access to loading/service areas, or emergency access and fire lanes. The food truck
must also be positioned at least three (3) feet away from fire hydrants and any fire department
connection, utility box or vault. A food truck shall not impede ingress and egress from driveway
entrances, handicapped parking spaces & ramps, building entrances and exits.
(f) Vendors must be located 1000’ from any approved events permitted by the Town of
Edenton except a qualified vendor at that event.
(g) Only one vendor may locate on any parcel at one time, unless vendors are participating in a
permitted special event.
(h) No signage shall be allowed other than signs permanently attached to the motor vehicle
and one (1) portable menu sign with a changeable face no more than six (6) square feet in display
area on the ground in the customer waiting area.
(i) The permit issued for the food truck business may be revoked if the vendor violates any of
the provisions contained in this article.
(j) The town manager may revoke a permit if he or she determines that the food truck vendor’s
operations are causing parking, traffic congestion, or litter problems either on or off the property where
the use is located or that such use is otherwise creating a danger to the public health or safety.
(k) The town manager reserves the right to temporarily suspend food truck permits during
times of special events in the downtown area.
(l) This article and its requirements, rights, or privileges shall not apply in any respect to
special events recognized by the Town where food truck vendors are permitted, to non-profit,
fundraising events of three (3) days or less in duration, where persons or organizations participate in
duly recognized fundraising events, including but not limited to, religious, charitable, patriotic, or
philanthropic events, or to private events on a residential street of twelve (12) hours or less in duration.
Section 180.13 Electronic Gaming Operations (Adopted 5/2018)
(a) Maximum number of computer terminals will be evaluated at Conditional Use Permit
hearing and maximum number will be based on such considerations as parking, square footage of
proposed operations;
(b) If food or beverage is served, the establishment must meet the requirements of Albemarle
Regional Health Services, including all necessary permits and/or licenses;
(c) No alcoholic beverages will be served or consumed on the premises of the establishment;
(d) The establishment must be a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from
another establishment/business engaged in electronic gaming operations;
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 11-44
(e) The establishment must be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from church, day care,
school, public park, or residentially zoned or residentially used property;
(f) Hours of operation will be limited to 8:00AM through 10:00PM daily;
(g) Electronic gaming operations must be established as a principle use, gaming machines
shall not be permitted as an accessory to a new or existing commercial operation.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-1
ARTICLE XII
DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
Section 181 Minimum Lot Size.
(a) Subject to the provisions of Sections 187 (Cluster Subdivisions) and 188 (Architecturally
Integrated Subdivisions), all lots in the following zones shall have at least the amount of square
footage indicated in the following table:
Zone Minimum Square Feet
RA 5 Acres
R-40 40,000 (Amended 5/12/92)
R-20 20,000
R-14 14,000
R-10 10,000
R-5 5,000
CD No Minimum
CH 30,000 (Amended 3/99)
CN No Minimum
MA No Minimum
(Except for residential uses; 20,000 sq. ft. min.)
(Amended 2/12/91)
IW No Minimum
OS No Minimum
SC 5-acres (Amended 3/99)
(b) The minimum lot sizes set forth in this section are permissible only if and to the extent
that adequate water and sewer facilities are or can be made available to serve every lot in
accordance with the provisions of Article XV of this ordinance. For example, in some areas zoned
R-20 that are not served by public sewer, lots may have to exceed the 20,000 square feet minimum
required below in order to accommodate septic tanks. In such cases and in cases where lots of less
than 15,000 square feet are proposed and such lots do not have access to sewage treatment facility
or county sewer lines, the Health Department - Environmental Health Division shall review and
approve proposed plans as provided in Sections 238 and 239.
Section 182 Residential Density.
(a) Subject to subsection (b) and the provisions of Sections 187 (Cluster Subdivisions) and 188
(Architecturally Integrated Subdivisions), every lot developed for residential purposes shall have the
number of square feet per dwelling unit indicated in the following table. In determining the number
of dwelling units permissible on a tract of land, fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole
number.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-2
Zone Minimum Square Feet
RA 5 acres
R-40 40,000 plus 40,000 for the 2nd unit and 40,000 for each additional unit
after 2 units (Amended 5/12/92)
R-20 20,000
R-14 14,000 plus 7,000 for the 2nd unit and 3,000 for each additional unit
after 2 units
R-10 10,000 plus 5,000 for the 2nd unit and 3,000 for each additional unit
after 2 units
R-5 5,000 plus 2,500 for the 2nd unit and 3,000 for each additional unit after
2 units
CD Same as R-5
CH Same as R-5
CN Same as R-5
MA Same as R-5
OS Same as R-5
(b) In districts permitting two-family or multi-family dwellings, where the area of the property
is such that a portion remains after full requirements have been met for other dwelling units on the
same property, the following rules shall apply in determining density, and no relaxation of these rules
shall be permitted by a variance. If otherwise permitted by the regulations of a district:
(1) A total of two units shall be permitted on a lot containing area for one unit and
95% of the area for the second.
(2) A total of three units shall be permitted on a lot containing area for two units and
90% of the area required for a third.
(3) A total of four units shall be permitted on a lot containing area for three units and
85% of the area for a fourth.
(4) One additional unit shall be permitted on a lot containing area for four or more units
and 80% of the area required for the additional unit.
Section 183 Minimum Lot Widths.
(a) No lot may be created that is so narrow or otherwise so irregularly shaped that it would
be impracticable to construct on it a building that:
(1) Could be used for purposes that are permissible in that zoning district; and
(2) Could satisfy any applicable setback requirements for that district.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-3
(b) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing standard, the following minimum lot
widths are recommended and are deemed presumptively to satisfy the standard set forth in
subsection (a). The lot width shall be measured along a straight line connecting the points at which
a line that demarcates the required setback from the street intersects with lot boundary lines at
opposite sides of the lot.
Zone Lot Width
RA 250'
R-40 150' plus 150' for each additional unit (except on curve or cul-de-sac
75') (Amended 5/12/92)
R-20 100'
R-14 90' plus 10' for each additional unit
R-10 80' plus 20' for 2nd unit and 10' for each additional unit
R-5 50' plus 30' for 2nd unit and 10' for each additional unit
CD Same as R-5 for residential units
CH 100' (Amended 3/99)
CN Same as R-5 for residential units
MA Same as R-20 (Amended 2/09/93)
IW Same as R-5 for residential units
OS Same as R-5 for residential units
SC 200’ (Amended 3/99)
(c) No lot created after the effective date of this chapter that is less than the recommended
width shall be entitled to a variance from any building setback requirement.
Section 184 Building Setback Requirements.
(a) Subject to Sections 185 and 188 and the other provisions of this section, no portion of
any building may be located on any lot closer to any lot line or to the street right-of-way line or
centerline than is authorized in the table set forth below.
(1) If the street right-of-way line is readily determinable (by reference to a recorded
map, set irons, or other means), the setback shall be measured from such
right-of-way line. If the right-of-way line is not so determinable, the setback shall
be measured from the street centerline.
(2) As used in this section, the term "lot boundary line" refers to lot boundaries other
than those that abut streets.
(3) As used in this section, the term "building" includes any substantial structure
which, by nature of its size, scale, dimensions, bulk, or use tends to constitute a
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-4
visual obstruction or generate activity similar to that usually associated with a
building. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the following structures
shall be deemed to fall within this description:
a. Gas pumps and overhead canopies or roofs.
b. Fences running along lot boundaries adjacent to public street rights-of-way
if such fences exceed six feet in height and are substantially opaque.
Zone
Minimum
Distance From
Street Right-of-
Way
Minimum
Distance From
Street Centerline
Minimum
Distance From
Lot Side
Boundary Line
Minimum
Distance From
Rear Boundary
Line
RA 30' 60' 20' 30'
R-40 30' 60' 20' 30'
R-20 25' 55' 12' 20'
R-14 20' 50' 10' 15'
R-10 15' 45' 10' 10'
R-5 10' 40' 10' 10'
CD -- -- -- --
CH 10' 40' 12'* 20'
CN 10' 40' 12' 20'
MA 15' 45' 10' 10'
IW 40' 70' 12' 20'
OS 15' 45' 10' 10'
SC 10' 40' 40'* 40'
(Amended 08/09/2005)
• the side building setback shall be increased 12 feet for each building story over one.
(Amendment 3/99)
(b) Whenever a lot in a nonresidential district has a common boundary line with a lot in a
residential district, and the property line setback requirement applicable to the residential lot is
greater than that applicable to the nonresidential lot, then the lot in the nonresidential district shall be
required to observe the property line setback requirement applicable to the adjoining residential lot.
(c) Setback distances shall be measured from the property line or street right-of-way line to
a point on the lot that is directly below the nearest extension of any part of the building that is
substantially a part of the building itself and not a mere appendage to it (such as a flagpole, etc.).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-5
(d) Whenever a private road that serves more than three lots or more than three dwelling
units or that serves any nonresidential use tending to generate traffic equivalent to more than three
dwelling units is located along a lot boundary, then:
(1) If the lot is not also bordered by a public street, buildings and freestanding signs
shall be set back from the centerline of the private road just as if such road were
a public street.
(2) If the lot is also bordered by a public street, then the setback distance on lots used
for residential purposes (as set forth above in the column labeled "Minimum
Distance from Lot Boundary Line") shall be measured from the inside boundary of
the traveled portion of the private road.
(e) Encroachments in Required Setbacks.
(1) Encroachments Permitted in Required Setback: The following are permitted in
required setbacks provided there is no interference with any sight area or utility
easement:
(a) Landscaping features, including but not limited to, ornamental pools,
planting boxes, sculpture, arbors, trellises, and birdbaths;
(b) At grade patios, play equipment or outdoor furniture, ornamental entry
columns and gates, flag poles, lamp posts, address posts, HVAC
equipment, mailboxes, outdoor fire places, public utility wires and poles,
pumps or wells, and fences or retaining walls;
(c) Handicapped ramps
(d) Water-dependent structures
(2) Structures Permitted in Required Setbacks: The following structures may
encroach into any required setback:
(a) Cornices, steps, overhanging eaves and gutters, window sills, bay windows
or similar architectural features, chimneys and fireplaces, fire escapes, and
fire balconies may project not more than two and one-half feet into any
required setback, but in no case shall be closer than three feet to any property
line; and
(b) Porches and decks may encroach into the required street and rear setbacks
as follows:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-6
Porch or Deck Type Setback Maximum
Encroachment
Maximum
Area
Covered or Uncovered Street 3 feet 35 square feet
Uncovered Only Rear 50% of setback n/a
(3) Canopy Projections: Gas station and convenience store pump island canopies
may be located in the street setback provided that no equipment or part of a
canopy is located closer than 12 feet to a street right-of-way.
(f) Easement and Right-of-Way Encroachments
(1) Utility Easements: In addition to the lines, boxes, structures, and substation
buildings for which utility easements are intended, fences without foundations may
be located within utility easements.
(2) Drainage Maintenance and Utility Easements: Water-related improvements such
as boat docks, may be placed or constructed within drainage maintenance and
utility easements with the approval of the utility provider having jurisdiction over
the easement.
(3) The repair and replacement of an encroachment structure damaged by the utility
provider is the responsibility of the person (s) owning the encroachment structure.
(4) Public Street Rights-of-Way: No structure or landscaping plantings may be placed
within a public street right-of-way without the express approval of the public entity
having jurisdiction over the right-of-way.
Section 185 Accessory Building Setback Requirements/Maximum Lot Coverage.
All accessory buildings in residential, commercial, and industrial districts (i.e., those
established by Sections 135 through 137) must comply with the street right-of-way setbacks and
side lot boundary setbacks set forth in Section 184.
(1) Where the high point of the roof or any appurtenance of an accessory building
exceeds twelve feet in height, the accessory building shall be set back from rear
lot boundary lines an additional two feet for every foot of height exceeding twelve
feet.
(2) Side and Rear Setbacks: If the gross floor area (GFA) of the accessory structure
or building is less than six hundred square feet, the structure or building (except
swimming pools) may be located no less than five feet from a side or rear lot
boundary line. If the GFA of the accessory structure is six hundred square feet or
greater, it must meet the setback requirements of the principal building (s) as
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-7
outlined in Section 184. Above-ground and in-ground swimming pools shall
comply with the setback requirements of the principal building (s) as delineated in
Section 184.
(3) Utility Easements: No accessory structure or building except utility substations
and similar appurtenances shall be erected in any utility easements.
(4) Where the high point of the roof or any appurtenance of an accessory building
exceeds twelve feet in height, the accessory building shall be set back from side
and rear lot boundary lines an additional two feet for every foot of height
exceeding twelve feet.
(5) The maximum lot coverage by principal and accessory structures and other
impervious structures, including parking areas, drive aisles and loading zone
access ways (but excluding the primary access to the parcel) shall be sixty (60)
percent. (Amended 09/26/2005)
Section 186 Building Height Limitations.
(a) For purposes of this section:
(1) The height of a building shall be the vertical distance measured from the mean
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of
the building.
(2) A point of access to a roof shall be the top of any parapet wall or the lowest point
of a roof's surface, whichever is greater. Roofs with slopes greater than
seventy-five percent are regarded as walls.
(b) Subject to the remaining provisions of this section, building height limitations in all
residential zoning districts shall be thirty-five (35) feet and fifty (50) feet in all non-residential zoning
districts.
(c) Subject to subsection (d), the following features are exempt from the district height
limitations set forth in subsection (b):
(1) Chimneys, antennas, church spires, water tanks, elevator shafts, scenery lofts,
and similar structural appendages not intended as places of occupancy or
storage;
(2) Flagpoles and similar devices;
(3) Heating and air conditioning equipment, solar collectors, and similar equipment,
fixtures and devices.
(d) The features listed in subsection (c) are exempt from the height limitations set forth in
subsection (b) if they conform to the following requirements:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-8
(1) Not more than one-third of the total roof area may be consumed by such
features.
(2) The features described in subdivision (c)(3) above must be set back from the
edge of the roof a minimum distance of one foot for every foot by which such
features extend above the roof surface of the principal building to which they are
attached.
(3) The permit issuing authority may authorize or require that parapet walls be
constructed (up to a height not exceeding that of the features screened) to shield
the features listed in subdivisions (c)(1) and (3) from view.
(e) Notwithstanding subsection (b), in any zoning district the vertical distance from the
ground to a point of access to a roof surface of any nonresidential building or any multi-family
residential building containing four or more dwelling units may not exceed thirty-five feet unless the
fire chief certifies to the permit-issuing authority that such building is designed to provide adequate
access for fire fighting personnel or the building inspector certifies that the building is otherwise
designed or equipped to provide adequate protection against the dangers of fire.
Section 187 Cluster Subdivisions.
(a) ln any single-family residential subdivision in the zones indicated below, a developer
may create lots that are smaller than those required by Section 181 if such developer complies with
the provisions of this section and if the lots so created are not smaller than the minimums set forth in
the following table:
Zone
Minimum
Square Feet
R-20 15,000
R-14 10,000
R-10 7,500
R-5 5,000
(b) The intent of this section is to authorize the developer to decrease lot sizes and leave
the land "saved" by so doing as usable open space, thereby lowering development costs and
increasing the amenity of the project without increasing the density beyond what would be
permissible if the land were subdivided into the size of lots required by Section 181.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-9
(c) The amount of usable open space that must be set aside shall be determined by:
(1) Subtracting from the standard square footage requirement set forth in Section
181 the amount of square footage of each lot that is smaller than that standard;
(2) Adding together the results obtained in (1) for each lot.
(d) The provisions of this section may only be used if the usable open space set aside in a
subdivision comprises at least 10,000 square feet of space that satisfies the definition of usable
open space set forth in Section 198 and if such usable open space is otherwise in compliance with
the provisions of Article XIII.
(e) The setback requirements of Sections 184 and 185 shall apply in cluster subdivisions.
Section 188 Architecturally Integrated Subdivisions.
(a) In any architecturally integrated subdivision, the developer may create lots and
construct buildings without regard to any minimum lot size, lot width, or setback restrictions except
that:
(1) Lot boundary setback requirements shall apply where and to the extent that the
subdivided tract abuts land that is not part of the subdivision; and
(2) Each lot must be of sufficient size and dimensions that it can support the
structure proposed to be located on it, consistent with all other applicable
requirements of this chapter.
(b) The number of dwelling units in an architecturally integrated subdivision may not exceed
the maximum density authorized for the tract under Section 182.
(c) To the extent reasonably practicable, in residential subdivisions the amount of land
"saved" by creating lots that are smaller than the standards set forth in Section 181 shall be set
aside as usable open space.
(d) The purpose of this section is to provide flexibility, consistent with the public health and
safety and without increasing overall density, to the developer who subdivides property and
constructs buildings on the lots created in accordance with a unified and coherent plan of
development.
Section 189 Density on Lots Where Portion Dedicated to Town.
(a) Subject to the other provisions of this section, if (i) any portion of a tract lies within an
area designated on any officially adopted town plan as part of a proposed public park, greenway, or
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 12-10
bikeway, and (ii) before the tract is developed, the owner of the tract, with the concurrence of the
town, dedicates to the town that portion of the tract so designated, then, when the remainder of the
tract is developed for residential purposes, the permissible density at which the remainder may be
developed shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(b) If the proposed use of the remainder is a single family detached residential subdivision,
then the lots in such subdivision may be reduced in accordance with the provisions of Sections 187
and 188 except that the developer need not set aside usable open space to the extent that an
equivalent amount of land has previously been dedicated to the town in accordance with subsection
(a).
(c) If the proposed use of the remainder is a two-family or multifamily project, then the
permissible density at which the remainder may be developed shall be calculated by regarding the
dedicated portion of the original lot as if it were still part of the lot proposed for development.
(d) If the portion of the tract that remains after dedication as provided in subsection (a)
is divided in such a way that the resultant parcels are intended for future subdivision or
development, then each of the resultant parcels shall be entitled to its pro rata share of the
"density bonus" provided for in subsections (b) and (c).
Sections 190 through 195 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 12-11
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 13-1
ARTICLE XIII
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND OPEN SPACE
Section 196 Miniparks Required.
(a) Subject to subsection (c), all residential developments shall provide (through dedication
or reservation, see Sections 199 and 200) recreational areas in the form of miniparks (as described
in Section 197) in an amount equal to .0025 acres (108.9 square feet) per person expected to reside
in that development (as determined in accordance with subsection (b)). Such recreational areas
shall be provided in addition to the open space areas required by Section 198.
(b) For purposes of this section, one-bedroom dwelling units shall be deemed to house an
average of 1.4 persons, two-bedroom units 2.2 persons, three-bedroom units 3.2 persons, and units
with four or more bedrooms 4.0 persons. In residential subdivisions that are not approved as
architecturally integrated subdivisions, each lot that is large enough for only a single dwelling unit
shall be deemed to house an average of 3.2 persons. Each lot that is large enough to
accommodate more than one dwelling unit shall be deemed to house 2.2 persons for each dwelling
unit that can be accommodated.
(c) The Council recognizes that miniparks must be of a certain minimum size to be usable
and that such miniparks will not serve the intended purpose unless properly maintained. Therefore,
residential developments that are small enough so that the amount of required minipark space does
not exceed 2,000 square feet are exempt from the provisions of this section. However, as used in
the foregoing sentence, the term "development" refers to the entire project developed on a single
tract or contiguous multiple tracts under common ownership, regardless of whether the development
is constructed in phases or stages. In addition, subdivided residential developments of less than
twenty-five dwelling units shall also be exempt from the provisions of this section.
Section 197 Miniparks: Purpose and Standards.
(a) The purpose of the minipark is to provide adequate active recreational facilities to serve
the residents of the immediately surrounding neighborhood within the development. The following
are illustrative of the types of facilities that shall be deemed to serve active recreational needs and
therefore to count toward satisfaction of the minipark requirements of this article: tennis courts,
racquetball courts, swimming pools, sauna and exercise rooms, meeting or activity rooms within
clubhouses, basketball courts, swings, slides, and play apparatus.
(b) Each development shall satisfy its minipark requirement by installing the types of
recreational facilities that are most likely to be suited to and used by the age bracket of persons
likely to reside in that development. However, unless it appears that less than five percent of the
residents of any development are likely to be children under twelve, then at least fifteen percent of
the minipark must be satisfied by the construction of "tot lots" (i.e., areas equipped with imaginative
play apparatus oriented to younger children as well as seating accommodations for parents).
(c) The total acreage of miniparks required by Section 196 shall be divided into miniparks
of not less than 2,000 square feet nor more than 30,000 square feet.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 13-2
(d) Miniparks shall be attractively landscaped and shall be provided with sufficient natural
or manmade screening or buffer areas to minimize any negative impacts upon adjacent residences.
(e) Each minipark shall be centrally located and easily accessible so that it can be
conveniently and safely reached and used by those persons in the surrounding neighborhood it is
designed to serve.
(f) Each minipark shall be constructed on land that is relatively flat, dry, and capable of
serving the purposes intended by this article.
Section 198 Usable Open Space.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (c), every residential development shall be developed
so that at least fifteen percent of the total area of the development remains permanently as usable
open space. (Amended 3/99)
(b) For purposes of this section, usable open space means an area that:
(1) Is not encumbered with any substantial structure;
(2) Is not devoted to use as a roadway, parking area, or sidewalk but may include
buffer areas, building setback areas, and retention ponds; (Amendment 3/99)
(3) Is left in its natural or undisturbed state (as of the date development began), if
wooded, except for the cutting of trails for walking or jogging, or, if not wooded at
the time of development, is landscaped for ballfields, picnic areas, or similar
facilities, or is properly vegetated and landscaped with the objective of creating a
wooded area or other area that is consistent with the objective set forth in
subdivision (4);
(4) Is capable of being used and enjoyed for purposes of informal and unstructured
recreation and relaxation; and
(5) Is legally and practicably accessible to the residents of the development out of
which the required open space is taken, or to the public if dedication of the open
space is required pursuant to Section 200.
(6) Consists of land no more than twenty-five percent of which lies within an area of
special flood hazard or a floodway as those terms are defined in Section 251.
(c) Subdivided residential developments of less than twenty-five dwelling units are exempt
from the requirements of this section unless the town agrees that it will accept an offer of dedication
of such open space, and in that case the offer of dedication shall be made.
Section 199 Ownership and Maintenance of Recreational Areas and Required
Open Space.
(a) Except as provided in Section 200, recreation facilities and usable open space required
to be provided by the developer in accordance with this article shall not be dedicated to the public
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 13-3
but shall remain under the ownership and control of the developer (or his successor) or a
homeowners association or similar organization that satisfies the criteria established in Section 203.
(b) The person or entity identified in subsection (a) as having the right of ownership and
control over such recreational facilities and open space shall be responsible for the continuing
upkeep and proper maintenance of the same.
Section 200 Dedication of Open Space.
(a) If any portion of any lot proposed for residential development lies within an area
designated on the officially adopted recreation master plan as a neighborhood park or part of the
greenway system or bikeway system, the area so designated (not exceeding five percent of the total
lot area) shall be included as part of the area set aside to satisfy the requirement of Section 198.
This area shall be dedicated to public use.
(b) If more than five percent of a lot proposed for residential development lies within an
area designated as provided in subsection (a), the town may attempt to acquire the additional land
in the following manner:
(1) The developer may be encouraged to resort to the procedures authorized in
Sections 187 or 188 and to dedicate the common open space thereby created;
or
(2) The town may purchase or condemn the land.
(c) An executed general warranty deed conveying the dedicated land to the Town of
Edenton shall be submitted to the Town within 30 working days of the approval by the Town Council
of a subdivision plat or development plan.
Section 201 Payments in Lieu of Dedication.
(a) Any developer required to dedicate land pursuant to this article, with the approval of
the Town Council, may make a payment in lieu of such dedication, or may make combination
dedication and partial payment in lieu of dedication, whichever, in the opinion of the Town Council,
shall be in the best interest of the citizens of the area to be served.
(b) Any such payment in lieu of dedication shall be the product of the number of acres to be
dedicated multiplied by the average fair market value of the land being subdivided at the time of the
submission of the final subdivision plat or final development plan.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 13-4
(c) In case of a disagreement between the town and the developer as to the fair market
value, such determination shall be made by a special appraisal committee made up of one (1)
professional appraiser appointed by the Town Manager, one (1) professional appraiser appointed by
the developer, and one (1) professional appraiser appointed by the initial two (2) committee
appointees. The Committee shall view the land and hear the contentions of both the Town and the
developer. The findings of the Committee shall be by a majority vote and shall be certified to the
Town Council in writing within thirty (30) days of the time of appointment of the third member of the
Committee. The costs of all professional land appraisers shall be borne entirely by the developer.
(A professional appraiser is an individual who can show by legal credentials and experience that he
or she has a knowledge of land appraisals of a similar type.)
(d) All monies received by the town pursuant to this section shall be used only for the
acquisition or development of recreational and park sites benefitting the new development and the
residents in the vicinity of the development.
Section 202 Procedure for Requesting Payment in Lieu of Dedication of Land.
(a) The developer shall attach to the subdivision plat, or in the case of a planned
development, the preliminary development plan, a letter requesting approval to make payment in
lieu of dedication of land pursuant to this article. In this letter, the developer shall state the proposed
per acre value and include, in writing, the basis for determination of this value.
(b) Upon receipt of the subdivision plat, or in the case of a planned development, the
preliminary development plan, the administrator shall submit a copy thereof with attached letter
requesting approval to make payment in lieu of dedication to the Town Manager at least twenty (20)
working days prior to the Town Council's next scheduled meeting. The Town Manager shall submit
any and all recommendations concerning payment in lieu of dedication to the Town Council at its
next scheduled meeting following review by the Town Manager.
(c) Upon approval by the Town Council, payment in lieu of dedication shall be made at the
time of final plat submittal or within one (1) year of the approval of the final development plan, except
as otherwise approved by the Town Council.
Section 203 Homeowners Associations.
Homeowners associations or similar legal entities that, pursuant to Section 199, are
responsible for the maintenance and control of common areas, including recreational facilities and
open space, shall be established in such a manner that:
(1) Provision for the establishment of the association or similar entity is made before any
lot in the development is sold or any building occupied;
(2) The association or similar legal entity has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise
control over such common areas and facilities;
(3) The association or similar legal entity has the power to compel contributions from
residents of the development to cover their proportionate shares of the costs
associated with the maintenance and upkeep of such common areas and facilities.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 13-5
Section 204 Flexibility in Administration Authorized.
(a) The requirements set forth in this article concerning the amount, size, location and
nature of recreational facilities and open space to be provided in connection with residential
developments are established by the Council as standards that presumptively will result in the
provision of that amount of recreational facilities and open space that is consistent with officially
adopted town plans. The Council recognizes, however, that due to the particular nature of a tract of
land, or the nature of the facilities proposed for installation, or other factors, the underlying
objectives of this article may be achieved even though the standards are not adhered to with
mathematical precision. Therefore, the permit issuing body is authorized to permit minor deviations
from these standards whenever it determines that: (i) the objectives underlying these standards can
be met without strict adherence to them; and (ii) because of peculiarities in the developer's tract of
land or the facilities proposed it would be unreasonable to require strict adherence to these
standards.
(b) Whenever the permit issuing board authorizes some deviation from the standards set
forth in this article pursuant to subsection (a), the official record of action taken on the development
application shall contain a statement of the reasons for allowing the deviation.
Section 205 Authority to Sell.
The Town Council shall have the authority to sell land dedicated pursuant to this article with
the proceeds of any such sale used solely for the acquisition and/or development of other
recreation, park or open space sites.
Section 206 Land Acceptance.
The Town Council shall have the authority to accept or reject land dedications made as a
requirement of this article. At the developer's request, the Town Council may accept a land
dedication located elsewhere in the town's jurisdiction in lieu of a land dedication at the site of the
proposed development.
Sections 207 through 209 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-1
ARTICLE XIV
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section 210 Street Classification.
(a) In all new subdivisions, streets that are dedicated to public use shall be classified as
provided in subsection (b).
(1) The classification shall be based upon the projected volume of traffic to be
carried by the street, stated in terms of the number of trips per day;
(2) The number of dwelling units to be served by the street may be used as a useful
indicator of the number of trips but is not conclusive;
(3) Whenever a subdivision street continues an existing street that formerly
terminated outside the subdivision or it is expected that a subdivision street will
be continued beyond the subdivision at some future time, the classification of the
street will be based upon the street in its entirety, both within and outside of the
subdivision.
(b) The classification of streets shall be as follows:
(1) Minor: A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties.
It serves or is designed to serve not more than nine dwelling units and is
expected to or does handle up to seventy-five trips per day.
(2) Local: A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting properties. It
serves or is designed to serve at least ten but no more than twenty-five dwelling
units and is expected to or does handle between seventy-five and two-hundred
trips per day.
(3) Cul-de-sac: A street that terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
(4) Subcollector: A street whose principal function is to provide access to abutting
properties but is also designed to be used or is used to connect minor and local
streets with collector or arterial streets. Including residences indirectly served
through connecting streets, it serves or is designed to serve at least twenty-six
but not more than one hundred dwelling units and is expected to or does handle
between two hundred and eight hundred trips per day.
(5) Collector: A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between minor,
local, and subcollector streets and arterial streets but that may also provide direct
access to abutting properties. It serves or is designed to serve, directly or
indirectly, more than one hundred dwelling units and is designed to be used or is
used to carry more than eight hundred trips per day.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-2
(6) Arterial: A major street in the town's street system that serves as an avenue for
the circulation of traffic into, out, or around the town and carries high volumes of
traffic.
(7) Marginal Access Street: A street that is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street and that is designed to provide access to abutting properties so that these
properties are somewhat sheltered from the effects of the through traffic on the
arterial street and so that the flow of traffic on the arterial street is not impeded by
direct driveway access from a large number of abutting properties.
(8) Commercial/Industrial Street: A street that is designed to primarily provide
vehicular access to abutting major commercial and industrial developments
including shopping centers, office parks, and industrial parks. (Amended 3/99)
Section 211 Access to Lots.
Every lot shall have access to it that is sufficient to afford a reasonable means of ingress and
egress for emergency vehicles as well as for all those likely to need or desire access to the property
in its intended use.
Section 212 Access to Arterial Streets.
Whenever a major subdivision that involves the creation of one or more new streets borders
on or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, no direct driveway access may be provided
from the lots within this subdivision onto this street.
Section 213 Entrances to Streets.
(a) All driveway entrances and other openings onto streets within the town's planning
jurisdiction shall be constructed so that:
(1) Vehicles can enter and exit from the lot in question without posing any
substantial danger to themselves, pedestrians, or vehicles traveling in abutting
streets; and
(2) Interference with the free and convenient flow of traffic in abutting or surrounding
streets is minimized.
(b) Specifications for driveway entrances are set forth in Appendix B to this chapter. If
driveway entrances and other openings onto streets are constructed in accordance with the
foregoing specifications and requirements, this shall be deemed prima facie evidence of compliance
with the standard set forth in subsection (a).
(c) For purposes of this section, the term "prima facie evidence" means that the
permit-issuing authority may (but is not required to) conclude from this evidence alone that the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-3
proposed development complies with subsection (a).
Section 214 Coordination with Surrounding Streets.
(a) The street system of a subdivision shall be coordinated with existing, proposed and
anticipated streets outside the subdivision or outside the portion of a single tract that is being divided
into lots (hereinafter, "surrounding streets") as provided in this section. Where applicable, the street
layout in all new subdivisions shall conform to the arrangement, width, and location indicated on any
official thoroughfare plan for state and local streets.
(b) Collector streets shall intersect with surrounding collector or arterial streets at safe and
convenient locations.
(c) Subcollector, local, and minor residential streets shall connect with surrounding streets
where necessary to permit the convenient movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods or
to facilitate access to neighborhoods by emergency service vehicles or for other sufficient reasons,
but connections shall not be permitted where the effect would be to encourage the use of such
streets by substantial through-traffic.
(d) Whenever connections to anticipated or proposed surrounding streets are required by
this section, the street right-of-way shall be extended and the street developed to the property line of
the subdivided property (or to the edge of the remaining undeveloped portion of a single tract) at the
point where the connection to the anticipated or proposed street is expected. In addition, the permit
issuing authority may require temporary turnarounds to be constructed at the end of such streets
pending their extension when such turnarounds appear necessary to facilitate the flow of traffic or
accommodate emergency vehicles. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection, no
temporary dead-end street in excess of 1,000 feet may be created unless no other practicable
alternative is available.
Section 215 Relationship of Streets to Topography.
(a) Streets shall be related appropriately to the topography. In particular, streets shall be
designed to facilitate the drainage and storm water runoff objectives set forth in Article XVI, and
street grades shall conform as closely as practicable to the original topography.
(b) As indicated in Section 216, the maximum grade at any point on a street constructed
without curb and gutter shall be six percent. On streets constructed with curb and gutter the grade
shall not exceed six percent unless no other practicable alternative is available. However, in no
case may streets be constructed with grades that, in the professional opinion of the public works
director, create a substantial danger to the public safety.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-4
Section 216 Street Width, Sidewalk, and Drainage Requirements in Subdivisions.
(a) Street rights-of-way are designed and developed to serve several functions: (i) to carry
motor vehicle traffic, and in some cases, allow on-street parking; (ii) to provide a safe and
convenient passageway for pedestrian traffic; and (iii) to serve as an important link in the town's
drainage system. In order to fulfill these objectives, all public streets shall be constructed to meet
either the standards set forth in subsection (b) or subsection (c).
(b) All streets, except as provided in subsection (c), shall be constructed with curb and
gutter and shall conform to the other requirements of this subsection. Only standard 90º curb may
be used, except that roll-type curb shall be permitted along minor and local streets within residential
subdivisions. Street pavement width shall be measured from curb face to curb face where 90º curb
is used, and from the center of the curb where roll-type curb is used. (Amended 7/99)
Type Street Minimum Rightof-
Way Width
Minimum
Pavement Width
Minor
50'
24'
Local
60'
24'
Subcollector
60'
26'
Collector
60'
32'
Commercial/
Industrial
60'
36'
(c) Where the Town Council, based upon engineering recommendations, determines that,
due to site-specific drainage requirements and proposed street grade, six foot wide shoulders and
drainage swales would be more appropriate than curb and gutter, the requirements of subsection (b)
may be waived. In such cases, streets shall be constructed according to the criteria indicated in the
table that follows as well as specifications referenced in Section 219. No sidewalks shall be
required for such streets. (Amended 7/99)
Type Street
Minimum Rightof-
Way Width
Minimum
Pavement Width
Minor
50'
20'
Local
60'
20'
Subcollector
60'
22'
(Amended 3/99)
(d) Where required by the Town Council, sidewalks shall be at least four feet in width and
constructed according to the specifications set forth in Appendix C, except that the Town Council
may permit the installation of walkways constructed with other suitable materials when it concludes
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-5
that:
(1) Such walkways would serve the residents of the development as adequately as
concrete sidewalks; and
(2) Such walkways would be more environmentally desirable or more in keeping with
the overall design of the development.
(e) Whenever the Town Council finds that a means of pedestrian access is necessary from
the subdivision to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other roads or facilities and that such access is
not conveniently provided by sidewalks adjacent to the streets, the developer may be required to
reserve an unobstructed easement of at least ten feet in width to provide such access.
Section 217 General Layout of Streets.
(a) Subcollector, local, and minor residential streets shall be curved whenever practicable
to the extent necessary to avoid conformity of lot appearance.
(b) All permanent dead-end streets [as opposed to temporary dead-end streets, see
Subsection 214(d)] shall be developed as cul-de-sacs in accordance with the standards set forth in
subsection (c). Except where no other practicable alternative is available, such streets shall be
designed so as to provide access to no more than 20 dwelling units or a maximum ADT of 200,
whichever is greater. ADT is calculated according to the following trip generation rate: (Amended
1/99)
Use
Generation Rate
Maximum Units
Single-family
10.0
20
Apartment, Condominium
6.1
32
Mobile Home
4.8
41
Retirement Community
3.3
60
Non-residential
As determined by appropriate trip
generation rates
(c) The right-of-way of a cul-de-sac shall have a radius of fifty feet. The radius of the paved
portion of the turn-around (measured to the outer edge of the pavement) shall be thirty-five feet, and
the pavement width shall be twelve feet without curb and gutter or eighteen feet with curb and gutter.
The unpaved center of the turn-around area shall be landscaped.
(d) Half streets (i.e., streets of less than the full required right- of-way and pavement width)
shall not be permitted except where such streets, when combined with a similar street (developed
previously or simultaneously) on property adjacent to the subdivision, creates or comprises a street
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-6
that meets the right-of-way and pavement requirements of this chapter.
(e) Streets shall be laid out so that residential blocks do not exceed 1,000 feet, unless no
other practicable alternative is available.
Section 218 Street Intersections.
(a) Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no two streets may
intersect at less than 60 degrees. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point, unless
the public works director certifies to the permit issuing authority that such an intersection can be
constructed with no extraordinary danger to public safety.
(b) Whenever possible, proposed intersections along one side of a street shall coincide
with existing or proposed intersections on the opposite side of such street. In any event, where a
center line offset (jog) occurs at an intersection, the distance between centerlines of the intersecting
streets shall be not less than 150 feet.
(c) Except when no other alternative is practicable or legally possible, no two streets may
intersect with any other street on the same side at a distance of less than 400 feet measured from
centerline to centerline of the intersecting street. When the intersected street is an arterial, the
distance between intersecting streets shall be at least 1,000 feet.
Section 219 Construction Standards and Specifications.
Construction and design standards and specifications for streets, sidewalks, and curbs and
gutters are contained in Appendix C, and all such facilities shall be completed in accordance with
these standards.
Section 220 Private Streets and Private Roads in Subdivisions.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, all lots created after the effective date of
this section shall abut a public street at least to the extent necessary to comply with the access
requirement set forth in Section 211. For purposes of this subsection, the term "public street"
includes a pre-existing public street as well as a street created by the subdivider that meets the
public street standards of this article and is dedicated for public use. Unless the recorded plat of a
subdivision clearly shows a street to be private, the recording of such a plat shall constitute an offer
of dedication of such street.
(b) Architecturally integrated residential subdivisions containing twenty-five or more
dwelling units may be developed with private roads that do not meet the public street and
sidewalk standards of this chapter so long as:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-7
(1) The proposed development will have direct access onto a public street or, if the
tract has access to a public street only via a private road, such private road is
improved to public street standards;
(2) No road intended to be private is planned to be extended to serve property
outside that development; and
(3) The standards applicable to unsubdivided developments set forth in Sections
221 and 222 are complied with.
(c) Architecturally integrated subdivisions containing any number of dwelling units may be
developed with private roads that do meet the public street and sidewalk standards of this chapter
but that are not intended for dedication to the public so long as:
(1) The proposed development will have direct access into a public street or, if the
tract has access to a public street only via a private road, such private road is
improved to public street standards;
(2) No road intended to be private is planned or expected to be extended to serve
property outside the development; and
(3) The subdivider demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Council that
the private roads will be properly maintained.
(d) A subdivision in which the access requirement of Section 211 is satisfied by a private
road that meets neither the public street standards nor the standards set forth in Section 221 may be
developed so long as, since the effective date of this chapter, not more than three lots have been
created out of that same tract.
(1) The intent of this subsection is primarily to allow the creation of not more than
three lots developed for single-family residential purposes. Therefore, the
permit-issuing authority may not approve any subdivision served by a private
road authorized by this subsection in which one or more of the lots thereby
created is intended for (i) two-family or multi-family residential use or (ii) any
other residential or nonresidential use that would tend to generate more traffic
than that customarily generated by three single-family residences.
(2) To ensure that the intent of this subsection is not subverted, the permit-issuing
authority may, among other possible options, require that the approved plans
show the types and locations of buildings on each lot or that the lots in a
residential subdivision served by a private road be smaller than the permissible
size of lots on which two-family or multi-family developments could be located or
that restrictive covenants limiting the use of the subdivided property in
accordance with this section be recorded before final plat approval.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-8
(e) No final plat that shows lots served by private roads may be recorded unless the final
plat contains the following notations:
(1) "Further subdivision of any lot shown on this plat as served by a private road may
be prohibited by the Edenton Land Development Ordinance."
(2) "The policy of the Town of Edenton is that, if the town improves streets (i) that
were never constructed to the standards required in the Edenton Land
Development Ordinance for dedicated streets, and (ii) on which 75% of
the dwelling units were constructed after the effective date of this chapter, then
100% of the costs of such improvements shall be assessed to abutting
landowners."
(3) "The maintenance of all private streets and roads shown on this plat shall be the
responsibility of property owners within the subdivision. The Town of Edenton
will not maintain any private street or road."
(f) The recorded plat of any subdivision that includes a private road shall clearly state that
such road is a private road. Further, the initial purchaser of a newly created lot served by a private
road shall be furnished by the seller with a disclosure statement outlining the maintenance
responsibilities for the road, in accordance with the provisions of NCGS 136-102.6.
Section 221 Road and Sidewalk Requirements in Unsubdivided Developments.
(a) Within unsubdivided developments, all private roads and access ways shall be
designed and constructed to facilitate the safe and convenient movement of motor vehicle and
pedestrian traffic. Width of roads, use of curb and gutter, and paving specifications shall be
determined by the provisions of this chapter dealing with parking (Article XVIII) and drainage (Article
XVI). To the extent not otherwise covered in the foregoing articles, and to the extent that the
requirements set forth in this article for subdivision streets may be relevant to the roads in
unsubdivided developments, the requirements of this article may be applied to satisfy the standard
set forth in the first sentence of this subsection.
(b) Whenever a road in an unsubdivided development connects two or more subcollector,
collector, or arterial streets in such a manner that any substantial volume of through traffic is likely to
make use of this road, such road shall be constructed in accordance with the standards applicable
to subdivision streets and shall be dedicated. In other cases when roads in unsubdivided
developments within the town are constructed in accordance with the specifications for subdivision
streets, the town may accept an offer of dedication of such streets.
(c) In all unsubdivided residential development, sidewalks shall be provided linking dwelling
units with other dwelling units, the public street, and on-site activity centers such as parking areas,
laundry facilities, and recreational areas and facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, sidewalks
shall not be required where pedestrians have access to a road that serves not more than nine
dwelling units.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 14-9
(d) Whenever the permit issuing authority finds that a means of pedestrian access is
necessary from an unsubdivided development to schools, parks, playgrounds, or other roads or
facilities and that such access is not conveniently provided by sidewalks adjacent to the roads, the
developer may be required to reserve an unobstructed easement of at least ten feet to provide such
access.
(e) The sidewalks required by this section shall be at least four feet wide and constructed
according to the specifications set forth in Appendix C, except that the permit issuing authority may
permit the installation of walkways constructed with other suitable materials when it concludes that:
(1) Such walkways would serve the residents of the development as adequately as
concrete sidewalks; and
(2) Such walkways could be more environmentally desirable or more in keeping with
the overall design of the development.
Section 222 Attention to Handicapped in Street and Sidewalk Construction.
(a) As provided in NCGS 136-44.14 whenever curb and gutter construction is used on
public streets, wheelchair ramps for the handicapped shall be provided at intersections and other
major points of pedestrian flow. Wheelchair ramps and depressed curbs shall be constructed in
accordance with published standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division
of Highways.
(b) In unsubdivided developments, sidewalk construction for the handicapped shall
conform to the requirements of Section 11X of the North Carolina State Building Code.
Section 223 Street Names and House Numbers.
(a) Street names shall be assigned by the developer subject to the approval of the permit
issuing authority. Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with existing streets shall be
given the same name. Newly created streets shall be given names that neither duplicate nor are
phonetically similar to existing streets within the town's planning jurisdiction, regardless of the use of
different suffixes (such as those set forth in subsection (b)).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 14-10
(b) Street names shall include a suffix such as the following:
(1) Circle: A short street that returns to itself.
(2) Court or Place: A cul-de-sac or dead-end street.
(3) Loop: A street that begins at the intersection with one street and circles back to
end at another intersection with the same street.
(4) Street, Avenue and other common suffixes not applying above: All public streets
not designated by another suffix.
(c) Building numbers shall be assigned by the town.
Section 224 Bridges.
All bridges shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the
[state or local] Department of Transportation, except that bridges on roads not intended for public
dedication may be approved if designed by a licensed architect or engineer.
Section 225 Utilities.
Utilities installed in public rights-of-way or along private roads shall conform to the
requirements set forth in Article XV, Utilities.
Section 226 Cost of Street and Sidewalk Improvements.
The cost of installing street and sidewalk improvements required by this article shall be borne
entirely by the developer. In no case shall the Town of Edenton be responsible for the cost of street
and sidewalk improvements required by this article.
Section 227 Street Name and Traffic Signs.
Street name and traffic signs which meet standard Town of Edenton and N.C. Department of
Transportation specifications shall be placed at all street intersections. The cost to install street
name and traffic signs shall be borne by the developer.
Sections 228 through 235 Reserved.
	

				
	 

ARTICLE XV
UTILITIES
Section 236 Utility Ownership and Easement Rights.
In any case in which a developer installs or causes the installation of water, sewer, electrical
power, telephone, or cable television facilities and intends that such facilities shall be owned,
operated or maintained by a public utility or any entity other than the developer, the developer shall
transfer to such utility or entity the necessary ownership or easement rights to enable the utility or
entity to operate and maintain such facilities. In addition, the developer, in accordance with Section
247, shall dedicate sufficient easement rights to accommodate the extension of utility facilities which
will serve adjacent or nearby developments. Easement rights transferred to the Town under this
section shall include provisions for the optional use of hiking, bicycling, and pedestrian activities
within the easement.
Section 237 Lots Served by Governmentally Owned Water or Sewer Lines.
(a) Whenever it is legally possible and practicable in terms of topography to connect a lot
with a town water or sewer line by running a connecting line not more than 200 feet from the lot to
such line, then no use requiring water or sewage disposal service may be made of such lot unless
connection is made to such line.
(b) Connection to such water or sewer line is not legally possible if, in order to make
connection with such line by a connecting line that does not exceed 200 feet in length, it is
necessary to run the connecting line over property not owned by the owner of the property to be
served by the connection, and, after diligent effort, the easement necessary to run the connecting
line cannot reasonably be obtained.
(c) For purposes of this article, a lot is "served" by a town owned water or sewer line if
connection is required by this section.
Section 238 Sewage Disposal Facilities Required.
Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall be served by a sewage disposal
system that is adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use or subdivision lot and
that complies with all applicable health regulations. When a subdivision is within the town limits, the
subdivider shall connect to the Edenton sewer system in order to provide sewer service to every lot
within the subdivision.
Section 239 Determining Compliance With Section 238.
	

				
	 

(a) Primary responsibility for determining whether a proposed development will comply with
the standard set forth in Section 238 often lies with an agency other than the town, and the
developer must comply with the detailed standards and specifications of such other agency. The
relevant agencies are listed in subsection (b). Whenever any such agency requires detailed
construction or design drawings before giving its official approval to the proposed sewage disposal
system, the authority issuing a permit under this section may rely upon a preliminary review by such
agency of the basic design elements of the proposed sewage disposal system to determine
compliance with Section 238. However, construction of such system may not be commenced until
the detailed plans and specifications have been reviewed and any appropriate permits issued by
such agency.
(b) In the following table, the column on the left describes the type of development and
the column on the right indicates the agency that must certify to the town whether the proposed
sewage disposal system complies with the standard set forth in Section 238.
IF
THEN
(1) The use is located on a lot that is
served by the town sewer system or a
previously approved, privately-owned
package treatment plant, and the use
can be served by a simple connection to
the system (as in the case of a
single-family residence) rather than the
construction of an internal collection
system (as in the case of a shopping
center or apartment complex):
No further certification is necessary.
(2) The use (other than a subdivision) is
located on a lot that is served by the town
sewer system but service to the use
necessitates construction of an internal
collection system (as in the case of a
shopping center or apartment complex);
and
a. The internal collection system is
to be transferred to and maintained
by the town:
The public works director must certify to the
town that the proposed internal collection
system meets the town's specifications and
will be accepted by the town. (A "Permit to
Construct" must be obtained from the
Division of Environmental Management.)
b. The internal collection system is
to be privately maintained:
The public works director must certify that the
proposed collection system is adequate.
(3) The use (other than a subdivision) is not
served by the town system but is to be
served by a privately operated sewage
treatment system (that has not previously
The County Health Department (CHD) must
certify to the town that the proposed system
complies with all applicable state and local
health regulations. If the proposed use is a
	

				
	 

been approved) with 3000 gallons or less
design capacity, the effluent from which
does not discharge to surface water:
single dwelling other than a manufactured
home, the developer must obtain an
improvements permit from the CHD. If the
proposed use is a single-family manufactured
home, the developer must present to the town
a certificate of completion from the CHD.
(4) The use (other than a subdivision) is to
be served by a privately operated sewage
system (not previously approved) that has
a design capacity of more than 3000
gallons or that discharges effluent into
surface waters:
The Division of Environmental Management
(DEM) must certify to the Town that the
proposed system complies with all applicable
state regulations. (A "Permit to Construct" and
a "Permit to Discharge" must be obtained from
DEM.)
(5) The proposed use is a subdivision;
and
a. Lots within the subdivision are to
be served by simple connection to
existing town lines or lines of a
previously approved private
system:
No further certification is necessary.
b. Lots within the subdivision are to
be served by the town system but
the developer will be responsible
for installing the necessary
additions to the town system:
The public works director must certify to the
town that the proposed system meets the
town's specifications and will be accepted by
the town. (A "Permit to Construct" must be
obtained from the Division of Environmental
Management of the N.C. Department of
Environmental Health and Natural Resources.)
c. Lots within the subdivision are to
be served by a sewage treatment
system that has not been
approved, that has a design
capacity of 3000 gallons or less,
and that does not discharge into
surface waters:
The County Health Department must certify
that the proposed system complies with all
applicable state and local health regulations.
If each lot within the subdivision is to be
served by a separate on-site disposal system,
the CHD must certify that each lot shown on a
major subdivision preliminary plat can
probably be served, and each lot on a major or
minor subdivision final plat can be served by
an on-site disposal system.
d. Lots within the subdivision are to
be served by a privately operated
sewage treatment system (not
previously approved) that has a
design capacity in excess of 3000
gallons or that discharges effluent
into surface waters:
The Division of Environmental Management
must certify that the proposed system
complies with all applicable state regulations.
(A "Permit to Construct" and a "Permit to
Discharge" must be obtained from DEM.)
	

				
	 

Section 240 Water Supply System Required.
Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall be served by a water supply system
that is adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use or subdivision lot and that
complies with all applicable health regulations. When a subdivision is within the town limits, the
subdivider shall connect to the Edenton water system in order to provide water service to every lot
within the subdivision.
Section 241 Determining Compliance with Section 240.
(a) Primary responsibility for determining whether a proposed development will comply with
the standard set forth in Section 240 often lies with an agency other than the town, and the
developer must comply with the detailed standards and specifications of such other agency. The
relevant agencies are listed in subsection (b). Whenever any such agency requires detailed
construction or design drawings before giving its official approval to the proposed water supply
system, the authority issuing a permit under this chapter may rely upon a preliminary review by such
agency of the basic design elements of the proposed water supply system to determine compliance
with Section 240. However, construction of such system may not be commenced until the detailed
plans and specifications have been reviewed and any appropriate permits issued by such agency.
(b) In the following table, the column on the left describes the type of development and the
column on the right indicates the agency that must certify to the town whether the proposed water
supply system complies with the standard set forth in Section 240.
IF
THEN
(1) The use is located on a lot that is
served by the town water system or a
previously approved, privately owned
public water supply system and the use
can be served by a simple connection to
the system (as in the case of a single
family residence) rather than the
construction of an internal distribution
system (as in the case of a shopping
center or apartment complex):
No further certification is necessary.
(2) The use (other than a subdivision) is
located on a lot that is served by the
town water system but service to the
use necessitates construction of an
internal distribution system (as in the
case of a shopping center or apartment
complex); and
a. The internal distribution system
is to be transferred to and
The public works director must certify to the
town that the proposed internal distribution
	

				
	 

maintained by the town: system meets town specifications and will be
accepted by the town. (A "Permit to
Construct" must be obtained from the Division
of Health Services.)
b. The internal distribution system
is to be privately maintained:
The public works director must certify that the
proposed collection system is adequate.
(3) The use (other than a subdivision) is
located on a lot not served by the town
system or a previously approved,
privately owned public water supply
system; and
a. The use is to be served by a
privately owned public water
supply system that has not
previously been approved:
The Division of Health Services must certify
that the proposed system complies with all
applicable state and federal regulations. (A
"Permit to Construct" must be obtained from
DHS.) The Division of Environmental
Management must also approve the plans if
the water source is a well and the system has
a design capacity of 100,000 gallons per day
or is located in certain areas designated by
DEM. The public works director must also
approve the distribution lines for possible
future addition to the town system.
b. The use is to be served by some
other source (such as an
individual well):
The County Health Department must certify
that the proposed system meets all applicable
state and local regulations.
(4) The proposed use is a subdivision; and
a. Lots within the subdivision are to
be served by simple connection
to existing town lines or lines of
a previously approved public
water supply system:
No further certification is necessary.
b. Lots within the subdivision are to
be served by the town system
but the developer will be
responsible for installing the
necessary additions to such
system:
The public works director must certify to the
town that the proposed system meets town
specifications and will be accepted by the
town. (A "Permit to Construct" must be
obtained from the Division of Health
Services.)
c. Lots within the subdivision are to
be served by a privately owned
public water supply system that
has not previously been
approved:
The Division of Health Services must certify
that the proposed system complies with all
applicable state and federal regulations. (A
"Permit to Construct" must be obtained from
DHS.) The Division of Environmental
Management must also approve the plans if
	

				
	  

the water source is a well and the system has
a design capacity of 100,000 per day or is
located within certain areas designated by
DEM. The public works director must also
approve the distribution lines for possible
future addition to the town system.
d. Lots within the subdivision are to
be served by individual wells:
The County Health Department must certify to
the town that each lot intended to be served
by a well can be served in accordance with
applicable health regulations.
Section 242 Lighting Requirements.
(a) Subject to subsection (b), all public streets, sidewalks, and other common areas or
facilities in subdivisions created after the effective date of this chapter shall be sufficiently
illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using such streets,
sidewalks, and other common areas or facilities.
(b) To the extent that fulfillment of the requirement established in subsection (a) would
normally require street lights installed along public streets, this requirement shall be applicable only
to subdivisions located within the corporate limits of the town. Street lights shall be placed at each
intersection and at such block spacing as may be required by the public works director.
(c) All roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, and other common areas and facilities in
unsubdivided developments shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and
the safety of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, and other common areas
and facilities.
(d) All entrances and exits in substantial buildings used for non-residential purposes and in
two-family or multi-family residential developments containing more than four dwelling units shall be
adequately lighted to ensure the safety of persons and the security of the buildings.
Section 243 Excessive Illumination.
Lighting within any lot that unnecessarily illuminates any other lot and substantially interferes
with the use or enjoyment of such other lot is prohibited. Lighting unnecessarily illuminates another
lot if it clearly exceeds the standard set forth in Section 242 or if the standard set forth in Section 242
could reasonably be achieved in a manner that would not substantially interfere with the use or
enjoyment of neighboring properties.
Section 244 Electric Power.
Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision shall have available to it a source of
electric power adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within
	

				
	 !

such subdivision. Compliance with this requirement shall be determined as follows:
(1) If the use is not a subdivision and is located on a lot that is served by an existing
power line and the use can be served by a simple connection to such power line
(as opposed to a more complex distribution system, such as would be required in
an apartment complex or shopping center), then no further certification is
needed.
(2) If the use is a subdivision or is not located on a lot served by an existing power
line or a substantial internal distribution system will be necessary, then the
electric utility service provider must review the proposed plans and certify to the
town that it can provide service that is adequate to meet the needs of the
proposed use and every lot within the proposed subdivision.
Section 245 Telephone Service.
Every principal use and every lot within a subdivision must have available to it a telephone
service cable adequate to accommodate the reasonable needs of such use and every lot within
such subdivision. Compliance with this requirement shall be determined as follows;
(1) If the use is not a subdivision and is located on a lot that is served by an existing
telephone line and the use can be served by a simple connection to such
telephone line (as opposed to a more complex distribution system, such as
would be required in an apartment complex or shopping center), then no further
certification is necessary.
(2) If the use is a subdivision or is not located on a lot served by an existing
telephone line or a substantial internal distribution system will be necessary, then
the telephone utility company must review the proposed plans and certify to the
town that it can provide service that is adequate to meet the needs of the
proposed use and every lot within the proposed subdivision.
Section 246 Underground Utilities.
(a) All electric power lines (not to include transformers or enclosures containing electrical equipment including,
but not limited to, switches, meters or capacitors which may be pad mounted), telephone, gas
distribution, and cable television lines in subdivisions constructed after the effective date of this
ordinance shall be placed underground in accordance with the specifications and policies of the
respective utility service providers and located in accordance with Appendix C, Standard Drawing
No. 6 or 7.
(b) Whenever an unsubdivided development is hereafter constructed on a lot that is
undeveloped on the effective date of this section, then all electric power, telephone, gas distribution,
and cable television lines installed to serve the development that are located on the development
site outside of a previously existing public street right-of-way shall be placed underground in
accordance with the specifications and policies of the respective utility companies.
	

				
	 "

Section 247 Utilities To Be Consistent With Internal and External Development.
(a) Whenever it can reasonably be anticipated that utility facilities constructed in one
development will be extended to serve other adjacent or nearby developments, such utility facilities
(e.g., water or sewer lines) shall be located and constructed so that extensions can be made
conveniently and without undue burden or expense or unnecessary duplication of service as
determined by the Town of Edenton. The dedication of requisite utility easements and/or the
construction of utility facilities may be required, as determined necessary by the Town of Edenton, to
accommodate utility service to adjacent or nearby properties.
(b) All utility facilities shall be constructed in such a manner as to minimize interference with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic and to facilitate maintenance without undue damage to improvements
or facilities located within the development.
Section 248 As-Built Drawings Required.
Whenever a developer installs or causes to be installed any utility line in any public right of
way, the developer shall, as soon as practicable after installation is complete, and before
acceptance of any water or sewer line, furnish the town with a copy of a drawing that shows the
exact location of such utility lines. Such drawings must be verified as accurate by the utility service
provider. Compliance with this requirement shall be a condition of the continued validity of the
permit authorizing such development.
Section 249 Fire Hydrants.
(a) Every development (subdivided or unsubdivided) that is served by a public water
system shall include a system of fire hydrants sufficient to provide adequate fire protection for the
buildings located or intended to be located within such development.
(b) The presumption established by this ordinance is that to satisfy the standard set forth in
subsection (a), fire hydrants must be located so that all parts of every building within the
development may be served by a hydrant by laying not more than 500 feet of hose connected to
such hydrant. However, the fire chief may authorize or require a deviation from this standard if, in
his professional opinion, another arrangement more satisfactorily complies with the standard set
forth in subsection (a).
(c) The fire chief shall determine the precise location of all fire hydrants, subject to the
other provisions of this section. In general, fire hydrants shall be placed six feet behind the curb line
of publicly dedicated streets that have curb and gutter.
(d) The fire chief shall determine the design standards of all hydrants based on fire flow
needs. Unless otherwise specified by the fire chief, all hydrants shall have two 2 1/2 inch hose
connections and one 4 1/2 inch hose connection. The 2 1/2 inch hose connections shall be located
at least 21 1/2 inches from the ground level. All hydrant threads shall be national standard threads.
	

				
	 

(e) Water lines that serve hydrants shall be at least six inch lines, and, unless no other
practicable alternative is available, no such lines shall be dead-end lines.
Section 250 Sites for and Screening of Dumpsters.
(a) Every development that, under the town's solid waste collection policies, is or will be
required to provide one or more dumpsters for solid waste collection shall provide sites for such
dumpsters that are:
(1) Located so as to facilitate collection and minimize any negative impact on
persons occupying the development site, neighboring properties, or public
rights-of-way; and
(2) Constructed according to specifications established by the public works director
to allow for collection without damage to the development site or the collection
vehicle.
(b) All such dumpsters shall be screened if and to the extent that, in the absence of
screening, they would be clearly visible to:
(1) Persons located within any dwelling unit on residential property other than that
where the dumpster is located.
(2) Occupants, customers, or other invitees located within any building on
non-residential property other than that where the dumpster is located, unless
such other property is used primarily for purposes permitted exclusively in an IW
zoning district.
(3) Persons traveling on any public street, sidewalk, or other public way.
(c) When dumpster screening is required under this section, such screening shall be
constructed, installed, and located to prevent or remedy the conditions requiring the screening.
Section 250.1 Sites for and Screening of Recycling Collection Boxes.
(a) Municipal recycling collection boxes shall be located so as to facilitate collection and
minimize any negative impact on neighboring properties or public rights-of-way.
(b) All such recycling collection boxes shall be screened if and to the extent that, in the
absence of screening, they would be clearly visible to:
(1) Persons located within any dwelling unit on adjoining residential property.
(2) Occupants, customers, or other invitees located within any building on
non-residential property other than that where the recycling collection box is
	

				
	 

located, unless such other property is used primarily for purposes permitted
exclusively in an IW zoning district.
(3) Persons travelling on any public street, sidewalk, or other public way.
(c) When recycling collection box screening is required under this section, such screening
shall be constructed, installed, and located to prevent or remedy the conditions requiring the
screening.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-1
ARTICLE XVI
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS, DRAINAGE, STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Part I. Flood Hazard Areas
Section 251 Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives.
(a) Statutory Authorization. The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part
6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of
Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local governmental units the
responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
Therefore, the Town Council of Edenton, North Carolina, does ordain as follows:
(b) Findings of Fact
(1) The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of Edenton are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(2) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(c) Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such
uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase
erosion or flood damage; and
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(d) Objectives. The objectives of this Section are to:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-2
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
flood prone areas;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a Special
Flood Hazard Area.
Section 252 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, word or phrases used in this Section shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
Ordinance its most reasonable application.
(1) Accessory Structure (Appurtenant Structure). A structure which is
located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of
which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and
storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds
and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
(2) Addition (to an existing building). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
(3) Appeal. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance.
(4) Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one
to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be
evident.
(5) Area of Special Flood Hazard. See ‘Special Flood Hazard Area
(SFHA)’.
(6) Base Flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
(7) Base Flood Elevation (BFE). A determination, as published in the Flood
Insurance Study, of the water surface elevations of the base flood. When the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-3
BFE has not been provided in a “Special Flood Hazard Area”, it may be obtained
from engineering studies available from a Federal, State, or other source using
FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with
the “Freeboard”, establishes the “Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation”.
(8) Basement. Any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
(9) Breakaway Wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of
the building or the supporting foundation system.
(10) Building. See ‘Structure’.
(11) CAMA. North Carolina’s Coastal Area Management Act. This act, along
with the Dredge and Fill Law and the federal Coastal Zone Management Act, is
managed through North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources’ (NCDENR’s) Division of Coastal Management (DCM).
(12) Chemical Storage Facility. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
(13) Coastal High Hazard Area. A Special Flood Hazard Area extending
from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast
and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. The area is designated on a FIRM, or other adopted flood map as
determined in Article 3, Section B of this code, as Zone VE or V1-30.
(14) Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
(15) Disposal. Defined as in NCGS 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any
land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste
may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any
waters, including ground waters.
(16) Elevated Building. A non-basement building which has its reference
level raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
(17) Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
(18) Existing Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured Home
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-4
Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads) is pre-FIRM. was completed before the initial effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.
(19) Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (a) The overflow of inland
or tidal waters; and, (b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(20) Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM). An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which
the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the floodways are delineated. This official
map is a supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
(21) Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of
the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.
(22) Flood Insurance. The insurance coverage provided under the National
Flood Insurance Program.
(23) Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
(24) Flood Insurance Study (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazard areas, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood insurance risk zones, and other flood data in a community
issued by FEMA. The Flood Insurance Study report includes Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if
published.
(25) Floodplain or Flood Prone Area. Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source.
(26) Floodplain Administrator. The individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.
(27) Floodplain Development Permit. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
(28) Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-5
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
(29) Floodplain Management Regulations. This Ordinance and other
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power which control
development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local
regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing
and reducing flood loss and damage.
(30) Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate risk
of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, or structures with their contents.
(31) Flood Prone Area. See ‘Floodplain’.
(32) Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floodways are located within areas of special flood hazard as defined herein.
(33) Flood Zone. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary
Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in
the area.
(34) Floor. See ‘Lowest Floor’.
(35) Freeboard. The height added to the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) to
account for the many unknown factors than could contribute to flood heights
greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the “Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation”.
(36) Functionally Dependent Facility. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water,
such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities.
The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.
(37) Hazardous Waste Management Facility. A facility for the collection,
storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous
waste as defined in NCGS Article 9 of Chapter 130A.
(38) Highest Adjacent Grade (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure.
(39) Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-6
a. listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
b. certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
c. individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in communities
with a “Certified Local Government (CLG) Program”; or
d. certified as contributing to the historical significance of a historic district
designated by a community with a “Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program”.
e. Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the US
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina
Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation
Officer as having me the requirements of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in 1980.
(40) Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk,
patio slab, or deck support immediately next to the building after completion of
the building. For Zone A and AO, use the natural grade elevation prior to
construction.
(41) Lowest Floor. The sub floor, top of slab or grade of the lowest enclosed
area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this Section.
(42) Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
‘manufactured home’ does not include a ‘recreational vehicle’.
(43) Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
(44) Market Value. The building value, excluding the land (as agreed to
between a willing buyer and seller), as established by what the local real estate
market will bear. Market value can be established by independent certified
appraisal; replacement cost depreciated by age of building (Actual Cash Value),
or adjusted assessed values.
(45) Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-7
Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) as corrected in 1988 or other vertical control datum used as a reference
for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which Base Flood
Elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel
to determine datum used.
(46) New Construction. Structures for which the ‘start of construction’
commenced on or after the effective date of the original version of this Section
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
(47) Nonconforming Building or Development. Any legally existing building
or development which fails to comply with the current provisions of this
Ordinance.
(48) Non-Encroachment Area. The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
(1) foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
(49) Obstruction. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure,
vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse
which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow
of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by
the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
(50) Post-FIRM. Construction or other development which started on or after
January 1, 1975 or on or after the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance
Rate Map for the area, whichever is later.
(51) Pre-FIRM. Construction or other development which started before
January 1, 1975 or before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance Rate
Map for the area, whichever is later.
(52) Primary Frontal Dune. A continuous or nearly continuous mound or
ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately
landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and over-topping from
high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary
frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively
steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
(53) Principally Above Ground. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
(54) Public Safety and/or Nuisance. Anything which is injurious to the safety
or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-8
(55) Recreational Vehicle (RV). A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single
chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(56) Reference Level. The top of the lowest floor for structures within Special
Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.
(57) Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. The elevation to which all
structures and other development located within the Special Flood Hazard Areas
must be elevated or flood proofed, if non-residential. Within areas where Base
Flood Elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE
plus two feet of freeboard. In areas where no BFE has been established, all
structures and other development must be elevated or flood proofed, if nonresidential,
to two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
(58) Remedy a Violation. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is
not possible, to reduce the impact of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may
be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from
flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this Ordinance or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
(59) Repetitive Loss. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during any 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(60) Retrofitting. Measures, such as flood proofing, elevation, construction of
small levees, and other modifications, taken on an existing building or its yard to
protect it from flood damage.
(61) Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
(62) Salvage Yard. Property used for the storage, collection, and/or recycling
of any type of equipment whatsoever, whether industrial or noncommercial, and
including but not limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
(63) Special Food Hazard Area (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to
a one (1%) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as
determined in subsection D 2. This area shall comprise the Flood Hazard
Overlay District established in Section 4.04 B.
(64) Solid Waste Disposal Facility. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in NCGS 130A-290(a) (35).
(65) Solid Waste Disposal Site. Defined as in NCGS 130A-290(a) (36), any
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-9
place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
(66) Start of Construction. Includes substantial improvement and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs
or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the
state of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
(67) Structure. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
(68) Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
during any one year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of ‘substantial
improvement’. Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained
by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the
cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
(69) Substantial Improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during
any one year period whereby the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the ‘start of construction’ of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred ‘substantial
damage’, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either: (a) any correction of existing violations of State or
Community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or, (b) any alteration of a
historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure.
(70) Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
Ordinance which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-10
(71) Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the County's floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in this Section is presumed to be in violation
until such time as that documentation is provided.
(72) Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(73) Water Surface Elevation (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea
level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
coastal or riverine areas.
Section 253 General Provisions.
(a) Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all Special Flood
Hazard Areas within the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the Town of Edenton.
(b) Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas. The Special Flood
Hazard Areas are those identified under the Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement
between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for the Town of Edenton dated October 16,
2008 which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. In addition,
upon annexation to the Town of Edenton or inclusion in the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ),
the Special Flood Hazard Areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) and/or produced under the Cooperating Technical State agreement between the State
of North Carolina and FEMA as stated above, for the Unincorporated Areas of Chowan County,
with accompanying maps and other supporting data are adopted by reference and declared to
be a part of this ordinance.
(c) Establishment of Floodplain Development Permit. Floodplain Development
Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the
commencement of any development activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in
accordance with the provisions of Section 253 (b) of this ordinance.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended,
converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all
provisions shall be:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-11
(1) considered as minimum requirements;
(2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State
statutes.
(g) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by
this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Actual flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This Section does not imply that land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
Section shall not create liability on the part of Chowan County or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Section or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(h) Penalties for Violation. Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to
comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
more than $50.00 or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each
day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent Chowan County from taking such other lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Section 254 Administration.
(a) Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Building Inspector, hereinafter
referred to as the “Floodplain Administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer and implement
the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Plans and Application Requirements. Application for a Floodplain Development
Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities located
within Special Flood Hazard Areas which must be presented to the Floodplain Administrator:
(1) Plot plans and sites plans shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following
details of the proposed floodplain development:
a. The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, the
location of utility systems, proposed grading/pavement areas, fill
materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other proposed
development;
b. The boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in Section 253 (b) or a
statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard
Area;
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-12
c. Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in
Section 253 (b);
d. The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in Section 253 (b);
e. The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
Section 253 (b); Section 254 (e) (12) and (e) (13); Section 255 (b)
(10); Section 255 (c); and Section 255 (a) 15;
f. The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
g. The boundary and effective date of COBRA zone or OPA, if
applicable.
(2) Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a Special
Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference
level (including basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure will be flood-proofed;
c. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or flood proofed;
(3) If flood proofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) with
supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan
that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of
flood proofing measures.
(4) A Foundation Plan drawn to scale which shall include details of the proposed
foundation system to ensure all provisions of this Section met. These details
include but are not limited to:
a. Proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid
foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open
foundation on columns/piers);
b. Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood
forces on walls in accordance with Section 255 (b) (4) (c) (i) when
solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE, and
A1-30.
c. In Coastal High Hazard Areas, the following must also be
submitted prior to permit issuance. Specific requirements are
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-13
detailed in Section 255 (e) and Section 254 (b) (4) (b).
(i) V-zone Certification form with accompanying plans and
specifications verifying the engineered structure and
breakaway wall designs as set forth in Section 254 (b) (4)
(b);
(ii) Plans for lattice work or decorative screening, if applicable.
Plans for any structures that will have lattice work or
decorative screening must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for approval prior to permit issuance;
(iii) Plans for non-structural fill, if applicable. Plans for
placement of any non-structural fill must be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator for approval prior to permit
issuance. Requirements are detailed in Section 255 (f) (8).
(5) Usage details of any enclosed space areas below the lowest floor.
(6) Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
(7) Certification that all other Local, State and Federal permits required prior to
permit issuance (i.e. Wetlands, Erosion and Sedimentation Control, CAMA,
Riparian Buffers, Mining, etc.)
(8) If permit is issued for placement of Recreational Vehicles and/or Temporary
Structures, documentation to ensure Section 255 (b) (7) and (8) are met.
(9) If a watercourse is proposed to be altered and/or relocated, a description of the
extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on the
effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and
downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.
(c) Permit Data Requirements. The following information shall be provided on the
approved permit to ensure compliance with this Section:
(1) A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain
development permit.
(2) The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed development
per available data specified in Section 253 (b).
(3) The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all
attendant utilities.
(4) The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public
utilities.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-14
(5) All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
(6) State that no fill material shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment
area of any watercourse, if applicable.
(7) If in an A, AO, AE or A1-30 zone, specify the minimum foundation opening
requirements.
(8) State limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable). (i.e., Parking,
Building Access and Limited Storage only).
(9) If in a VE or V1-30 zone, state that there shall be no alteration of sand dunes
which would increase potential flood damage.
(10) If in a VE or V1-30 zone, state that there shall be no fill used as structural
support.
(d) Certification Requirements
(1) An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or Floodproofing Certificate
(FEMA Form 81-65) is required after the reference level is completed. Within
seven (7) calendar days of establishment of the reference level elevation, or
flood proofing, by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall
be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the elevation of the reference level, or flood proofed elevation,
whichever is applicable in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized,
said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work done within
the seven (7) day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification
shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review
the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive
work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make said corrections required shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for
the project.
(2) A Final As-Built Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or Floodproofing
Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required after construction is completed and
prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of
the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final
as-built construction of the elevation or flood proofed elevation of the reference
level and all attendant utilities. Said certification shall be prepared by or under
the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer
and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized, said certification shall be
prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or
architect and certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-15
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of
Compliance/Occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may
be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make said corrections required shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
(3) Floodproofing Certificate. If non-residential flood proofing is used to meet the
Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate
(FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an
inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any
new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the flood proofed design elevation of
the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level.
Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision
of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the
inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall
be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a
floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the
certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a Certificate of
Compliance/Occupancy.
(4) A V-Zone/Breakaway Wall Certification is required prior to issuance of a permit
within coastal high hazard areas. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to
submit to the Floodplain Zoning Administrator said certification to ensure the
design standards of this Section are met. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop or review the structural design, plans, and specifications
for construction and certify that the design and methods of construction to be
used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of this Section. This certification is not a substitute for an Elevation
Certificate.
(5) If a manufactured home is placed within an A, AO, AE, or A1-30 zone and the
elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineered foundation
certification is required per Section 255 (b) (3).
(6) If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of
watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map
showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall
all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a permit.
(7) Certification Exemptions. The following structures, if located within A, AO, AE
or A1-30 zones, are exempt from the elevation/flood proofing certification
requirements specified in items 1. and 2. above:
a. Recreational Vehicles meeting requirements of Section 255 (b) (7)
(a);
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-16
b. Temporary Structures meeting requirements of Section 255 (b)
(8). and
c. Accessory Structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of Section 255 (b) (9).
(e) Duties of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties of the Floodplain
Administrator as they relate to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of Section
7.02 shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Review all applications and issue permits for all proposed development within
flood prone areas to assure that the requirements of this Section have been
satisfied.
(2) Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure
that all necessary Local, State and Federal permits have been received.
(3) Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(4) Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
(5) Prevent encroachments within floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 255 (e) are
met.
(6) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level
(including basement) of all attendant utilities of all new or substantially
improved structures, in accordance with Section 254 (d).
(7) Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or
substantially improved structures and all utilities have been flood proofed, in
accordance with Section 254 (d).
(8) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities, in
accordance with Section 254 (d).
(9) When flood proofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications
from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Section
254 (d) and Section 255 (b) (2).
(10) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of
the Special Flood Hazard Areas (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the
necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-17
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided
in this Section.
(11) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with Section 253 (b), obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data and/or nonencroachment
area data available from a Federal, State, or other source,
including data developed pursuant to Section 255 (b) (10) d., in order to
administer the provisions of this Section.
(12) When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway nor
non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with Section
253 (b), obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data, and/or nonencroachment
area data available from a Federal, State, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this Section.
(13) When the exact location of boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas
conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site, the property
owner may apply and be approved for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) by
FEMA. A copy of the Letter of Map Amendment issued from FEMA will be
maintained by the Floodplain Administrator in the permit file.
(14) Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this
Section and make these records available for public inspection recognizing that
such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.
(15) Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a
permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall make as many
inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being
done according to the provisions of this Section and the terms of the permit. In
exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
(16) Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof
is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this
Section, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be immediately
stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person
doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be
stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition(s) under
which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a
misdemeanor.
(17) Revocation of permits as required. The Floodplain Administrator may
revoke and require the return of the permit by notifying the permit holder in
writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for
any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or
specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of State or
local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-18
permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable State or local
law may also be revoked.
(18) Make periodic inspections throughout all special flood hazard areas within
the jurisdiction of Chowan County. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of the Department of Planning and Inspections shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial
jurisdiction of Chowan County at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
(19) Follow through with corrective procedures of Section 254 (f).
(20) Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
(21) Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS
Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance
with the provisions of Section 253 of this ordinance, including any revisions
thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify State and
FEMA of mapping needs.
(22) Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of Map
Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
(f) Corrective Procedures. Violations of the provisions of this Section shall be subject
to the enforcement procedures, remedies, and penalties delineated in Article VII, Enforcement
and Review.
(g) Variance Procedures. Requests for variances from the provisions of Section 138
(b) shall be reviewed by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures delineated
in Article V, Appeals, Variances, and Interpretations.
(1) The Board of Adjustment as established by Chowan County, hereinafter
referred to as the “appeal board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such
decision to the Court, as provided in Chapter 7A of the North Carolina General
Statutes.
(3) Variances may be issued for:
a. the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure;
b. functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in Section 252 of this ordinance, provided
provisions of Section 254 (g) (9) (b), (c), and (e) have been
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-19
satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety; or
c. any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this Section.
(4) In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this
ordinance, and:
a. the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
b. the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
d. the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
e. the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under Section 252 of this ordinance as a functionally dependent
facility, where applicable;
f. the availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
g. the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
h. the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
i. the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
j. the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
k. the costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
and streets and bridges.
(5) A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with
the application for a variance.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-20
(6) Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this
ordinance, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
ordinance.
(7) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice
specifying the difference between the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below
the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance
to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification
shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the State of North Carolina upon request.
(9) Conditions for Variances:
a. Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other Federal, State, or local laws,
regulations, or ordinances.
b. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.
c. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
d. Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) a showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship; and
(iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
(10) A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-21
facilities that are located in Special Flood Hazard Areas provided that all of the
following conditions are met.
a. The use serves a critical need in the community.
b. No feasible location exists for the use outside the Special Flood
Hazard Area.
c. The reference level of any structure is elevated or flood proofed to
at least the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
d. The use complies with all other applicable Federal, State and local
laws.
e. The County has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina
Department of Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to
grant a variance at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to granting
the variance.
Section 255 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
(a) General Standards. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas the following provisions are
required:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other
service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
These include but are not limited to HVAC equipment, water softener units,
bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes,
appliances (i.e., washers, dryers, refrigerator, etc.), hot water heaters, electric
outlets/switches.
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters.
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(8) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure which is in
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-22
compliance with the provisions of this Section, shall meet the requirements of
‘new construction’ as contained in this Section.
(9) Non-conforming structures or other development may not be enlarged, replaced,
or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in
conformance with the provisions of this Section. Provided, however, nothing in
this Section shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building
or structure existing on the effective date of this Ordinance and located totally or
partially within the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback,
provided that the bulk of the building or structure below the regulatory flood
protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback
is not increased and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement
meets all of the other requirements of this Section.
(10) New solid waste disposal facilities, hazardous waste management
facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted in
Special Flood Hazard Areas. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage
incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or
wastewater treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only
if the structure or tank is either elevated or flood proofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified according to Section 254 (d).
(11) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(12) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(13) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(14) All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
(15) When a structure is partially located in a Special Flood Hazard Area, the
entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial
improvements.
(16) When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood
hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more
restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
shall apply.
(b) Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas
where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in Section 253 (b) or
Sections 254 (e) (11) and (12), the following provisions are required:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-23
(1) Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference
level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
(2) Non-Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement of
any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. Structures located in A, AO, AE and A1-30 Zones may be
flood proofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation
provided that all areas of the structure below the required flood protection
elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are
satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection N along with the operational plan and the inspection and
maintenance plan.
(3) Manufactured Homes.
a. New or replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so
that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than
the regulatory flood protection elevation.
b. Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement in accordance with the State of North Carolina
Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes, 2004 Edition, and
any revision thereto adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance
pursuant to NCGS 143-143.15 or a certified engineered
foundation. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an
elevation of the chassis thirty-six (36) inches or less above the
grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength.
When the elevation of the chassis is above thirty-six (36) inches in
height, an engineering certification is required.
c. All foundation enclosures or skirting shall be in accordance with
Section 255 (b) (4).
d. An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially
damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within
flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by
the Zoning Administrator and the local Emergency Management
coordinator.
(4) Elevated Buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially
improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-24
a. shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises.
Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of
maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the
living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such
enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate
rooms, except to enclose storage areas;
b. shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least to
the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation;
c. In A, AO, AE, and A1-30 zones, measures for complying with this
requirement shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the foundation
must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or
meet the following minimum design criteria:
(i) Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding.
(ii) The total net area of all openings must be at least one (1)
square inch for each square foot of each enclosed area subject
to flooding.
(iii) If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must
have openings on exterior walls to allow floodwater to directly
enter;
(iv) The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one
(1) foot above the adjacent grade; and,
(v) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
opening coverings or devices provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
(vi) Foundation enclosures:
enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not
require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning,
regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and
requires flood openings as outlined above.
(5) In Coastal High Hazard Areas (VE and V1-30 zones),
a. Breakaway walls, lattice work or decorative screening shall be
allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation provided
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-25
they are not part of the structural support of the building and are
designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or
wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the
building on which they are to be used and provided the following
design specifications are met:
b. Material shall consist of open wood lattice or mesh insect
screening; or
c. Breakaway walls meeting the following design specifications:
(i) Design safe loading resistance of each wall shall be not less
than 10 nor more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
(ii) If more than 20 pounds per square foot, a registered
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design
wall collapse would result from a water load less than that
which would occur during the base flood event, and the
elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or
other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all building components
(structural and non-structural). The water loading values
used shall be those associated with the base flood. The wind
loading values used shall be those required by the North
Carolina State Building Code.
(6) Additions/Improvements.
a. Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures whereas
the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure
(i) are not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages
and must not be any more non-conforming than the existing
structure.
(ii) are a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the
standards for new construction.
b. Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure shall require only the addition to comply with the
standards for new construction.
c. Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures whereas
the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior
modifications to the existing structure
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-26
(i) are not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new
construction.
(ii) are a substantial improvement, both the existing structure and
the addition and/or improvements must comply with the
standards for new construction.
(iii) Where a fire wall or independent perimeter load-bearing wall is
provided between the addition and the existing building, the
addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and only the
addition must comply with the standards for new construction.
(7) Recreational Vehicles. Recreation vehicles placed on sites within a Special
Flood Hazard Area shall either:
a. be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and has
no permanently attached additions); or
b. meet all the requirements for new construction, including
anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 254 (b), Section
255 (a) and Section 255 (b) (3).
(8) Temporary Structures. Prior to the issuance of a permit for a temporary
structure, the following requirements must be met:
a. Applicants must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for
the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane or
flash flood warning notification. The plan must include the
following information:
(i) a specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three (3) months,
renewable up to one (1) year;
(ii) the name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
(iii) the time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e. minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a
hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification);
(iv) a copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with a
trucking company to insure the availability of removal
equipment when needed; and
(v) designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location
outside the Special Flood Hazard Area to which the temporary
structure will be moved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-27
The above information shall be submitted in writing to the Zoning
Administrator for review and written approval
(9) Accessory Structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages,
etc.) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following criteria
shall be met:
a. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including
work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
b. Accessory Structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
c. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
d. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
e. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
Section 255 (a) (1)
f. All service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
installed in accordance with Section 255 (a) (4). and
g. Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance
with Section 255 (b) (4) (c).
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet does not
require an elevation or flood proofing certificate. Elevation or flood
proofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures in
accordance with Section 254 (d).
(10) Subdivisions, Manufactured Home Parks, and Major Developments. All
subdivision, manufactured home park and major development proposals
located within Special Flood Hazard Areas shall:
a. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
b. Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
c. Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards;
and;
d. Have Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data provided if development is
greater than the lesser of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots/manufactured
home sites. Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by
reference per Section 253 (b) to be utilized in implementing this
Section.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-28
(c) Standards for Floodplains without Established Base Flood Elevations. Within the
Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Section 253 (b), where no Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) data has been provided, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
or new development shall be permitted within a distance of twenty feet each
side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream whichever is
greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) The BFE used in determining the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation shall
be determined based on the following criteria:
a. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within
such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this
ordinance and shall be elevated or flood proofed in accordance with
standards in Section 255 (a) and (b).
b. When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from a Federal,
State, or other source, all new construction and substantial
improvements within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also
comply with the requirements of Sections 255 (a) and (e).
c. All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if
development is greater than five (5) acres or has more than fifty (50)
lots/manufactured home sites. Such Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data
shall be adopted by reference in accordance with Section 253 and
utilized in implementing this ordinance.
d. When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available from a Federal,
State, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or flood proofed (nonresidential) to or above the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation, as defined in Section 252. All other
applicable provisions of Section 255 (b) shall also apply.
(d) Standards for Riverine Floodplains with Base Flood Elevations but without Established
Floodways or Non-encroachment Areas. Along rivers and streams where Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither
floodway nor non-encroachment areas are identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the
FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such
areas:
(1) Standards of Sections 255 (a) and (b); and
(2) Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless
certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-29
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community.
(e) Floodways and Non-encroachment Areas. Located within the Special Flood
Hazard Areas established in Section 253 (b) are areas designated as floodways or nonencroachment
areas. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous
areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and
potential projectiles. The following provisions shall apply to all development within such areas:
(1) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
a. it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of permit.
b. A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been
approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also
be obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment.
(2) If Section 255 (e) is satisfied, all development shall comply with all
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Section.
(3) No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision provided the following provisions are met:
a. The anchoring and the elevation standards of Section 255 (b) (3);
and
b. The no encroachment standards of subsection Section 255 (e) (1)
are met.
(f) Coastal High Hazard Areas (VE and V1-30 Zones). Coastal High Hazard Areas
are Special Flood Hazard Areas established in Section 253 (b) and designated as Zones VE or
V1-30. These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from
surges and, therefore, in addition to meeting all provisions in this Section, the following
provisions shall apply to all new construction, substantial improvements and all other
development:
(1) All development shall:
a. Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide;
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-30
b. Be located landward of the first line of stable natural vegetation, and
c. Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements.
(2) All development shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest supporting
horizontal member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation. Floodproofing may not be utilized on any
structures in Coastal High Hazard Areas to satisfy the regulatory flood protection
elevation requirements.
(3) All space below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be open so as not
to impede the flow of water.
(4) Open wood lattice work or mesh insect screening may be permitted below the
regulatory flood protection elevation for aesthetic purposes only and must be
designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance
with Section 255 (b) (5. Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with
Section 254 (b) (4) (c).
(5) All development shall be securely anchored on pilings or columns.
(6) All pilings and columns and the attached structures shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all building components.
(7) A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design,
specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions
contained in Section 254 (b) and Section 255 (f) (4), (6), and (8).
(8) There shall be no fill used as structural support. Non-compacted fill may be used
around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/ aesthetic purposes provided
the fill will wash out from storm surge, thereby rendering the building free of
obstruction prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave
deflection. Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with Section 254 (b)
(4) (c). The Floodplain Administrator may approve design plans for
landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an
engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist which demonstrates that the following
factors have been fully considered:
a. Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for
excessive natural compaction;
b. Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent
properties; and,
c. Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping.
(9) There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood
damage.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-31
(10) No manufactured homes shall be permitted except in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home
may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
provided the anchoring and elevation standards are in compliance with this
section of code.
(11) Recreational vehicles shall be permitted in Coastal High Hazard Areas
provided that they meet the Recreational Vehicle criteria of Section 255 (b) (7)
(a) and the Temporary Structure provisions of Section 255 (b) (8).
Section 256 Legal Status Provisions.
(a) Effect on Rights and Liabilities under the Former Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance. This Section in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the Food Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted September 14, 1987 as
amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce
without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued
there under are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this Section shall not affect
any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance of Chowan County enacted on September 14, 1987, as amended, which
are not reenacted herein are repealed.
(b) Effect upon Outstanding Building Permits. Nothing herein contained shall require
any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any development or any part
thereof for which a permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or his authorized
agents before the time of passage of this Section; provided, however, that when construction is
not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of six (6) months subsequent to
passage of this Section or any revision thereto, construction or use shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this Section.
(c) Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective October 16, 2008.
I hereby certify that this is a true and correct copy of the flood damage prevention ordinance as
adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Edenton, North Carolina, on the 8th day of
October, 2008.
WITNESS my hand and the official seal of the Town of Edenton, this the 8th day of October,
2008.
________________________________
(signature)
Sections 257 through 269 Reserved.
Part II. Drainage, Erosion Control, Storm Water Management
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-32
Section 263 Natural Drainage System Utilized to Extent Feasible.
(a) To the extent practicable, all development shall conform to the natural contours of
the land and natural and pre-existing man-made drainage ways shall remain undisturbed.
(b) To the extent practicable, lot boundaries shall be made to coincide with natural and
pre-existing man-made drainage ways within subdivisions to avoid the creation of lots that can
be built upon only by altering such drainage ways.
Section 264 Developments Must Drain Properly.
(a) All developments shall be provided with a drainage system that is adequate to
prevent the undue retention of surface water on the development site. Surface water shall not
be regarded as unduly retained if:
(1) The retention results from a technique, practice or device deliberately
installed as part of an approved sedimentation or storm water runoff control
plan; or
(2) The retention is not substantially different in location or degree than that
experienced by the development site in its pre-development stage, unless
such retention presents a danger to health or safety.
(b) No surface water may be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer.
(c) Whenever practicable, the drainage system of a development shall coordinate with
and connect to the drainage systems or drainage ways on surrounding properties or streets.
(d) Use of drainage swales rather than curb and gutter and storm sewers in
subdivisions is provided for in Section 216. Private roads and access ways within unsubdivided
developments shall utilize curb and gutter and storm drains to provide adequate drainage if the
grade of such roads or access ways is too steep to provide drainage in another manner or if
other sufficient reasons exist to require such construction.
(e) Construction specifications for drainage swales, curbs and gutters, and storm drains
are contained in Appendix C.
Section 265 Storm Water Management.
(a) All developments shall be constructed and maintained so that adjacent properties
are not unreasonably burdened with surface waters as a result of such developments. More
specifically:
(1) No development may be constructed or maintained so that such development
unreasonably impedes the natural flow of water from higher adjacent
properties across such development, thereby unreasonably causing
substantial damage to such higher adjacent properties; and
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-33
(2) No development may be constructed or maintained so that surface waters
from such development are unreasonably collected and channeled onto lower
adjacent properties at such locations or at such volumes as to cause
substantial damage to such lower adjacent properties.
(b) All developments shall contain an adequate drainage system for the property
drainage of all surface water. No new construction and no substantial improvements of a
structure may take place unless the design of a drainage system is reviewed by the
administrator to assure that:
(1) No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer.
(2) Where feasible, the subdivider shall connect to an existing storm drainage
system.
(3) Where an existing storm drainage system cannot feasibly be extended to the
subdivision, a surface drainage system shall be designed to protect the
proposed development from water damage.
(4) Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of not less than the natural
angle of repose for the soil but not less than a 3 to 1 slope in which the
course is constructed and courses shall be of sufficient size to accommodate
the drainage area without flooding the adjacent properties.
Section 266 Sedimentation and Erosion Control.
(a) No zoning, special use, or conditional use permit may be issued and final plat
approval for subdivisions may not be given with respect to any development that would cause
land disturbing activity requiring prior approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan by
the N.C. Sedimentation Control Commission under NCGS 113A-57(4) unless the commission
has certified to the town, either that:
(1) An erosion control plan has been submitted to and approved by the
commission; or
(2) The commission has examined the preliminary plans for the development and
it reasonably appears that an erosion control plan can be approved upon
submission by the developer of more detailed construction or design
drawings. However, in this case, construction of the development may not
begin (and no building permits may be issued) until the commission approves
the erosion control plan.
(b) For purposes of this section, "land disturbing activity" means any use of the land by
any person in residential, industrial, educational, institutional or commercial development,
highway and road construction and maintenance that results in a change in the natural cover or
topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation except activities that are exempt
under NCGS 113A-52(6)). Sedimentation occurs whenever solid particulate matter, mineral or
organic, is transported by water, air, gravity, or ice from the site of its origin.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 16-34
(c) All developments shall maintain a 25-foot vegetated buffer along each side of a
stream or natural drainageway. The 25-foot distance shall be measured from the top edge of
the streambank or drainageway. If no drainageway bank exists, the centerline of the
drainageway swale shall be used for measurement purposes. The vegetated buffer shall
remain undisturbed except as may be necessary to accommodate roads (provided they cross at
a horizontal angle of at least sixty degrees), utilities and their easements, pedestrian paths and
their easements and approved water-dependent uses such as marinas, docks, piers, boat
ramps and bridges. In cases in which a 25-foot buffer may not be practical nor desirable, the
Board of Adjustment may consider a special exception if it finds that an acceptable alternative
means of handling stormwater can be achieved without maintaining a 25-foot vegetated buffer.
(Amended October 16, 2008.)
Sections 267 through 269 Reserved.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 17-1
ARTICLE XVII
SIGNS
Section 270 Purpose/Definitions.
The purpose of this article is to create a comprehensive system of signage within the Town of
Edenton and is further intended to facilitate an effective and attractive means of communication. It
recognizes the need for an orderly and aesthetically pleasing community as well as the need for
adequate business identification. This article regulates the use of signs in order to ensure (i) that
they are designed, constructed, installed, and maintained in such a manner that they do not
endanger the public safety and welfare and (ii) that they are compatible with their surroundings.
However, the regulations contained herein are designed to provide flexibility for the individual
identification of businesses and services. Signs which do not conform to the requirements of this
article are declared to be nonconforming and are allowed to remain in existence until the termination
of a five-year amortization period.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the words
and phrases defined in this section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this article.
(a) Sign. Any device that is sufficiently visible to persons not located on the lot where
such device is located to accomplish the objective of (I) directing attention to a
business, commodity, service, entertainment or other activity sold or offered
exclusively on the premises where the sign is located; or (ii) communicating
information to them.
(b) Feather Sign. A freestanding temporary sign typically constructed of a single plastic
or metal shaft driven in the ground with an attached pennant that is vertically
elongated and attached to the shaft.
(c) Freestanding Sign. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some
structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure) that is not itself an integral
part of or attached to a building or other structure whose principal function is
something other than the support of a sign. A sign that stands without supporting
elements, such as "sandwich sign," is also a freestanding sign.
(d) LED Sign. An LED sign uses an array of light-emitting diodes as pixels for a video
display. Their brightness allows them to be used outdoors where they are visible in
the sun for store signs and billboards.
(e) Temporary Sign. A sign that (i) is used in connection with a circumstance, situation,
or event that is designed, intended or expected to take place or to be completed
within a reasonably short or definite period after the erection of such sign, or (ii) is
intended to remain on the location where it is erected or placed for a period of not
more than fifteen days. If a sign display area is permanent but the message
displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign shall not be regarded as
temporary. Temporary signs include political signs.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 9/00 17-2
(f) Nonconforming Sign. See Section 129, Nonconforming Signs.
(g) Internally Illuminated Sign. A sign where the source of the illumination is inside the
sign and light emanates through the message of the sign, rather than being reflected
off the surface of the sign from an external source. Without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, signs that consist of or contain tubes that (i) are filled with neon or
some other gas that glows when an electric current passes through it and (ii) are
intended to form or constitute all or part of the message of the sign, rather than
merely providing illumination to other parts of the sign that contain the message,
shall also be considered internally illuminated signs.
(h) Projecting Sign. A sign which is attached to and projects more than twelve (12)
inches from a building face or wall.
(i) Wall Sign. Any sign attached to, painted on, or erected against any wall of a building
or structure so that the exposed face of the sign is on a place parallel to the plane of
said wall and which does not extend more than 12 inches from the wall. Wall sign
also includes any sign erected against, installed on or painted on a penthouse above
the roof of a building as long as the wall of the penthouse is on a plane parallel to the
wall of the building. Wall sign also includes a sign attached to, painted on, or
erected against a false wall or false roof that does not vary more than thirty (30)
degrees from the plane of the adjoining wall elevation.
Section 271 Permit Required for Signs.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Sections 272 (Signs Excluded from Regulation) and
273 (Certain Temporary Signs: Permit Exceptions and Additional Regulations), no sign may be
erected, moved, enlarged, or substantially altered except in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Mere repainting or changing the message of a sign shall not, in and of itself, be considered
a substantial alteration.
(b) If plans submitted for a zoning permit, special use permit, or conditional use permit
include sign plans in sufficient detail that the permit-issuing authority can determine whether the
proposed sign or signs comply with the provisions of this chapter, then issuance of the requested
zoning, special use, or conditional use permit shall constitute approval of the proposed sign or signs.
(c) Signs not approved as provided in subsection (b) or exempted under the provisions
referenced in subsection (a) may be erected, moved, enlarged, or substantially altered only in
accordance with a sign permit issued by the administrator.
(1) Sign permit applications and sign permits shall be governed by the same
provisions of this chapter applicable to zoning permits.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-3
(2) In the case of a lot occupied or intended to be occupied by multiple business
enterprises (e.g., a shopping center), sign permits shall be issued in the
name of the lot owner or his agent or in the name of the individual business
enterprise requesting a particular sign. The town may assist the owner by
suggesting a formula whereby the maximum square footage of sign area
allowed on the lot may be allocated equitably among all tenants, but the town
shall be responsible for enforcing only the provisions of this chapter and not
the provisions of any allocation formula, lease, or other private restriction.
Section 272 Signs Not Requiring A Permit.
The following signs are exempt from regulation under this chapter except for those stated in
Subsections 287(a) through (d).
(a) Incidental Informational. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose to the use
of the subject property on which it is located, such as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” and
other similar directives.
(b) Flags. Flags on a single, straight flagpole provided that:
(1) The flagpole is attached to the ground, building, or other object at only one
end; it may not be attached to another pole.
(2) Flags are not hung or stretched between two (2) poles or a pole and another
object or the ground;
(3) Flags are attached to the pole (or rope) on one (1) side only and are not
weighted on an unattached side;
(4) Flags hung from a horizontal, or nearly horizontal, pole and displayed
against, or nearly against, a wall, fence, or similar structure are prohibited
(this applies only to flags permitted by this section);
(5) More than one (1) flag may fly on a single pole;
(6) The flags are not “feather flag;” and
(7) All applicable requirements of Article XVII are complied with.
(c) Temporary Signs. A banner, pennant, poster, or display constructed of paper, cloth,
canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wall board, plywood, or other like materials, and that appears to be
intended or determined by the UDO Administrator to be displayed for a limited period of time.
(d) Construction Signs. An on-site temporary sign identifying the names of the individuals
and/or firms connected with the construction of an active project. Fence wraps displaying signage
when affixed to perimeter fencing at a construction site are exempt until the certificate of occupancy
is issued for the final portion of any construction at the site or 24 months from the time the fence
wrap was installed, whichever is shorter. If construction is not completed at the end of 24 months
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-4
from the time the fence wrap is installed, the Town may regulate the signage but shall continue to
allow fence wrapping materials to be affixed to the perimeter fencing. No fence wrap affixed
pursuant to this subsection may display any advertising other than advertising sponsored by a
person directly involved in the construction project and for which monetary compensation for the
advertisement is not paid or required.
(e) Miscellaneous Exemptions.
(1) Handicapped parking space signs; signs associated with the operation of
equipment or other functional elements such as menu boards, automatic
teller machines, gas pumps, vending machines, scoreboards, and similar
incidental signs; signs visible only from the premises, markers which are noncommercial
in nature.
(2) Memorial signs, plaques, or grave markers.
(3) Signs not exceeding four square feet in area that are customarily associated
with residential use and that are not of a commercial nature, such as (i) signs
giving property identification names or numbers or names of occupants, (ii)
signs on mailboxes or paper tubes, and (iii) signs posted on private property
relating to private parking or warning the public against trespassing or
danger from animals.
(4) Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to the authorization of a
governmental body, including legal notices, identification and informational
signs, and traffic, directional or regulatory signs.
(5) Official signs of a noncommercial nature erected by public utilities.
(6) Flags, pennants, or insignia of any governmental or nonprofit organization
when not displayed in connection with a commercial promotion or as an
advertising device.
(7) Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings or works of art, so
long as such features or works do not contain letters, trademarks, moving
parts, or lights.
(8) Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property that do not exceed four
square feet each and that bear no advertising matter.
(9) Signs painted on or otherwise permanently attached to currently licensed
motor vehicles that are not primarily used as signs.
(10) Signs determined by the Town Council to be of local historical significance.
(11) Identification signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area (one only per
premises).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-5
(12) Political signs erected in accordance with NC General Statutes §136-32 as
follows:
(i) During the period beginning on the 30th day before the beginning
date of “one stop” early voting under NC General Statutes §163-
227.2 and ending on the 10th day after the primary or election day, a
person may place political signs in the right-of-way of the State
highway system or Town street as provided in this section. Signs
must be placed in compliance with subsection (ii) below and removed
by the end of the period prescribed herein.
(ii) The permittee must obtain the permission of the property owner of a
residence, business or religious institution fronting the right-of-way
where a sign would be erected. Signs must be placed in accordance
with the following:
 No sign shall be permitted in the right-of-way of a fully
controlled access highway.
 No sign shall be closer than three (3) feet from the edge of
the pavement of the road.
 No sign shall obscure motorist visibility at an intersection.
 No sign shall be larger than 864 square inches.
 No sign shall obscure or replace another sign.
Section 273 Certain Temporary Signs: Permit Exemptions and Additional
Regulations.
(a) The following temporary signs are permitted without a zoning, special use, conditional
use, or sign permit. However, such signs shall conform to the requirements set forth below as well
as all other applicable requirements of this chapter.
(1) Construction site identification signs. Such signs may identify the project, the
owner or developer, architect, engineer, contractor and subcontractors,
funding sources, and may contain related information. Not more than one
such sign may be erected per site, and it may not exceed thirty-two square
feet in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a
building permit and shall be removed within ten days after the issuance of the
final occupancy permit.
(2) Signs attached temporarily to the interior of a building window or glass door.
Such signs, individually or collectively, may not cover more than twenty-five
percent of the surface area of the transparent portion of the window or door
to which they are attached. Such signs shall be removed within thirty days
after placement. (Amended 5/29/90)
(3) Displays, including lighting, erected in connection with the observance of
holidays. Such signs shall be removed within ten days following the holidays.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-6
(4) Signs indicating that a special event such as a grand opening, fair, carnival,
circus, festival or similar happening is to take place on the lot where the sign
is located. Such signs may be erected not sooner than two weeks before the
event and must be removed not later than three days after the event.
(5) Feather Flags. Limited to two flags per business, but no more than six (6)
flags at one time per approved major or minor site plan. Commercial
advertisement flags no greater than ten (10) feet in height and no greater
than four (4) feet in width and, on a temporary basis, shall be permitted and
shall contain the imprint or logo of the business in which the flag is intended,
no additional logos, joint advertising, or insignia shall be permitted. No
commercial advertisement flag shall be placed in the vehicular zone
including parking areas, driveways, or vehicular ways. Placement of flags
shall not impede ingress/egress to the building.
(6) Temporary signs not covered in the foregoing categories, so long as such
signs meet the following restrictions:
(i) Not more than one such sign may be located on any lot.
(ii) No such sign may exceed four square feet in surface area.
(iii) Such sign may not be displayed for longer than fourteen (14)
consecutive days nor more than twenty (20) days out of any 365-day
period.
(b) Other temporary signs not listed in subsection (a) shall be regarded and treated in all
respects as permanent signs.
Section 274 Determining the Number of Signs.
(a) For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be
a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related, and composed to
form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of
elements, each element shall be considered a single sign.
(b) Without limiting the generality of subsection (a), a multi-sided sign shall be regarded
as one sign.
Section 275 Computation of Sign Area.
(a) The surface area of a sign shall be computed by including the entire area within a
single, continuous, rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight straight lines, or a circle or an ellipse,
enclosing the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with
any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate
the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting
framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-7
(b) If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all of the area, including that
between sections or modules, shall be included in the computation of the sign area.
(c) With respect to two-sided, multi-sided or three dimensional signs, the surface area
shall be computed by including the total of all sides designed either to attract attention or
communicate information that can be seen at one time by any person from any vantage point. For
example, with respect to a typical two-sided sign where a message is printed on both sides of a flat
surface, the sign surface area of each side (rather than the sum total of both sides) shall be
regarded as the total sign surface area of that sign, since one can see only one side of the sign from
any vantage point
Section 276 Signs in Residential Districts.
Unless otherwise provided in this article or in Article XI, Supplementary Use Regulations, the
maximum sign surface area permitted on any lot in any residential district (see Section 135) is four
square feet.
Section 277 Signs in MA and OS Districts.
(a) One Freestanding sign per lot, not to exceed sixty (60) square feet I sign surface
area nor 6 feet in height, shall be permitted in MA and OS Districts. Freestanding signs shall be
located no closer than 10 feet from a property line or street right-of-way line and shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from a street intersection, measured along the street right-of-way.
(b) One wall sign per building entrance, not to exceed six (6) square feet in sign surface
area, shall be permitted in MA Districts.
Section 278 Signs in CD Districts.
(a) One freestanding sign per street frontage, not to exceed 80 square feet in sign
surface area nor 25 feet in height, shall be permitted in CD Districts. Freestanding signs shall be
located no closer than 10 feet from a property line or street right-of-way line and shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from a street intersection, measured along the street right-of-way.
(b) A maximum of 2 wall signs per building entrance not to exceed a total of 50 square
feet in sign surface area shall be permitted in CD Districts. Projecting signs, each not to exceed 3
square feet in sign surface area, are permissible types of wall signs that may be included in the
maximum number of wall signs but need not be included in the 50-foot maximum sign surface area.
For buildings with more than one street frontage, the requirements delineated above shall apply to
each building facade adjacent to a public street.
(c) In CD Districts, one canopy or awning sign may be permitted per premises provided
that the surface area of such signs is included in the 50-foot maximum wall sign surface area
required in subsection (b).
(d) Signs painted directly onto a building window or glass door shall not exceed 25
percent of the window or door glass surface area.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-8
Section 279 Signs in CN Districts.
The sign requirements in CN Districts shall be the same as those delineated in Section 278,
Signs in CD Districts, except that no freestanding signs shall be permitted in CN Districts.
Section 280 Signs in CH Districts Within 1,000 Feet of U.S. Highway 17.
(a) In CH Districts, properties within 1,000 feet of the U.S. Highway 17 bypass shall have
a maximum sign area for all types of permitted signs which shall be determined as follows:
(1) For lots with a street frontage of 75 linear feet or less, the maximum sign
surface area shall be 75 square feet.
(2) For lots with lot street frontage greater than 75 linear feet, the maximum sign
surface areas shall be one square foot of sign surface area per each linear
foot of lot street frontage, up to a maximum of 500 feet of sign surface area.
(3) For lots with more than one street frontage, the maximum sign area
requirements shall apply to each street frontage. (Amended 8/09/05)
(b) One freestanding sign per street frontage, not to exceed 105 square feet in sign
surface area, nor twenty (20) feet in height, shall be permitted. Freestanding signs shall be located
no closer than ten (10) feet from a property line or street right-of-way line and shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from a street intersection, measured along the street right-of-way. Free
standing sign surface area is included in the maximum sign surface area. (Amended 8/13/91)
(c) A maximum of 2 wall signs per structure shall be permitted.
(d) One canopy or awning sign may be permitted per building.
Section 281 Signs in CH Districts Not Within 1,000 Feet of U.S. Highway 17.
(a) Properties within CH Districts not located within 1,000 feet of the U.S. Highway 17
by-pass shall have a maximum sign area for all types of permitted signs which shall be determined
as follows:
(1) For lots with a lot street frontage of 150 linear feet or less, the maximum sign
surface area shall be 75 square feet.
(2) For lots with a lot street frontage greater than 150 linear feet, the maximum
sign surface area shall be 0.5 square feet of sign area for each linear foot of
lot street frontage or 250 square feet of sign area, whichever is less.
For lots with more than one street frontage, the maximum sign area
requirements shall apply to each street frontage.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-9
(b) One freestanding sign per street frontage, not to exceed 80 square feet, nor
fifteen (15) feet in height, shall be permitted. Freestanding signs shall be located no closer than
ten (10) feet from a property line or street right-of-way line and shall be set back a minimum of
50 feet from a street intersection, measured along the street right-of-way. Freestanding sign
surface area is included in the maximum sign surface area. (Amended 08/09/2005)
(c) A maximum of 2 wall signs per structure shall be permitted.
(d) One canopy or awning sign may be permitted per building.
Section 282 Shopping Center Signs. (Amended 6/02)
(a) One wall sign per separate business establishment in a shopping center
development shall be permitted. Allowable wall sign area shall be determined as follows:
(1) Establishments with a building frontage of 50 linear feet or less shall have no
sign greater than 50 square feet.
(2) Establishments with a building frontage greater than 50 linear feet shall have
an additional area of 0.5 square feet of sign area for each linear foot over 50
feet of building frontage to a maximum of 150 square feet of sign area,
whichever is less.
(b) One freestanding sign per street frontage, not to exceed 105 square feet in sign
surface area nor 20 feet in height shall be permitted. (Amended 5/12/2015)
(1) Freestanding signage shall be located no closer than 10’ from a property line
or street right-of-way and shall be setback a minimum of 100’ from a street
intersection, measured along the street right-of-way.
(2) Vegetation (evergreen shrubbery) shall be required along the sides
and front of the base of the freestanding sign(s).
(3) Shopping Center signage shall be of uniform design: double sided box type
shape, constructed with materials conducive to that used for the shopping
center building(s).
(4) Freestanding signs shall not be internally illuminated.
(Amended 11/25/2013)
Section 283 Signs in IW Districts.
The sign requirements in IW Districts shall be the same as those outlined in Section 281.
Section 284 Subdivision and Multi-Family Development Entrance Signs.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-10
At any entrance to a residential subdivision or multi-family development, there may be not
more than two signs identifying such subdivision or development. A single side of any such sign
may not exceed sixteen square feet, nor may the total surface area of all such signs located at a
single entrance exceed thirty-two square feet.
Section 285 Location Requirements.
(a) No sign may extend above any parapet or be placed upon any roof surface, except
that for purposes of this section, roof surfaces constructed at an angle of seventy-five degrees or
more from horizontal shall be regarded as wall space. This subsection shall not apply to displays,
including lighting, erected in connection with the observation of holidays on the roofs of residential
structures.
(b) No sign or supporting structure may be located in or over the traveled portion of any
public right-of-way unless the sign is attached to a structural element of a building and an
encroachment permit has been obtained from the town.
Section 286 Sign Illumination and Signs Containing Lights.
(a) Unless otherwise prohibited by this chapter, signs may be illuminated if such
illumination is in accordance with this section.
(b) No sign within 150 feet of a residential zone may be illuminated between the hours of
12 midnight and 6:00 a.m., unless the impact of such lighting beyond the boundaries of the lot where
it is located is entirely inconsequential.
(c) Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded so that it illuminates only the face of
the sign and does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or residential premises.
(d) LED signs shall be allowed in all non-residential zoning districts.
(e) Internally illuminated freestanding signs may not be illuminated during hours that the
business or enterprise advertised by such sign is not open for business or in operation.
(f) Subject to subsection (g), illuminated tubing or strings of lights that outline property
lines, sales areas, roof lines, doors, windows, or similar areas are prohibited.
(g) Subject to subsection (g), no sign may contain or be illuminated by flashing or
intermittent lights or lights of changing degrees of intensity, as provided below:
(1) Electronic message signs are allowed where permitted provided the
message does not change more frequently than every eight (8) seconds and
the message completes the change within two (2) seconds.
(2) Illuminated signs erected in a non-residential district contiguous to a
residential district shall be so shielded or directed so that light brightness
shall not exceed one (1) foot-candle at the property boundary.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-11
(3) No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light shall be permitted as part of
any sign.
(h) Subsections (e) and (f) do not apply to temporary signs erected in connection with the
observance of holidays.
(i) No internally illuminated sign shall be located in an HO District.
Section 287 Miscellaneous Restrictions and Prohibitions.
(a) No sign may be located so that it substantially interferes with the view necessary for
motorists to proceed safely through intersections or to enter onto or exit from public streets or private
roads.
(b) Signs that revolve or are animated or that utilize movement or apparent movement to
attract the attention of the public are prohibited. Without limiting the foregoing, banners, streamers,
animated display boards, pennants, and propellers are prohibited, but signs that only move
occasionally because of wind are not prohibited if their movement (i) is not a primary design feature
of the sign, and (ii) is not intended to attract attention to the sign. The restriction of this subsection
shall not apply to signs specified in subdivision 272(4) or to signs indicating the time, date, or
weather conditions.
(c) No sign may be erected so that by its location, color, size, shape, nature or message
it would tend to obstruct the view of or be confused with official traffic signs or other signs erected by
governmental agencies.
(d) Freestanding signs shall be securely fastened to the ground or to some other
substantial supportive structure so that there is virtually no danger that either the sign or the
supportive structure may be moved by the wind or other forces of nature and cause injury to persons
or property.
(e) Canopy signs are permitted when suspended or attached to the underside of a
canopy provided that the bottom of such signs shall be located at least eight (8) feet above the
sidewalk.
(f) No portable signs except those meeting the requirements of Section 273 shall be
allowed in any zoning district.
(g) The sign area of a sign permanently painted, affixed, or placed in a building window
which is visible from a street right-of-way shall be restricted to no more than 25 percent of the total
window area.
(h) No off-premises signs, except those exempted from regulation or from permit
requirements under Sections 272 and 273, may be located within any district.
(i) No sign may interfere with free passage from or obstruct any fire escape, downspout,
door, stairway, ladder, or opening intended as a means of ingress or egress or providing light or air.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-12
(j) No signs shall overhang or be erected in any public right-of-way. Traffic regulation,
information, or warning signs erected by the State Department of Transportation or signs erected by
the Town are exempt.
(k) No signs shall be located in such a way as to intentionally deny an adjoining property
owner visual access to an existing sign.
(l) Flashing, fluttering, swinging, rotating signs (except governmental signs and signs
which give time and temperature and other commercial public information message), including wind
signs as defined in Section 270, are prohibited.
(m) Roof signs, or signs above the parapet of a building are prohibited.
(n) Electronic message boards in all Residential districts are prohibited.
(o) All Beacons and Spotlights. Illumination system(s) shall not contain or utilize any
beacon, spot, search, or stroboscopic light or reflector which is visible from any public right-of-way or
adjacent property, nor shall such lights be operated outside, under any circumstances, except by
authorized agencies for emergency services purposes.
(p) Flood lights shall not be utilized as a part of a sign illumination system which are not
hooded or shielded so that the light source is not visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent
property, nor shall any sign otherwise reflect or emit a glaring light so as to impair driver vision.
(q) Signs painted on or attached to trees, fences, or fence posts, and telephone or utility
poles or signs on or attached to rocks or other natural features (snipe signs) are not allowed in any
zoning district.
(r) Any sign or sign structure that is structurally unsafe as determined by the Building
Inspector.
Section 287.1 Sign Maintenance.
All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with applicable building and
electrical codes and the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance. Specifically:
(1) A sign shall not display disfigured, cracked, ripped or peeling paint, poster paper, or
other material for a period of more than sixty (60) consecutive days.
(2) A sign shall not stand with bent or broken sign facing, with broken supports, with
loose appendages or struts, or more than 15 degrees from vertical for a period of
more than ten (10) consecutive days.
(3) A sign shall not have weeds, trees, vines, or other vegetation growing upon it, or
obscuring the view of the sign from the public right-of-way from which it is to be
viewed, for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
(4) An illuminated sign shall not be allowed to stand with partial illumination for a period
of more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 17-13
(5) Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of the public
health and welfare, the UDO Administrator shall order said sign to be made safe or
removed. Such order shall be complied with within five (5) days of notification,
unless the sign is an immediate danger to the public health, safety, and welfare, in
which case the UDO Administrator may reduce the 5-day notice.
Section 288 Nonconforming Signs.
Nonconforming signs are subject to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter, particularly
Section 129.
Section 289 Discontinued Signs.
Upon the discontinuance of a business or occupancy of an establishment for a consecutive
period of 60 days, the administrator shall require the removal of the on-premises sign(s) advertising
or identifying the establishment. The administrator shall give thirty days notice to the property owner
to remove the sign(s). Failure to remove the sign(s) within the thirty-day period shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and shall be remedied in accordance with the provisions of Article VII.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-1
ARTICLE XVIII
PARKING
Section 290 Definitions.
Unless otherwise specifically provided or unless clearly required by the context, the words and
phrases defined below shall have the meaning indicated when used in this section.
(1) Circulation Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used for access to
parking or loading areas or other facilities on the lot. Essentially, driveways and other
maneuvering areas (other than parking aisles) comprise the circulation area.
(2) Driveway. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area that consists of a travel lane
bounded on either side by an area that is not part of the vehicle accommodation area.
(3) Gross Floor Area. The total area of a building measured by taking the outside
dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy or storage.
(4) Loading and Unloading Area. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area used to
satisfy the requirements of Section 300.
(5) Vehicle Accommodation Area. That portion of a lot that is used by vehicles for access,
circulation, parking and loading and unloading. It comprises the total of circulation
areas, loading and unloading areas, and parking areas (spaces and aisles).
(6) Parking Area Aisles. That portion of the vehicle accommodation area consisting of
lanes providing access to parking spaces.
(7) Parking Space. A portion of the vehicle accommodation area set for the parking of one
vehicle.
Section 291 Number of Parking Spaces Required.
(a) All developments in all zoning districts other than the CD district shall provide a
sufficient number of parking spaces to accommodate the number of vehicles that ordinarily are likely
to be attracted to the development in question.
(b) The presumptions established by this article are that: (i) a development must comply
with the parking standards set forth in subsection (e) to satisfy the requirement stated in subsection
(a), and (ii) any development that does meet these standards is in compliance. However, the Table
of Parking Requirements is only intended to establish a presumption and should be flexibly
administered, as provided in Section 292.
(c) The minimum number of required off-street parking and stacking spaces is indicated in
the Table of Parking Requirements [subsection (e)]. When determination of the number of parking
spaces required by this table results in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of one-half
or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-2
space. (Amended 7/99)
(d) The Council recognizes that the Table of Parking Requirements set forth in subsection
(e) cannot and does not cover every possible situation that may arise. Therefore, in cases not
specifically covered, the permit issuing authority is authorized to determine the parking requirements
using this table as a guide.
(e) Table of Parking Requirements. (Amended 1/99)
USE
SPACES REQUIRED
Residential Uses
Family care or group care facilities
1/4 beds plus 1/employee and visiting
specialist plus 1/vehicle used in the operation
Multi-family dwellings (including
condominiums)
0 to 1 bedroom units
1.50/unit
2 bedroom units
1.75/unit
3 or more bedroom units
2.00/unit
Homeless Shelter
1/resident staff member, plus 2/3
nonresidential staff members and/or
volunteers on the largest shift, plus 1/each
vehicle used in the operation
Single-family detached; two-family
dwellings; manufactured homes;
townhouse dwellings; manufactured home
parks
2/dwelling unit on the same lot
Accessory Uses
Caretaker dwelling
2/unit
Home occupations
1/each non-resident employee
Recreation
Fairgrounds; skating rinks
1/200 square feet of activity area
Athletic fields
25/field
Auditorium; assembly hall; convention
center; stadium
1/5 persons based upon the design capacity
of the building
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-3
Batting cages, golf driving ranges;
miniature golf; shooting ranges
1/cage, tee, or firing point
Billiard parlors; tennis courts
3/table or court
Bowling centers
4/lane
Clubs; coin-operated amusement; physical
fitness centers and similar indoor
recreation
1/200 square feet of gross floor area
Riding Academy
1/2 stalls
Go-cart raceways
1/go-cart plus 1/employee on the largest shift
Swimming pools
1/100 square feet of water and deck space
Educational and Institutional Uses
Ambulance services; fire stations; police
stations
1/employee on the largest shift
Churches
1/4 seats in main chapel
Colleges, universities, technical institutes
7/classroom plus 1/4 beds in main campus
dorms plus 1/250 square feet of office space
plus 1/5 fixed seats in assembly halls and
stadiums
Correctional institutions
1/10 inmates plus 2/3 employees on largest
shift plus 1/vehicle used in the operation
Day care, adult or child
1/employee plus 1/10 client served with
parking located on-site
Elementary and middle schools
3/room used for offices plus 3/classroom
Government offices; post offices
1/150 square feet of public service area plus
2/3 employees on largest shift
Hospitals
1/4 in-patient or out-patient beds plus 2/3
employees on largest shift plus 1/staff doctor
Libraries; museums and art galleries
1/450 square feet of gross floor area for
public use plus 2/3 employees on the largest
shift
Nursing and convalescent homes
1/4 beds plus 1/employee and visiting
specialist plus 1/vehicle used in the operation
Senior high schools 3/room used for offices plus 7/classroom
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-4
Business, Professional and Personal
Services
Automobile repair services
3/service bay plus 1/wrecker or service
vehicle plus 2/3 employees on the largest shift
Banks and financial institutions
*1/200 square feet gross floor area plus
stacking for 4 vehicles at each drive-through
window or automatic teller machine
Barber and beauty shops
3/operator
Car washes
a) Full-service
*stacking for 30 vehicles or 10/approach lane,
whichever is greater plus 3 spaces in the
manual drying area plus 2/3 employees on
the largest shift
b) Self-service
*3 stacking spaces/approach lane plus 2
drying spaces/stall
Delivery services
2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/vehicle
used in the operation
Equipment rental and leasing
1/200 square feet gross floor area
Funeral homes or crematoria
1/4 seats in main chapel plus 2/3 employees
on the largest shift plus 1/vehicle used in the
largest operation
Hotels and motels containing...
(a) 5,000 square feet or less ancillary space,
i.e. restaurant, meeting rooms, lounge or
lobby or a restaurant/lounge containing
3,000 square feet or less
1.1/rental unit
(b) (B) more than 5,000 square feet of ancillary
space, i.e. restaurant, meeting rooms,
lounge or lobby or a restaurant/lounge
containing over 3,000 square feet
1.25/rental unit
Kennels or pet grooming
1/300 square feet of sales, grooming or
customer waiting area plus 2/3 employees on
the largest shift
Laundromat (coin operated)
1/4 pieces of rental equipment
Laundry and dry cleaning plants or
substation
*2/3 employees on the largest shift plus
1/vehicle used in the operation plus stacking
for 4 vehicles/pickup station
Laboratories
*2/3 employees on the largest shift plus 1/250
square feet of office space
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-5
Medical, dental, or related offices
3/examining room plus 1/employee including
doctors
Motion picture production
1/1000 square feet of gross floor area
Offices not otherwise classified
1/250 square feet of gross floor area
Repair of bulky items (appliances,
furniture, boats, etc.)
2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/vehicle
used in operation
Theaters (indoor)
1/4 seats
Truck wash
*3 stacking spaces/stall
Veterinary service (other)
4/doctor plus 1/employee including doctors
Vocational, business, or secretarial
schools
1/100 square feet of classroom space plus
1/250 square feet of office space
Services and repairs not otherwise
classified
1/250 square feet gross floor area plus
1/vehicle used in the operation
Drive-throughs not otherwise classified
*Stacking for 4 vehicles at each bay, window,
lane, ordering station or machine in addition
to the use requirement
Retail Trade
Bars; night clubs
1/3 persons based upon the design capacity
of building plus 2/3 employees on the largest
shift, located on the same zone lot
Convenience stores
*1/400 square feet gross floor area plus 2
stacking spaces at pump islands
Department stores; food stores
1/500 square feet gross floor area
Fuel oil sales, propane sales
2/3 employees on largest shift plus 1/vehicle
used in the operation
Furniture; floor covering sales
1/1,000 square feet gross floor area
Motor vehicle, motorcycle, or recreational
vehicle sales or rental; manufactured
homes sales
5 spaces plus 1/10,000 square feet of display
area plus 2/3 employees on the largest shift
Restaurants
*1/4 seats plus 5 total stacking spaces at or
before ordering station
Retail sales not otherwise classified
1/400 square feet gross floor area
Retail sales of bulky items (appliances,
1/500 square feet of gross floor area
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-6
building materials, etc.)
Service stations, gasoline sales
*3/service bay plus 1/wrecker or service
vehicle plus 2 stacking spaces at pump
islands
Wholesale Trade
Market showroom
1/1,000 square feet gross floor area
Wholesale uses
2/3 employees on the largest shift plus 1/200
square feet of retail sales or customer service
area plus 1/vehicle used in the operation
Transportation, Warehousing and
Utilities
Airport, bus and railroad terminals
1/4 seats plus 2/3 employees on the largest
shift
Communications towers; heliports; utility
lines or substations
No required parking
Self-storage warehouses
1 space/5,000 square feet devoted to storage
Transportation, warehousing and utility
uses not otherwise classified
2/3 employees on the largest shift plus
1/vehicle used in the operation
Manufacturing and Industrial Uses
2/3 employees on the largest shift plus 1/200
square feet of retail sales or customer service
area plus 1/vehicle used in the operation
Other Uses
Flea markets; other open air sales
1/1,000 square feet of lot area used for
storage, sales, and display
Shopping Centers
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-7
1/500 square feet gross floor area in main
building(s) (excluding theatres) plus parking
as required for out parcels or theatres
/ = Per
* = NCDOT may require additional stacking spaces on state or federal highways.
Section 292 Flexibility in Administration Required.
(a) The Council recognizes that, due to the particularities of any given development, the
inflexible application of the parking standards set forth in Subsection 291(e) may result in a
development either with inadequate parking space or parking space far in excess of its needs. The
former situation may lead to traffic congestion or parking violations in adjacent streets as well as
unauthorized parking in nearby private lots. The latter situation results in a waste of money as well
as a waste of space that could more desirably be used for valuable development or environmentally
useful open space. Therefore, as suggested in Section 291, the permit-issuing authority may permit
deviations from the presumptive requirements of Subsection 291(e) and may require more parking
or allow less parking whenever it finds that such deviations are more likely to satisfy the standard set
forth in Subsection 291(a).
(b) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the permit-issuing authority may allow
deviations from the parking requirements set forth in Subsection 291(e) when it finds that:
(1) A residential development is irrevocably oriented toward the elderly;
(2) A business is primarily oriented to walk-in trade.
(c) Whenever the permit-issuing authority allows or requires a deviation from the
presumptive parking requirements set forth in Subsection 291(e), it shall enter on the face of the
permit the parking requirement that it imposes and the reasons for allowing or requiring the
deviation.
(d) If the permit-issuing authority concludes, based upon information it receives in the
consideration of a specific development proposal, that the presumption established by
Subsection 291(e) for a particular use classification is erroneous, it shall initiate a request for an
amendment to the Table of Parking Requirements in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Article XX.
Section 293 Parking Space Dimensions.
(a) Subject to subsections (b) and (c), each parking space shall contain a rectangular
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-8
area at least eighteen feet long and nine feet wide. Lines demarcating parking spaces may be
drawn at various angles in relation to curbs or aisles, so long as the parking spaces so created
contain within them the rectangular area required by this section. Stacking space dimensions shall
be 12 feet by 20 feet.
(b) In parking areas containing ten or more parking spaces, up to twenty percent of the
parking spaces may contain a rectangular area of only eight feet in width by sixteen feet in length. If
such spaces are provided, they shall be conspicuously designated as reserved for small or compact
cars only.
(c) Wherever parking areas consist of spaces set aside for parallel parking, the
dimensions of such parking spaces shall be not less than twenty-two feet by nine feet.
(d) Parking spaces designated for use by a handicapped person shall conform to state
regulations pertaining to dimensions and number of spaces for use by a handicapped person.
(e) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the permit issuing authority may allow
deviations from the parking requirements set forth when it finds that:
(1) In order to lessen the amount of paved areas, it is desirable to allow two
feet of the presumed overhang of a vehicle as outlined in subsection 317
(d) to overhang a landscaped area, thereby allowing the landscaped area
to embody two feet of the 18 feet required length of the parking space.
(Amended 1/99)
(2) In order to lessen the amount of paved areas, it is desirable to allow two
feet of the presumed overhang of a compact car to overhang a
landscaped area, thereby allowing the landscaped area to embody two
feet of the 16 feet required length of the designated compact car parking
space. (Amended 6/13/95)
Section 294 Required Widths of Parking Area Aisles and Driveways.
(a) Parking area aisle widths shall conform to the following table, which varies the
width requirement according to the angle of parking.
Parking Angle
Aisle Width
0º
30º
45º
60º
90º
One Way Traffic
13
11
13
18
24
Two Way Traffic
19
20
21
23
24
(b) Driveways shall be not less than ten feet in width for one way traffic and eighteen feet
in width for two way traffic, except that ten feet wide driveways are permissible for two way traffic
when (I) the driveway is not longer than fifty feet, (ii) it provides access to not more than six spaces,
and (iii) sufficient turning space is provided so that vehicles need not back into a public street.
Section 295 General Design Requirements.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-9
(a) Unless no other practicable alternative is available, vehicle accommodation areas
shall be designed so that, without resorting to extraordinary movements, vehicles may exit such
areas without backing onto a public street. This requirement does not apply to parking areas
consisting of driveways that serve one or two dwelling units, although backing onto arterial streets is
discouraged.
(b) Vehicle accommodation areas of all developments shall be designed so that
sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can serve such developments without the
necessity of backing unreasonable distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning
movements.
(c) Every vehicle accommodation area shall be designed so that vehicles cannot extend
beyond the perimeter of such area onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Such areas
shall also be designed so that vehicles do not extend over sidewalks or tend to bump against or
damage any wall, vegetation, or other obstruction.
(d) Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without
posing a danger to pedestrians or other vehicles and without interfering with parking areas.
Section 296 Vehicle Accommodation Area Surfaces.
(a) Vehicle accommodation areas that (i) include lanes for drive-in windows or (ii) contain
parking areas that are required to have more than ten parking spaces and that are used regularly at
least five days per week are encouraged to be graded and surfaced with an permeable block
(pervious concrete) material. Otherwise, asphalt, concrete or other material that will provide
equivalent protection against potholes, erosion, and dust shall be utilized. Vehicle accommodation
areas provided in excess of the minimum parking requirements for the use in question are required
to be surfaced with a pervious material. Specifications for surfaces meeting the standard set forth in
this subsection are contained in Appendix D. The use of bumper guards or other means in lieu of
curbs and gutters in order to permit runoff to infiltrate the landscape areas is encouraged.
(b) Vehicle accommodation areas that are not provided with the type of surface
recommended in subsection (a) shall be graded and surfaced with crushed stone, gravel, or other
suitable material (as provided in the specifications set forth in Appendix D) to provide a surface that
is stable and will help to reduce dust and erosion. The perimeter of such parking areas shall be
defined by bricks, stones, railroad ties, or other similar devices installed in such a manner as to
permit runoff to infiltrate the landscaped areas. In addition, whenever such a vehicle
accommodation area abuts a paved street, the driveway leading from such street to such area (or, if
there is no driveway, the portion of the vehicle accommodation area that opens onto such streets),
shall be paved as provided in subsection (a) for a distance of fifteen feet back from the edge of the
paved street. This subsection shall not apply to single-family or two-family residences or other uses
that are required to have only one or two parking spaces. (Amended 1/99)
(c) Parking spaces in areas paved with an impervious surface shall be appropriately
demarcated with painted lines or other markings. Parking spaces in areas surfaced in accordance
with subsection (b) shall be demarcated whenever practicable.
(d) Vehicle accommodation areas shall be properly maintained in all respects. In
particular, and without limiting the foregoing, vehicle accommodation area surfaces shall be kept in
good condition (free from potholes, etc.) and parking space lines or markings shall be kept clearly
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-10
visible and distinct.
Section 297 Joint Use of Required Parking Spaces.
(a) One parking area may contain required spaces for several different uses, but except
as otherwise provided in this section, the required space assigned to one use may not be credited to
any other use.
(b) To the extent that developments that wish to make joint use of the same parking
spaces operate at different times, the same spaces may be credited to both uses. For example, if a
parking lot is used in connection with an office building on Monday through Friday but is generally
90% vacant on weekends, another development that operates only on weekends could be credited
with 90% of the spaces on that lot. Or, if a church parking lot is generally occupied only to 50% of
capacity on days other than Sunday, another development could make use of 50% of the church
lot's spaces on those other days.
(c) If the joint use of the same parking spaces by two or more principal uses involves
satellite parking spaces, then the provisions of Section 298 are also applicable.
Section 298 Satellite Parking.
(a) If the number of off-street parking spaces required by this chapter cannot reasonably
be provided on the same lot where the principal use associated with these parking spaces is
located, then spaces may be provided on adjacent or nearby lots in accordance with the provisions
of this section. These off-site spaces are referred to in this section as "satellite" parking spaces.
(b) All such satellite parking spaces (except spaces intended for employee use) must be
located within 400 feet of a public entrance of a principal building housing the use associated with
such parking, or within 400 feet of the lot on which the use associated with such parking is located if
the use is not housed within any principal building. Satellite parking spaces intended for employee
use may be located within any reasonable distance. Satellite parking spaces must be located in a
zoning district which permits parking lots for the use intended.
(c) The developer wishing to take advantage of the provisions of this section must
present satisfactory written evidence that he has the permission of the owner or other person in
charge of the satellite parking spaces to use such spaces. The developer must also sign an
acknowledgment that the continuing validity of his permit depends upon his continuing ability to
provide the requisite number of parking spaces.
Section 299 Special Provisions For Lots With Existing Buildings.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever (i) there exists a lot with one or more
structures on it constructed before the effective date of this chapter, and (ii) a change in use that
does not involve any enlargement of a structure is proposed for such lot, and (iii) the parking
requirements of Section 291 that would be applicable as a result of the proposed change cannot be
satisfied on such lot because there is not sufficient area available on the lot that can practicably be
used for parking, then the developer need only comply with the requirements of Section 291 to the
extent that (i) parking space is practicably available on the lot where the development is located, and
(ii) satellite parking space is reasonably available as provided in Section 298. However, if satellite
parking subsequently becomes reasonably available, then it shall be a continuing condition of the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-11
permit authorizing development on such lot that the developer obtain satellite parking when it does
become available.
Section 300 Loading and Unloading Areas.
(a) Subject to subsection (e), whenever the normal operation of any development
requires that goods, merchandise, or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from that
development, a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be provided in accordance with
this section to accommodate the delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner.
(b) The loading and unloading area must be of sufficient size to accommodate the
numbers and types of vehicles that are likely to use this area, given the nature of the development in
question. The following table indicates the number and size of spaces that, presumptively, satisfy
the standard set forth in this subsection. However, the permit issuing authority may require more or
less loading and unloading area if reasonably necessary to satisfy the foregoing standard.
Gross Leasable Area of
Building
Number of spaces with minimum dimensions of 12
feet x 55 feet and overhead clearance of 14 feet
from street grade
1,000
-
19,999
1
20,000
-
79,999
2
80,000
-
127,999
3
128,000
-
191,000
4
192,000
-
255,999
5
256,000
-
319,999
6
320,000
-
391,999
7
Plus one (1) for each additional 72,000 square feet or fraction thereof.
(c) Loading and unloading areas shall be so located and designed that the vehicles intended to use
them can (i) maneuver safely and conveniently to and from a public right of way, and (ii) complete the loading
and unloading operations without obstructing or interfering with any public right-of-way or any parking space or
parking lot aisle.
(d) No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements
for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area
requirements for loading and unloading facilities.
(e) Whenever (i) there exists a lot with one or more structures on it constructed before the effective
date of this chapter, and (ii) a change in use that does not involve any enlargement of a structure is proposed
for such lot, and (iii) the loading area requirements of this section cannot be satisfied because there is not
sufficient area available on the lot that can practicably be used for loading and unloading, then the developer
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-12
need only comply with this section to the extent reasonably possible.
Section 301 Parking Area Landscaping.
(a) In addition to the shading requirements of Section 317, every vehicle accommodation area
containing 10 or more parking spaces shall be landscaped in accordance with the standards delineated in the
remainder of this section. The parking areas of developments located within the IW zoning district are exempt
from the requirements of this Section.
(b) The presumption established by this article is that: A development must comply with the
landscaping standards set forth is subsections (c), (d), (e), and (f) to satisfy the requirements stated in
subsection (a).
(c) A minimum 10-foot perpetually maintained natural or planted buffer yard must be provided to
screen any vehicle accommodation area (where such area is not screened visually by an intervening building)
from an adjoining street right-of-way or property line. The buffer yard shall contain at least one tree for each 40
linear feet of buffer yard, evenly distributed throughout vehicle accommodation areas so as to maximize the
number of parking spaces that receive shade. Each tree shall be a species which can be expected to attain a
minimum height of 20 feet at maturity, except where planted along a street right-of-way without a tree lawn of
sufficient width for large street trees but with overhead clearance. In such cases, trees planted along the street
right-of-way shall be large shade trees reaching at least 50 feet at maturity. All trees selected by the developer
shall meet the standards set forth in Appendix E. Trees planted in buffer yards must provide a minimum
30-foot diameter canopy at maturity if they are to be considered in meeting the requirements of Section 317.
(d) The required buffer yard shall also contain evergreen shrubs, planted four feet on center,
which are 3-gallon size, 18 inches in width or height at the time of planting, and are a species
which can be expected to attain a height of between 24 inches and 40 inches, and form a
continuous landscape buffer at maturity. A combination of natural vegetation, fences, walls
and berms may be utilized to achieve the screening requirements of this section. All shrubs
selected by the developer shall meet the standards set forth in Appendix E.
(e) All portions of the buffer yard not planted with trees or shrubs or covered by a wall or other
barrier shall be planted with grass, ground cover, or natural mulch of a minimum depth of three inches.
(f) A minimum of ten percent of the interior of a vehicle accommodation area shall be devoted to
landscaping. Landscaping provided through Section 317(c) shall be credited towards meeting this interior
requirement.
(g) Land uses required by Section 308 to provide a type A or B screen between adjoining uses or
a street frontage are exempt from the requirements of this subsection subsections (c), (d), and (e).
(h) In parking areas consisting of not more than two aisles and three rows of parking spaces, not
exceeding ten spaces per row, where adjoining landscaped areas exceed the sum of the buffer yard and
interior landscaping requirements, the interior landscaping requirements may be waived.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance 18-13
(i) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a detailed landscape plan showing the interior
landscaping areas, buffer zones, screens and shade tree locations required by this ordinance shall be submitted
and approved by the land use administrator and if applicable, the Planning Board/Town Council in conjunction with
the applicable review criteria. The Town of Edenton Tree Committee shall be advised of such plans. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping is completed as certified by an onsite inspection by
the land use administrator, unless a bond or other acceptable guarantee of improvements has been posted.
(Amended 2/12/91, 6/13/95, 1/99, 1/14/03)
Section 302 Landscaping of Preexisting Vehicle Parking Areas.
(a) The Town Council recognizes that requiring preexisting parking areas as defined in Section 301
(a) to comply with the requirements of Section 301 (b) would create an undue burden on the owners of those
parking areas. Therefore, no owner of a preexisting parking area as defined in Section 301 (a) shall be required to
comply with the requirements of Section 301 (b) except as follows:
(1) If the owner of the parking area discontinues use of the business that the parking lot serves
or discontinues use of the parking lot itself for 180 days or discontinues use of the parking lot
or the business which the parking lot serves for any period without a present intention to
continue to use the parking lot or the business, then in such a situation the owner of said
parking lot shall be required to comply with the provisions of Section 301 (b).
(2) If the owner of the parking lot expands either the business that the parking lot serves or the
parking lot itself by more than 5 percent of its present actual size, then said parking lot
would be required to comply with the requirements of Section 301 (b).
(3) If a change of ownership occurs after 180 days of discontinued use, then the new owner
of the said business will be required to comply with the requirements of Section 301 (b).
(b) If pursuant to the provisions of Section 302 (1), (2), and (3), the owner of a preexisting parking lot
is required to comply with the provisions of Section 301 (b) then in such case:
	

				
	 

(1) The owner of the parking lot would have 60 days to submit a landscaping plan to the
land use administrator for approval and 12 months to comply with the provisions of
Section 301. The Town of Edenton Tree Committee shall be advised of such plans.
In certain cases where existing properties cannot physically meet the standards of
Section 301 (b), the Board of Adjustment may grant a variance from the strict letter of
the ordinance. The Town of Edenton Tree Committee should be advised if such
instances occur. (Amended 1/1/4/03)
(2) No expenditure made for removing existing asphalt and concrete, constructing
planting areas, and adding soil and plant materials which is necessary to comply with
Section 301 (b) shall be required in excess of 2 percent of the total assessed real
property tax value of the business that the parking lot serves and the parking lot itself
and no reduction in the number of parking spaces in excess of 10 percent shall be
required of the owner of the preexisting parking lot when meeting the requirements of
Section 301 (b).
(c) If the zoning administrator finds that any provision of this ordinance is being violated, he shall
send written notice to the property owner indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it. If after 30 days, the violation has not been cured or the administrators's decision
appealed in accordance with the procedures of this ordinance, then the property owner shall be subject to a
civil penalty of $50.00 per day from the date of notice for each day the violation continues and the Town of
Edenton may initiate proceedings before a court of competent jurisdiction to collect penalties as allowed by
law.
(d) Any preexisting parking lots that are located in areas which are annexed by the Town of
Edenton shall be subject to the same requirements as preexisting parking lots within the town's present
jurisdiction. (Amended 3/12/96, 1/99)
Section 303 Flexibility in Administration Required.
(a) The Council recognizes that, because of the wide variety of types of developments and the
relationships between them, it is neither possible nor prudent to establish inflexible landscaping requirements.
Therefore, as provided in Section 302(a), the Board of Adjustment may permit deviations from the presumptive
requirements of Section 301(b) and may require either more or less landscaping whenever it finds such
deviations are likely to satisfy the standards set forth in Section 301(a). The Town of Edenton Tree Committee
should be advised if such instances occur. (Amended 1/14/03)
(b) Whenever the Board of Adjustment allows or requires a deviation from the presumptive requirements
set forth is Section 301(b), it shall enter on the face of the site plan the landscaping requirements that it
imposes to meet the standard set forth is Section 301(a). (Amended 6/13/95, 1/14/03)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 19-1
ARTICLE XIX
SCREENING, LANDSCAPING AND TREES
Part I. Landscaping and Screening
Section 304 Purpose.
The purpose of this Part is to establish minimum landscaping and screening requirements
that provide (i) a visual buffer between parking and loading areas and public streets, (ii) a visual
buffer between parking and loading areas and adjoining land uses, (iii) screening of solid waste
collection dumpsters, and (iv) screening between certain incompatible land uses, and (v) tree
protection during construction. Parking lots located within all IW zoning districts are exempt from the
requirements of Part I of this Article. (Amended 3/99) A landscaping plan in accordance with
Appendix A, Section A-6 shall be required.
Section 305 Parking and Loading Area Landscaping.
(a) Streetside Buffer Yard Requirements
(1) All parking lots, except those located within IW zoning districts, containing
ten or more parking spaces shall include a minimum 10-foot perpetually
maintained natural or planted buffer yard to screen the parking lot from all
adjoining public street rights-of-way and all adjoining property lines that do
not coincide with street rights-of-way (where such parking lot is not screened
visually by an intervening building). (Amended 3/99)
(2) The required buffer yard shall contain at least one canopy tree for each forty
linear feet and each tree shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height and shall
have a minimum caliper of 2 inches (measured six inches above grade) at
the time of planting. Each tree shall be a species which can be expected to
attain a minimum height of 40 feet and have a crown width of 30 feet or
greater at maturity.
(3) The required buffer yard shall also contain evergreen shrubs, planted four
feet on center, which are, at the time of planting, 3-gallon in size, 18 inches in
width or height, and of a species which can be expected to reach a height of
between 24 and 40 inches and a minimum spread of 30 inches within 3
years of planting.
(4) All portions of the buffer yard not planted with trees or shrubs or covered by a
wall or other barrier shall be planted with grass, ground cover, or natural
mulch of a minimum depth of 3 inches.
(b) Property Line Buffer requirements
(1) Any parking lot and loading area (i) which contains ten or more parking
spaces, (ii) which is located on a commercially or institutionally-used lot, and
(iii) which abuts a residentially zoned lot shall include a minimum 10-foot
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 19-2
perpetually maintained natural or planted buffer yard along all adjoining
property lines that do not coincide with street rights-of-way.
(2) The required property line buffer yard shall comply with the plating standards
set out in subsection (a) for streetside buffer yards except that there shall be
one canopy tree for each 40 LF of property line adjoining a residentially
zoned lot rather than for each 40 LF of street frontage.
Section 306 Screening of Dumpsters.
Solid waste collection dumpsters, which are (i) located on sites used for multi-family
residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial purposes and (ii) abutting a residence.
Residentially zoned lot, or street right-of-way shall be screened from the view of adjoined
residences, residentially zoned lots, or street rights-of-way. Such screening may consist of
natural vegetation, fences, walls, or berms and shall be installed, located, or constructed so as
to create an effective screen.
Section 307 Screening of Adjoining Incompatible Land Uses.
(a) Multi-family Residential Uses and Manufactured Home parks
Whenever 3 or more multi-family residential dwelling units or a manufactured home
park are proposed to be located directly abutting a property which is used for singlefamily
residential purposes or which is zoned for single-family residential use, the
multi-family or manufactured home use shall provide screening in accordance with
the following standards:
(1) A minimum 10-foot perpetually maintained natural or planted buffer yard shall
be provided along all property lines directly abutting a single-family used or
zoned lot.
(2) The buffer yard shall contain 2 canopy trees and 3 understory trees per 100
linear feet of buffer yard. Canopy trees shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height
and 2 inches in caliper (measured 6 inches above grade) when planted.
When mature, a canopy tree should be at least 40 feet high and have a
crown of width of 30 feet or greater. Understory trees shall be a minimum of
4 feet high and 1 inch in caliper (measured 6 inches above the grade) when
planted.
(3) The buffer yard shall also contain 17 shrubs per 100 linear feet of buffer
yard. All shrubs shall be of a species which can be expected to reach a
minimum height of 36 inches and a minimum spread of 30 inches within 3
years of planting.
(4) All portions of the buffer yard not planted with trees or shrubs or covered by a
wall or other barrier shall be planted with grass, ground cover, or natural
mulch of a minimum depth of 3 inches.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 19-3
(b) Commercial Uses
Whenever a commercial use is proposed to be located so that the principal building,
accessory building(s), outdoor use areas or parking and loading areas are within 100
feet of a lot which is used for residential purposes or which is zoned for residential
use, the commercial use shall provide screening in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) A minimum 15-foot perpetually maintained natural or planted buffer yard shall
be provided along all property lines directly abutting a residentially used or
zoned lot.
(2) The buffer yard shall contain 3 canopy trees and 5 under story trees per 100
linear feet of buffer yard. Canopy trees shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height
and 2 inches in caliper (measured 6 inches above grade) when planted.
When mature, a canopy tree should be at least 40 feet high and have a
crown width of 30 feet or greater. Under story trees shall be a minimum of 4
feet high and 1 inch in caliper (measured 6 inches above grade) when
planted.
(3) The buffer yard shall also contain 25 shrubs per 100 linear feet of buffer
yard. All shrubs shall be of species which can be expected to reach a
minimum height of 36 inches and a minimum spread of 30 inches within 3
years of planting.
(4) All portions of the buffer yard not planted with trees or shrubs or covered by a
wall or other barrier shall be planted with grass, groundcover, or natural
mulch of a minimum depth of 3 inches.
Section 308 Alternative Screening Methods.
(a) Under certain circumstances the application of the standards delineated in this
ordinance is either inappropriate or ineffective in achieving the intended purpose and
when screening is required by this ordinance and the site design, topography, unique
relationships to other properties, lot configuration, spatial separation, natural
vegetation, or other special considerations exists relative to the proposed
development, the developer may submit a specific plan for screening to the Land
Use Administrator. The Land Use Administrator shall review the plans and make a
recommendation to the Board of Adjustment to review and determine if the purpose
and standards of this Ordinance will be met by measures other than those listed in
Section 305-307. The Town of Edenton Tree Committee should be advised in such
instances. If approved by the Board of Adjustment, the alternate screening plan may
be utilized to meet the requirements of this ordinance.
(b) A combination of natural vegetation, fences, walls, and berms may be utilized to
achieve the screening requirements of sections 305 through 307 provided that the
fallowing standards are met:
(1) Walls (a minimum of 5 feet in height and constructed of masonry, stone, or
pressure treated lumber) or opaque fence (a minimum of five feet in height)
may be used to reduce the width of the buffer yards required in Sections 307
(a)(1) and (b)(1) by 5 feet.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 19-4
(2) Understory trees may be substituted for canopy trees if, in the opinion of the
administrator upon conferring with the electrical utility provider, a conflict
exists with overhead utility lines.
(3) Wall planters shall be constructed of masonry, stone, or pressure treated
lumber and shall have a minimum height of 30 inches. The minimum height
of shrubs in wall planters shall be 6 inches. The effective planting are of the
wall planter shall be 4 feet in width (7 feet if the wall planter contains trees).
(4) Any berm utilized for screening purposes shall have a minimum height of 3
feet, a minimum crown width of three feet, and a side slope of no greater
than 3:1.
Section 309 Maintenance.
In order for any screening to fulfill the purpose for which it was established, it must be
properly maintained. The owner of the property and any tenant on the property where screening is
required will be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all required screening
materials. Maintenance includes actions necessary to keep screening materials healthy, neat and
orderly in appearance and free of litter and debris. Any live screening materials such as shrubs and
trees which may die must be replaced in compliance with the minimum standards of this Ordinance.
All screening and landscaping areas must be protected from damage by motor vehicles or
pedestrians which could reduce the effectiveness of the screening. Landscaped areas shall be kept
in a proper, neat and orderly appearance and free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy or dead
plant material shall be replaced by the property owner or tenant. Failure to maintain the required
landscape materials shall constitute a zoning violation and shall be remedied in accordance with the
provisions of Article VII.
Section 310 Use of Existing Screening
When a lot is to be developed so that screening is required and that lot abuts an existing
hedge, fence or other screening material on the adjoining lot, then that existing screen may be used
to satisfy the requirements of this Ordinance. The existing screen must meet the minimum
standards for screening established by this Ordinance and it must be protected from damage by
pedestrians or motor vehicles. However, the burden to provide the necessary screening remains
with the use to be screened and is a continuing obligation that runs with the land so long as the
original use continues in operation. Consequently, should the screening on the adjoining lot be
removed, the use required to be screened shall, at that time, provide screening in accordance with
the requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 310.1 Obstruction Prohibited
Landscaping and screening materials shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any
street, driveway, or parking aisle.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 19-5
Section 310.2 Guarantee in Lieu of Immediate Installation of Landscaping and Screening
Materials
It is recognized that land development occurs continuously and that vegetation used in
landscaping or screening should be planted at certain times of the year to ensure the best chance of
survival. In order to ensure compliance with this Ordinance and reduce the potential expense of
replacing landscaping or screening materials which were installed in an untimely or improper
fashion, the developer may provide, in accordance with the provisions of Section 61, an adequately
secured performance bond or other security to ensure that all of the requirements of this Article will
be fulfilled.
Sections 311-313 Reserved.
Part II. Shading
Section 314 Council Findings and Declaration of Policy on Shade Trees.
(a) The Council finds that:
(1) Trees are proven producers of oxygen, a necessary element for human
survival;
(2) Trees appreciably reduce the ever-increasing, environmentally dangerous
carbon dioxide content of the air and play a vital role in purifying the air we
breathe;
(3) Trees transpire considerable amounts of water each day and thereby purify
the air much like the air-washer devices used on commercial air conditioning
systems;
(4) Trees have an important role in neutralizing waste water passing through the
ground from the surface to ground water tables and lower aquifers;
(5) Trees, through their root systems, stabilize the ground water tables and play
an important and effective part in soil conservation, erosion control and flood
control;
(6) Trees are an invaluable physical, aesthetic and psychological counterpoint to
the urban setting, making urban life more comfortable by providing shade
and cooling the air and land, reducing noise levels and glare and breaking
the monotony of human developments on the land, particularly parking
areas; and
(7) For the reasons indicated in Subdivision (6), trees have an important impact
on the desirability of land and therefore on property values.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 19-6
(b) Based upon the findings set forth in subsection (a), the Council declares that it is not
only desirable but essential to the health, safety, and welfare of all persons living or
working within the town's planning jurisdiction to protect certain existing trees and,
under the circumstances set forth in this article, to require the planting of new trees
in certain types of developments.
Section 315 Required Trees Along Dedicated Streets.
Along both sides of all newly created streets that are constructed in accordance with the
public street standards set forth in Article XIV, the developer shall either plant or retain sufficient
trees so that, between the paved portion of the street and a line running parallel to and 50 feet from
the centerline of the street, there is for every 30 feet of street frontage at least an average of one
deciduous tree that shall obtain a minimum height of at least 50 feet and provide a canopy of at least
30 feet in diameter at maturity. When trees are planted by the developer pursuant to this section,
the developer shall choose trees that meet the standards set forth in Appendix E. (Amended 1/99)
Section 316 Retention and Protection of Large Trees.
(a) Every development shall retain all existing trees twelve inches in diameter or more
unless the retention of such trees would prohibit use of the allowable building
footprint area or compliance with the requirements of the UDO.
(b) No excavation or other subsurface disturbance may be undertaken within the drip
line of any tree twelve inches in diameter or more, and no impervious surface
(including, but not limited to, paving or buildings) may be located within the drip line
of any tree twelve inches in diameter (measured at a height of 4.5 feet above ground
level) or more unless compliance with this subsection would unreasonably burden
the development. For purposes of this subsection, a drip line is defined as a
perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where
precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground.
(c) The retention or protection of trees twelve inches in diameter or more as provided in
subsections (a) and (b) unreasonably burdens a development if, to accomplish such
retention or protection, the desired location of improvements on a lot or the proposed
activities on a lot would have to be substantially altered and such alteration would
work an unreasonable hardship upon the developer.
(d) If space that would otherwise be devoted to parking cannot be so used because of
the requirements of subsections (a) or (b), and, as a result, the parking requirements
set forth in Article XVIII cannot be satisfied, the number of required spaces may be
reduced by the number of spaces "lost" because of the provisions of subsections (a)
and (b), up to a maximum of fifteen percent of the required spaces.
Section 316.1 Tree Protection During Construction.
(a) To preserve existing trees specified on the required landscape plan to remain on the
site as a function of fulfilling purposes of this section, the critical root zone shall be
protected by proper installation of barricades and signage from vehicular movement,
material storage, compacting, grading, excavating, and other development related
activities during construction and in the final landscape design.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 19-7
(b) The critical root zone (CRZ) shall be protected during construction by approved tree
protection fencing and practices. Tree protective fencing shall be shown on site
plans and grading plans around each tree, cluster of trees, at perimeter of tree-save
areas, and at limits of disturbance. No equipment is allowed on the site until all tree
protection fencing and silt fencing has been installed and approved. Tree protective
fencing shall remain in place through completion of construction activities.
(c) If the entire CRZ cannot be preserved, the disturbed area shall extend no closer to
the protected tree trunk than one half (1/2) the radius of the CRZ. In no case can
more than forty (40) percent of the CRZ be disturbed.
(d) Disturbance of the CRZ will only be allowed on one (1) side of the retained tree and
only with prior approval by the appropriate reviewing agency.
(e) Prior to grading, tree roots shall be pruned using appropriate arboriculture pruning
tools and practices.
(f) Disturbance other than that allowed on the approved plan, including incorrectly
placed tree protection fencing or improper root pruning constitutes negligence and
will require the owner to post an irrevocable letter of credit or other means of
financial assurance approved by the reviewing agency for three (3) years to provide
for mitigation of the tree, to be released if determined by the reviewing agency that
the tree is not at risk of dying due to the disturbance.
(g) Any person who is responsible for failing to properly install or maintain protection
measures pursuant to this Part shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) per day and a stop work order shall be placed on the project. The owner
of the property shall also be a jointly and severally responsible party if the improper
practices are conducted by an employee, agent, or other person under the control,
employ, or direction of the property owner.
Section 317 Shade Trees in Parking Areas.
(a) In Parking Areas:
(1) Vehicle accommodation areas that contain 10 or more parking spaces must
include deciduous shade trees (either retained or planted by the developer).
Trees shall be evenly distributed throughout vehicle accommodation areas
so as to maximize the number of parking spaces that receive shade. When
trees are planted by the developer to satisfy the requirements of this
subsection, the developer shall choose trees that meet the standards set
forth in Appendix E. Parking areas located in developments within IW zoning
districts are exempt from the requirements of this Section. (Amended 1/99)
(2) Each tree of the type described in subsection (a) shall satisfy the
requirements of Section 305(a)(2) and there must be sufficient trees so that,
using this standard, twenty percent of the vehicle accommodation area will
be shaded.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 3/19/99 19-8
(3) No paving may be placed within two-thirds of the distance from the trunk
(measured from the outside of the trunk) to the drip line of any tree retained
to comply with subsection (a), and new trees planted to comply with
subsection (a) shall have pavement no closer than 5 feet from the trunk in
any direction. (Refer to Section 315 for special requirements for large trees.)
(4) Vehicle accommodation areas shall be laid out and detailed to prevent
vehicles from striking trees. Vehicles will be presumed to have a body
overhang of three feet six inches.
Section 318 Compliance with Landscaping and Screening Standards.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a detailed landscape plan showing the interior
landscaping area, buffer zones, screens and shade tree locations required by this ordinance shall
be submitted and approved by the land use administrator and if applicable, the Planning
Board/Town Council in conjunction with the applicable review criteria. The Town of Edenton Tree
Committee shall be advised of such plans. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the
landscaping is completed as certified by an on-site inspection by the administrator, unless a bond or
other acceptable guarantee of improvements has been posted.
Part III. Supplemental Standards Applicable to All Landscaped Areas
Section 319 Irrigation.
An irrigation system is recommended for all landscaped areas required in this Article.
Section 319.1 Revegetation.
All areas cleared of existing vegetation shall be revegetated with grass and trees as soon as
possible after being disturbed. Such disturbed areas shall be replanted with domesticated grass
and trees of a species similar to those recommended in Appendix E-12 and E-13. Disturbed areas
shall be replanted with one tree for each 707 square feet of disturbed area.
Section 319.2 Preservation of Existing Vegetation.
Every attempt shall be made to preserve existing vegetation. A minimum of 50 percent of all
areas not devoted to buildings, streets, drives, parking, and loading areas shall be maintained in a
natural state unless it can be demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the permit-issuing authority, that
revegetation would meet the intent of this Article and would provide a vegetative pattern superior to
the existing natural vegetation.
Section 319.3 Specificity of Plans.
All plans as required by this Article shall show the specific location of plant material to be
planted and shall also show the specific location of plant material that will remain. In addition, plans
shall show the size of plant material to be installed and any other pertinent information required by
this Article. Photographs of vegetative conditions preceding development shall be submitted with
plans required by this Article.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-1
ARTICLE XX
AMENDMENTS
Section 320 Amendments in General.
(a) Amendments to the text of this ordinance or to the zoning map may be made in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(b) Conditional use district zoning requests shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of Section 327.
(c) The Town Council shall consider amendments to this ordinance not more than four
times per year at one meeting during the months of February, May, August and November. The
Town Council may waive this restriction if it finds an emergency exists by a three-fourths majority
vote of its membership.
(d) Definition of Emergency: A sudden unexpected happening; an unforeseen
occurrence or condition; specifically, perplexing contingency or complication of circumstances; a
sudden or unexpected occasion for action; exigency; pressing necessity. (Amended 2/09/93)
(e) As provided in NCGS 160A-385(b), amendments, modifications, supplements, repeal
or other changes in zoning regulations and restrictions and zone boundaries shall not be applicable
or enforceable without consent of the owner with regard to buildings and uses for which either (i) a
building permit has been issued pursuant to NCGS 160A-417 prior to the enactment of the
ordinance making the change or changes as long as the permit remains valid and unexpired
pursuant to NCGS 160A-418 and unrevoked pursuant to NCGS 160A-422 or (ii) a vested right has
been established pursuant to NCGS 160A-385.1 and the provisions of Section 328 of this
Ordinance and such vested right remains valid and unexpired. (Amended 6/13/95)
(f) The Town may not deny a zoning or rezoning request for a school based on
consideration of the level of service of a road abutting or near the school.
Section 321 Initiation of Amendments.
(a) Whenever a request to amend this ordinance is initiated by the Town Council, the
Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment, or the town administration, the administrator, in
consultation with the Town Attorney shall draft an appropriate ordinance and set a date for a public
hearing.
(b) Any other person may also petition the Council to amend this ordinance. The petition
shall be filed with the administrator and shall include, among the information deemed relevant by the
administrator:
(1) The name, address, and phone number of the applicant; When an
authorized agent files a petition on behalf of a property owner, the agent shall
provide the Town with written documentation that the owner of the property
has authorized the filing of the petition.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-2
(2) A metes and bounds description and a scaled map of the land affected by
the amendment if a change in zoning district classification is proposed;
(3) Stamped envelopes containing the names and addresses of all those to
whom notice of the public hearing must be sent as provided in Section 323;
(4) A description of the proposed map change or a summary of the specific
objective of any proposed change in the text of this ordinance;
(c) Petitions for amendments shall be submitted to the administrator 25 days prior to the
date of the Planning Board meeting at which the petition will be reviewed in accordance with the
schedule delineated in Section 320(c). If the submission deadline date falls on a Saturday, the
application must be received by the preceding Friday. If the submission deadline date falls on a
Sunday, the application must be received by the following Monday.
(d) If the administrator determines that the development for which a rezoning is
requested will have or may have substantial impact on surrounding properties, he shall require that
(i) the applicant notify, at a minimum, all adjoining property owners, at least ten days in advance, of
an informal informational meeting and (ii) the applicant conduct the informational meeting to discuss
the impacts of the proposed rezoning with the adjoining property owners. The purpose of the
informational meeting is to involve those property owners most likely impacted by a proposed project
in the early steps of the development process. Consequently, the informational meeting should be
held prior to the public hearing date established for the rezoning request.
(e) Without limiting the generality of subsection (d), the administrator may require the
applicant to hold an informational meeting when:
(1) the request for a rezoning involves a residential project of 25 or more
dwelling units.
(2) the request for a rezoning involves 10 acres or more.
Section 322 Planning Board Consideration of Proposed Amendments.
(a) After a date for a public hearing on a proposed amendment is set, by the
administrator, the proposed amendment shall be referred to the Planning Board for its consideration.
(b) The Planning Board shall endeavor to review the proposed amendment in such a
timely fashion that any recommendations it may have can be presented to the Council at the public
hearing on the amendment. The Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the
proposed text amendment or map amendment is consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan or
any other applicable officially adopted plans. However, if the Planning Board is not prepared to
make recommendations at the public hearing, it may request the Council to delay final action on the
amendment until such time as the Planning Board can present its recommendations.
(c) The Planning Board shall provide a written recommendation to the Town Council that
addresses plan consistency and other matters as deemed appropriate by the Planning Board, but a
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-3
comment by the Planning Board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive
plan shall not preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the Town Council.
(d) The Council need not await the recommendations of the Planning Board before
taking action on a proposed amendment, nor is the Council bound by any recommendations of the
Planning Board that are before it at the time it takes action on a proposed amendment.
Section 323 Hearing Required; Notice.
(a) No ordinance that amends any of the provisions of this ordinance may be adopted
until a public hearing has been held on such ordinance.
(b) The administrator shall publish a notice of the public hearing on any ordinance that
amends the provisions of this ordinance once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
having general circulation in the area. The notice shall be published for the first time not less than
ten days nor more than twenty-five days before the date fixed for the hearing. In computing this
period, the date of publication shall not be counted but the date of the hearing shall be.
(c) With respect to map amendments, the administrator shall provide first class mail
notice of the public hearing to the record owners for tax purposes of all properties whose zoning
classification is changed by the proposed amendment as well as the owners of all properties
abutting the property rezoned by the amendment.
(d) The notice required in subsection (c) shall not be required in the following situations:
(1) The total rezoning of all property within the corporate boundaries of Edenton
unless the rezoning involves zoning of parcels of land to less intense or more
restrictive uses. If the rezoning involves zoning of parcels of land to less
intense or more restrictive uses, notification to owners of these parcels shall
be made by mail in accordance with subsection (c) of this Section;
(2) The zoning is an initial zoning of the entire zoning jurisdiction area.
(3) The zoning reclassification action directly affects more than 50 properties,
owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners;
(4) The reclassification is an amendment to the zoning text; or
(5) The Town is adopting a water supply watershed protection program as
required by NCGS 143-214.5.
In any case where this subsection eliminates the notice required by subsection (c),
the Town shall publish once a week for four successive calendar weeks in a
newspaper having general circulation in the area maps showing the boundaries of
the area affected by the proposed ordinance or amendment. The map shall not be
less than one-half of a newspaper page in size. The notice shall only be effective for
property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the newspaper which
publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside the Town's jurisdiction or
outside of the newspaper circulation area, according to the address listed on the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-4
most recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified by mail
pursuant to subsection (c). The person or persons mailing the notices shall certify to
the Town Council that fact, and the certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the
absence of fraud. In addition to the published notice, the Town shall post one or
more prominent signs immediately adjacent to the subject area reasonably
calculated to give public notice of the proposed rezoning. (Amended 6/13/95)
(e) The administrator shall also post notices of the public hearing in the vicinity of the
property rezoned by the proposed amendment and take any other action deemed by the
administrator to be useful or appropriate to give notice of the public hearing on any proposed
amendment.
(f) The notice required or authorized by this section shall:
(1) State the date, time, and place of the public hearing;
(2) Summarize the nature and character of the proposed change;
(3) If the proposed amendment involves a change in zoning district
classification, reasonably identify the property whose classification would be
affected by the amendment;
(4) State that the full text of the amendment can be obtained from the Town
Clerk; and
(5) State that substantial changes in the proposed amendment may be made
following the public hearing.
(6) Summarize the protest petition provisions of Section 326 if the proposed
amendment involves a change in zoning district classification.
(g) The administrator shall make every reasonable effort to comply with the notice
provisions set forth in this section. However, it is the Council's intention that no failure to comply
with any of the notice provisions (except those set forth in subsection (b)) shall render any
amendment invalid.
(h) The person or persons mailing notices to adjoining property owners, as defined in
NCGS 160A-384, shall certify to the Town Council that fact.
Section 324 Council Action on Amendments.
(a) At the conclusion of the public hearing on a proposed amendment, the Council may
proceed to vote on the proposed ordinance, refer it to a committee for further study, or take any
other action consistent with its usual rules of procedure.
(b) The Council is not required to take final action on a proposed amendment within any
specific period of time, but it should proceed as expeditiously as practicable on petitions for
amendments since inordinate delays can result in the petitioner incurring unnecessary costs.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-5
(c) Before taking such lawful action, the Town Council shall consider the Planning
Board’s recommendation and staff report on each proposed amendment. When considering a
zoning amendment, the Town Council is directed to adopt a plan consistency statement that takes
one of three forms, as follows:
(1) A statement approving the amendment and describing how it is consistent
with the plan;
(2) A statement rejecting the amendment and describing how it is inconsistent
with the plan; or
(3) A statement approving the amendment and a declaration that the plan also is
amended. In this situation, the statement must also include an explanation
of “the change in conditions the Council took into account in amending the
UDO to meet the development needs of the community.”
In all three options, the statement is to include an explanation of why the action being taken is
reasonable and in the public interest, as required by current law. The Planning Board and staff
recommendations must be recorded in the Town Council minutes of the meeting at which Board
action was taken.
Section 325 Ultimate Issue Before Council on Amendments.
In deciding whether to adopt a proposed amendment to this ordinance, the central issue
before the Council is whether the proposed amendment advances the public health, safety or
welfare. All other issues are irrelevant, and all information related to other issues at the public
hearing may be declared irrelevant by the mayor and excluded. When considering proposed map
amendments:
(1) Except for rezoning requests submitted in accordance with Section 327, the
Council shall not consider any representations made by the petitioner that, if
the change is granted, the rezoned property will be used for only one of the
possible range of uses permitted in the requested classification. Rather, the
Council shall consider whether the entire range of permitted uses in the
requested classification is more appropriate than the range of uses in the
existing classification.
(2) The Council shall not regard as controlling any advantages or disadvantages
to the individual requesting the change, but shall consider the impact of the
proposed change on the public at large.
Section 326 Citizen Comments.
Zoning ordinances may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or
repealed. If any resident or property owner in the town submits a written statement regarding a
proposed amendment, modification, or repeal to a zoning ordinance to the Town Clerk at least two
business days prior to the proposed vote on such change, the Town Clerk shall deliver such written
statement to the Town Council. If the proposed change is the subject of a quasi-judicial proceeding
under NCGS 160A-388, the Town Clerk shall provide only the names and addresses of the
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-6
individuals providing written comment, and the provision of such names and addresses to all
members of the Council shall not disqualify any member of the Council from voting.
Section 327 Conditional Use District Rezonings (Amended 1/14/03).
(a) There are circumstances in which a general zoning district designation allowing a
use by right would not be appropriate for a particular property even though the use itself could be
appropriate for the property consistent with the objectives of this ordinance and the adopted
Land Use Plan. The review process established in this section provides for the accommodation
of such uses by reclassification of property into a conditional use district, subject to specific
conditions, which ensure compatibility of the use with the surrounding area and enjoyment of the
neighboring properties.
(b) The Conditional Use District rezoning process is established to address certain
situations when particular uses, future uses, or unknown future uses may be acceptable but the
general zoning district which allows that use(s) would be inappropriate at the particular locations
in the absence of special conditions. Where the applicant for rezoning desires property to be
rezoned to such a district in such situations, the Conditional Use District Classification will be
considered only upon request/acceptance of the applicant for rezoning. Conditional Use
Districts (bearing the designation C.U.) corresponds to an identical district, for example a
Conditional Use Highway Commerical District shall be labeled at C.U. CH.
(c) Within the Conditional Use District, only those uses authorized by this ordinance
as permitted, in the zoning district with which the C.U. District corresponds shall be allowed and
all other requirements of the corresponding district shall be met. No C.U. District shall be
established until the Town Council has approved the rezoning petition in accordance with
Section 321 of this ordinance. In addition, within a C.U. District no use shall be allowed except
pursuant to a Conditional Use Permit authorized by the Town Council, which shall specify the
use or uses authorized. Such permit may further specify the location on the property of the
proposed use or uses, the number of dwelling units, the location and extent of supporting
facilities such as parking lots, driveways, and access streets, the location and extent of buffer
areas and other special purpose areas, the timing of development, the location and extent of
right-of-way and other areas to be dedicated for public use, building design, and other such
matters as the applicant may propose as conditions upon the request. In the course of
evaluating the proposed use, the Council may request additional information deemed
appropriate to provide a complete analysis of the proposal. This process allows rezoning
requests and a Conditional Use Permit applications to be processed at the same time, however,
the governing bodies should treat the two proposals as legally independent, separate decisions.
In granting a Conditional Use Permit, the Town Council may impose such additional reasonable
and appropriate safeguards upon such permit, as it may deem necessary in order that the
purpose and intent of this section are served, public welfare secured, and substantial justice
done. The petitioner shall have a reasonable opportunity to consider and respond to any such
conditions prior to final action by the Town Council.
(d) The authorization of a Conditional Use Permit, in any C.U. District for any use,
which is allowed only as a Special Use in the zoning district, which corresponds, to the C.U.
District, shall preclude any requirements for obtaining a Special Use Permit from any such use
from the Board of Adjustment.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-7
(e) If a petition is approved under this section, the district that is established, the approved
petition, and all conditions, which may have been attached to the approval, are binding on the
property as an amendment to these regulations and to the zoning map. All subsequent
development and use of the property shall be in accordance with the standards for the approved
C.U. District, the approved petition, and all conditions attached to the approval. Only those uses
and structures indicated in the approved petition and site plan shall be allowed on the subject
property. Any development in the district shall comply with all provisions of and conditions to the
approved petition and site plan. Any uses and structures on the subject property shall also comply
with all standards and requirements for development in the underlying general zoning district.
(f) Following the approval of the petition for a C.U. District, the subject property shall be
identified on the zoning map by the appropriate district designation. A C.U. District shall be
identified by the same designation as the general zoning district bearing the designation C.U., for
example a Conditional Use Highway Commerical District shall be labeled at C.U. CH.
(g) Except as provided in subsection (h), changes to the approved petition or to the
conditions attached to the approval shall be treated the same as amendments to these regulations
or to the zoning map and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures in this section.
(h) Minor changes in the detail of the approved petition or site plan which will not alter the
basic relationship of the proposed development to surrounding properties or the standards and
requirements of these regulations or to any conditions attached to the approval may be approved by
the administrator without going through the amendment process or a public hearing. The
administrator, at his discretion, may forward any application for changes in detail to the Town
Council for its consideration as an amendment to these regulations or the zoning map. The
applicant may appeal the decision of the administrator to the Board of Adjustment for review and
decision as to whether an amendment to the approved district shall be required.
(i) The objective of the C.U. District is to encourage orderly development in accordance
to firm plans to develop the property. Therefore, from the date of approval of the petition, the
administrator shall periodically examine the progress made toward developing the property in
accordance with the approved petition and any conditions attached to the approval. If the
administrator determines that construction has not commenced or is not in accordance with the
approved petition and conditions, the administrator shall either initiate a reclassification of the
property in accordance with the procedures established in this section or shall forward a report to
the Council recommending that the property be classified to another district.
(j) After a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the development approved as a
C.U. District, the administrator shall periodically inspect the use and maintenance of the subject
property to ensure continued compliance with these regulations, the approved petition, and any
conditions attached by the Town Council to approval of the petition.
Section 328 Vested Right.
(a) A vested right, in accordance with NCGS 160A-385.1, may be established upon the
approval or conditional approval of a site specific development plan by the Town Council in
accordance with the provisions outlined in this section. A right which has been vested as provided
for in this section shall, as a general rule, remain valid for two years and shall attach to and run with
the land.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-8
(b) Unless otherwise specifically provided, or unless clearly required by the context, the
words and phrases defined in this subsection shall have the meaning indicated when used in this
article.
(1) Landowner. Any owner of a legal or equitable interest in real property,
including the heirs, devisees, successors, assigns, and personal
representative of such owner. The landowner may allow a person holding a
valid option to purchase to act as his agent or representative for purposes of
submitting a proposed site specific development plan.
(2) Property. All real property subject to the regulations and restrictions of this
ordinance as well as the zoning district boundaries established by this
ordinance and depicted on the official zoning map.
(3) Site specific development plan. A plan which has been submitted to the Town
of Edenton by a landowner in accordance with NCGS 160A-385.1(b)(5)
describing in detail the type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels
of property. Such plan shall be in the form of a site plan required to obtain a
conditional use permit and shall include the information required by Section 49
and Appendix A. All site specific development plans shall be approved by the
Town Council.
(4) Vested right. The right to undertake and complete the development and use
of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site specific
development plan.
(c) A vested right shall be deemed established upon the effective date of approval by the
Town Council of a site specific development plan. Following the approval of a site specific
development plan, the administrator shall issue a vested right certificate to the landowner which
indicates the duration of the vesting period, the conditions, if any, imposed on the approval of the
site specific development plan, and any other information determined by the zoning officer to be
necessary to administer the vested right.
(d) A vested right shall confer upon the landowner the right to undertake and complete the
development and use of the property as delineated in the approved site specific development plan.
The Town Council may approve a site specific development plan upon such terms and conditions as
may be determined necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Failure to comply
with the approved terms and conditions shall result in a forfeiture of vested rights.
(e) Approval by the Town Council of a site specific development plan shall follow the
procedural requirements for the issuance of a conditional use permit as outlined in Articles IV and
VI. Changes in or modifications to an approved site specific development plan shall be made only
with the concurrence of the Town Council in accordance with the provisions of Section 65.
(f) A vested right obtained under this section runs with the land and is generally valid for
two years from the effective date of approval by the Town Council of a site specific development
plan. The Town may, at its sole discretion, provide that rights shall be vested for a period greater
than two years but not exceeding five years where warranted due to such circumstances as the size
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-9
and phasing of development, the level of investment, the need for the development, etc. A vested
right shall not be extended by any amendments or modifications to an approved site specific
development plan unless expressly provided for by the Town Council. A vested right shall expire at
the end of the established vesting period if no building permit applications have been filed with the
Town to construct the use or uses proposed in the approved site specific development plan. If
building permits are issued, the provisions of NCGS 160A-418 and NCGS 160A-422 shall apply,
except that a building permit shall not expire or be revoked because of the lack of progress during
the established vesting period.
(g) A vested right, once established or provided for in this section, precludes any zoning
action by the Town which would change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish, or otherwise delay the
development or use of the property as set forth in the approved site specific development plan,
except:
(1) With the written consent of the affected landowner,
(2) Upon findings, by ordinance after notice and a public hearing, that natural or
man-made hazards in the immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected,
would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the
project were to proceed as contemplated in the site specific development plan;
(3) To the extent that the affected landowner receives compensation for all costs,
expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not
limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural,
planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant's fees incurred after approval
by the town, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid.
Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the property
which is caused by such action;
(4) Upon findings, by ordinance after notice and a public hearing, that the
landowner or his representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information
or made material misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval
by the Town of the site specific development plan; or
(5) Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or regulation
which precludes development as contemplated in the site specific
development plan, in which case the Town may modify the affected
provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a
fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance after notice and a public hearing.
(h) The establishment of a vested right shall not preclude the application of overlay zoning
which imposes additional requirements but does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or
ordinances or regulations which are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to
land use regulation by the Town, including, but not limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and
mechanical codes.
(i) Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the establishment of a vested right shall
not preclude, change, or impair the authority of the Town to enforce provisions of this ordinance
governing nonconforming situations or uses.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 20-10
(j) A vested right obtained under this section is not a personal right, but shall attach to
and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific development plan, all
successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise such vested rights.
(k) The Town shall not require a landowner to waive his vested rights as a condition of
developmental approval. (Amended 6/13/95)
(l) Vested Right for Multi-Phased Development. A seven-year vested right is established
for all phases of the development at the time a site plan is approved for the initial phase of the
development. Under common law vesting, substantial expenditures would have to be made for
development in a particular phase of the project for that phase to get a vested right.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix A-1
Appendix A
INFORMATION REQUIRED WITH APPLICATIONS
A-1. In General
(a) As provided in Section 49, it is presumed that all of the information listed in
this appendix must be submitted with an application for a zoning, sign, special use, or
conditional use permit to enable the permit-issuing authority to determine whether the
development, if completed as proposed, will comply with all the requirements of this
chapter. As set forth in Section 92, applications for variances are subject to the same
provisions. However, the permit-issuing authority may require more information or
accept as sufficient less information according to the circumstances of the particular
case. A developer who believes information presumptively required by this appendix is
unnecessary shall contact the planning staff for an interpretation.
(b) As also provided in Section 49, the administrator shall develop application
processes, including standard forms, to simplify and expedite applications for simple
developments that do not require the full range of information called for in this appendix.
In particular, developers seeking only permission to construct single-family or two-family
residences or to construct new or modify existing signs should contact the administrator
for standard forms.
A-2. Written Application
Every applicant for a variance or a zoning, sign, special use, conditional use
permit or certificate of appropriateness shall complete a written application containing at
least the following information:
(1) The name, address, and phone number of the applicant.
(2) If the applicant is not the owner or lessee of the property in question,
or their agents, or persons who have contracted to purchase the
property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary
permits, or the agents of such persons (who may make application in
the name of such owner, lessee, or contract vendee)(i) the name,
address, and phone number of the owner, (ii) the legal relationship of
the applicant to the owner that entitles the applicant to make
application, and (iii) written documentation that the owner of the
property has authorized the filing of the application.
(3) The date of the application.
(4) Identification of the particular permit sought.
(5) A succinct statement of the nature of the development proposed
under the permit or the nature of the variance.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix A-2
(6) Identification of the property in question by street address and tax
map reference.
(7) The zoning district within which the property lies.
(8) A boundary survey showing the dimensions and the number of
square feet in the lot where the development is to take place.
(9) The gross floor area of all existing or proposed buildings located on
the lot where the development is to take place.
(10) If the proposed development is a two-family or multi- family residential
development or an architecturally integrated subdivision, the number
of one, two, three, or four bedroom dwelling units proposed for
construction.
A-3. Development Site Plans
Subject to Section A-1 of this appendix, every application for a variance or a
zoning, sign, special use or conditional use permit shall contain plans that locate the
development site and graphically demonstrate existing and proposed natural,
man-made, and legal features on and near the site in question, all in conformity with
Sections A-4 through A-6 of this appendix.
A-4. Graphic Materials Required for Plans
(a) The plans shall include a location map that shows the location of the project in
the broad context of the town or planning jurisdiction. This location map may be drawn
on the development site plans or it may be furnished separately using reduced copies of
maps of the town's planning jurisdiction.
(b) Development site plans shall be drawn to scale, using such a scale that all
features required to be shown on the plans are readily discernible. Very large
developments may require that plans show the development in sections to accomplish
this objective without resorting to plans that are so large as to be cumbersome, or the
objective may be accomplished by using different plans or plans drawn to different
scales to illustrate different features. In all cases, the permit-issuing authority shall
make the final determination whether the plans submitted are drawn to the appropriate
scale, but the applicant for a conditional or special use permit relies in the first instance
on the recommendations of the planning staff.
(c) Development site plans should show on the first page the following
information:
(1) Name of Applicant
(2) Name of Development (if any)
(3) North Arrow
(4) Legend
(5) Scale
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix A-3
(d) All of the features required to be shown on plans by Sections A-5 and A-6
may be included on one set of plans, so long as the features are distinctly discernible.
A-5. Existing Natural, Man-Made and Legal Features
(a) Development site plans shall show all existing natural, man- made, and
legal features on the lot where the development is to take place, including but not limited
to those listed below. In addition, the plans shall also show those features indicated
below by an asterisk that are located within fifty feet in any direction of the lot where the
development is to take place, and shall specify (by reference to the Table of Permissible
Uses or otherwise) the use made of adjoining properties.
(b) Existing natural features:
(1) Tree line of wooded areas.
(2) Individual trees twelve inches in diameter or more, identified by
common or scientific name.
(3) Orchards or other agricultural groves by common or scientific name.
*(4) Streams, ponds, drainage ditches, swamps, boundaries of floodways
and floodplains.
(5) (If the proposed development is a subdivision of more than fifty lots or
if more than five acres of land are to be developed), base flood elevation
data (See Article XVI, Part I).
*(6) Contour lines (shown as dotted lines) with no larger than five-foot
contour intervals. (As indicated in Subsection A-6(b)(17), proposed
contour lines shall be shown as solid lines.)
(7) Boundaries of applicable Areas of Environmental Concern in
accordance with the State Guidelines for AECs (15 NCAC 7H)
pursuant to the Coastal Area Management Act of 1974.
(c) Existing man-made features:
*(1) Vehicle accommodation areas (including parking areas, loading areas
and circulation areas, see Section 290), all designated by surface
material and showing the layout of existing parking spaces and
direction of travel lanes, aisles, or driveways.
(2) Streets, private roads, sidewalks, and other walkways, all designated
by surface material.
(3) Curbs and gutters, curb inlets and curb cuts, and drainage grates.
(4) Other storm water or drainage facilities, including manholes, pipes,
and drainage ditches.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix A-4
(5) Underground utility lines, including water, sewer, electric power,
telephone, gas, cable television.
(6) Aboveground utility lines and other utility facilities.
*(7) Fire hydrants.
*(8) Buildings, structures and signs (including dimensions of each).
(9) Location of exterior light fixtures.
*(10) Location of dumpsters.
(d) Existing legal features:
(1) The zoning of the property, including zoning district lines where
applicable.
(2) Property lines of the tract to be developed (with dimensions
identified), adjacent property lines (including corporate limits, town
boundaries and county lines).
(3) Street right-of-way lines.
(4) Utility or other easement lines.
(5) Deed book and page reference demonstrating ownership of property.
A-6. Proposed Changes in Existing Features or New Features
(a) Development site plans shall show proposed changes in (i) existing natural
features (see A-5(b)), (ii) existing manmade features (see A-5(c)), and (iii) existing legal
features (see A-5(d)).
(b) Development site plans shall also show proposed new legal features
(especially new property lines, street right-of-way lines, and utility and other easements),
as well as proposed man-made features, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) The number of square feet in every lot created by a new subdivision
and the total number of lots created.
(2) Lot dimensions, including lot widths measured in accordance with
Section 183 and average lot size.
(3) The location and dimensions of all buildings and freestanding signs
on the lot, as well as the distances all buildings are set back from
property lines, streets or street right-of-way lines (see Section 184).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix A-5
(4) Principal side(s) building elevations for typical units of new buildings
or exterior remodelings of existing buildings, showing building heights
(see Section 186) and proposed wall sign or window sign area;
(5) The location and dimensions of all recreational areas provided in
accordance with Article XIII, with each area designated as to type of
use;
(6) The location and dimensions of all areas intended to remain as
usable open space. The plans shall clearly indicate whether such
open space areas are intended to be offered for dedication to public
use or to remain privately owned.
(7) Streets, labeled by classification (see Section 210) and street name
showing linear feet, whether curb and gutter or shoulders and swales
are to be provided and indicating street paving widths, approximate
grades and typical street cross-sections. Private roads in
subdivisions shall also be shown and clearly labeled as such.
(8) Curbs and gutters, curb inlets and curb cuts, drainage grates.
(9) Other storm water or drainage facilities, including manholes, pipes,
drainage ditches, retention ponds, etc.
(10) Sidewalks and walkways, showing widths and surface material.
(11) Bridges.
(12) Outdoor illumination with lighting fixtures sufficiently identified to
demonstrate compliance with Section 242.
(13) Underground utility lines, including water, sewer, electric power,
telephone, gas, cable television. Water and sewer pipe line signs
shall be labeled.
(14) Aboveground utility lines and other facilities.
(15) Fire hydrants.
(16) Dumpsters.
(17) New contour lines resulting from earth movement (shown as solid
lines) with no larger than five-foot contour intervals (existing lines
should be shown as dotted lines).
(18) Scale drawings of all signs requiring permits pursuant to Article XVII,
together with an indication of the location and dimensions of all such
signs.
(19) Vehicle accommodation areas (including parking areas, loading
areas, and circulation areas, see Section 290), all designated by
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix A-6
surface material and showing the dimensions and layout of proposed
parking spaces and the dimensions and direction of travel of lanes,
aisles, and driveways.
(20) Landscaping plans shall be submitted before or at the time of
application for the building permit for all development projects, except
for development of a single-family residentially zoned parcel outside
of a historic district. These plans shall contain the following
information:
a. Date of plan preparation.
b. Project name and description of land use.
c. Project owner and mailing address.
d. A map at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100)
feet (1”=100’) or less showing:
1. North arrow.
2. Scale.
3. Approximate locations, species, and critical root
zones of all protected trees. Groves of protected
trees that will not be disturbed may be labeled as
such on the map, stating the approximate number
of protected trees and species mix, without
specifying data on each individual tree.
4. Note on plan stating that prior to any clearing,
grading, or construction activity, tree protection
fencing will be installed around protected trees or
groves of trees. No construction workers, tools,
materials, or vehicles are permitted within the tree
protection fencing.
5. Locations, dimensions, and square footages of
required buffer yards and parking lot landscaping.
6. Details of required landscaping showing species,
dimensions, and spacing of planted materials and
the use and protection of existing vegetation.
7. All existing and proposed utilities and if applicable,
their associated easements.
8. Location and square footage of structures and
parking lots.
9. Adjacent zoning districts.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix A-7
10. Approximate locations of all trees greater than
eight (8) inches DBH within required buffers and of
all areas of natural vegetation to be used as part of
the buffer.
11. Setbacks of all structures and specifications and
shielding of certain uses, as required.
12. Locations of any conservation resources
associated with the parcel including any rare and
endangered species in accordance with the North
Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission.
13. Proposed schedule for landscaping.
14. Approximate location of all existing protected trees
clearly indicating those to be retained and those
proposed for removal and all trees to be planted on
site to meet any mitigation requirements.
15. Triangular sight distance.
A-7. Documents and Written Information in Addition to Plans
In addition to the written application and the plans, whenever the nature of the
proposed development makes information or documents such as the following relevant,
such documents or information shall be provided. The following is a representative list
of the types of information or documents that may be requested:
(1) Documentation confirming that the applicant has a legally sufficient
interest in the property proposed for development to use it in the
manner requested, or is the duly appointed agent of such a person.
(2) Certifications from the appropriate agencies that proposed utility
systems are or will be adequate to handle the proposed development,
as set forth in Article XV, and that all necessary easements have
been provided.
(3) Detailed description of play apparatus or other recreational facilities to
be provided in miniparks.
(4) Legal documentation establishing homeowners associations or other
legal entities responsible for control over required common areas and
facilities.
(5) Bonds, letters of credit, or other surety devices.
(6) Stamped envelopes containing the names and addresses of all those
to whom notice of a public hearing must be sent to comply with
Section 102 or Section 54.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix A-8
(7) Complete documentation justifying any requested deviation from
specific requirements established by this chapter as presumptively
satisfying design standards.
(8) Written evidence of permission to use satellite parking spaces under
the control of a person other than the developer when such spaces
are allowed pursuant to Section 298.
(9) Written evidence of good faith efforts to acquire satellite parking
under the circumstances set forth in Section 298.
(10) A traffic impact assessment performed and prepared by a qualified
transportation or traffic engineer or planner in accordance with the
guidelines delineated in Appendix J. Thresholds for triggering a traffic
impact assessment are contained in Appendix J. (Amendment 3/99)
(11) Time schedules for the completion of phases in staged development,
as required by Section 61.
(12) The environmental impact of a development, including its effect on
historically significant or ecologically fragile or important areas in
accordance with the guidelines delineated in Appendix K.
(Amendment 3/99)
(13) If any street is proposed to intersect with a state maintained road, a
copy of the application for driveway approval as required by the
Department of Transportation, Division of Highways Manual on
Driveway Regulations.
(14) Proposed deed restrictions or covenants to be imposed upon newly
created lots.
A-8. Number of Copies of Plans and Documents
With respect to all plans and other documents required by this appendix, the
developer shall submit the number of copies (not to exceed ten) that the administrator
deems necessary to expedite the review process and to provide necessary permanent
records.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix B-1
Appendix B
SPECIFICATIONS ON DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES
B-1. All driveway entrances and other openings onto town-maintained streets shall, at a
minimum, conform to the requirements set forth in this appendix. Driveway entrances to
state-maintained streets shall also conform to the standards contained herein as well as
those of the North Carolina Department of Transportation. In the event of a conflict
between the two sets of standards, the most restrictive standard shall apply.
B-2. Basic Driveway Dimensions
Map Reference
(See Figure 1)
1 and 2
Family
Residential
Multi-Family
Residential and
Commercial
Industrial
Width1 W
One-Way 10'-12' 15'-18' 20'-25'
Two-Way 10'-12' 30-'36' 40'-50'
Right Turn Radius or Flare2 R 5" 15'-30' 15'-30'
Minimum Spacing3
From Property Line P 0' 0' -R
From Street Corner C 5'
Between Driveways S 3'
Minimum Angle4 A 45 45 45
1
Multi-lane driveway widths to be determined by the Public Works Director based upon the
number of lanes, the type of land use served, and the use of channelizing islands.
2
On the side of a driveway exposed to entry or exit by right turning vehicles. The radii for major
generator driveways to be determined by the Public Works Director.
3
Measured along the curb or edge of pavement from the roadway end of the curb radius or
flare.
4
Minimum acute angle measured from edge of pavement, and generally based on one-way
operation. For two-way driveways and in high pedestrian activity areas, the minimum angle
should be 70 degrees.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix B-2
B-3 Driveway Spacing
(a) The standards for driveway spacing delineated in Section B-2 are intended as
general guidelines for driveways with low and moderate traffic volumes. Spacing
for high volume driveways (such as shopping centers, major apartment
complexes, etc.) shall be determined by the Public Works Director based upon
actual traffic conditions and needs.
(b) The number of permissible driveways on an individual property shall be
determined as follows:
Maximum Number of Driveways By Street
Frontage Arterial All Other
<50' 1 1
51' - 150' 1 2
151' - 500' 2 3
>500' 3 4
B-4 Dedication of Right-of-Way/Roadway Improvements
Applicants for driveways may be required to dedicate right-of-way for and
construct or reimburse the cost of constructing medians, acceleration and deceleration
lanes, and traffic storage lanes in order to connect a driveway to a street. The need for
these improvements will be determined by the Public Works Director and in cases
involving driveway connections onto state-maintained roads, the consent of the North
Carolina Department of Transportation must also be obtained. The need for the
improvements must be reasonably attributable to the traffic utilizing the driveway and the
improvements must be designed to serve the driveway traffic.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-1
Appendix C
SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
C-1. Design Speed, Sight Distance, Centerline Radius
Minor Local Sub-Collector Collector
Design Speed 25 mph 25 mph 30 mph 35 mph
Minimum Sight Distance on
Vertical Curve
150' 150' 200' 200'
Minimum Centerline Radius 150' 150' 200' 250'
C-2. Cut and Fill Slopes
Cut and fill slopes on any street right-of-way may not exceed 3:1.
C-3. Sight Distances at Intersections
(a) At no-stop intersections, the intersection shall be constructed so that a person
standing at a location on the centerline of any street 90 feet from the intersection of the
street centerlines has an unobstructed view to a point located on the centerline of the
intersecting street 90 feet (in either direction) from the intersection of the street
centerlines. See Standard Diagram No. 1.
(b) Subject to subsection (c), at stop intersections, the intersection shall be
constructed so that a person standing 10 feet back of the intersection of right-of-way
lines on the stop street has an unobstructed view to a point on the right-of-way line of
the intersecting through street located 70 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way
lines. See Standard Diagram No. 2.
(c) At stop intersections where a residential street intersects with a
state-maintained primary road, the intersection shall be constructed so that a person
standing 30 feet back of the intersection of right-of-way lines on the stop street has an
unobstructed view to a point on the centerline of the through street located 150 feet from
the intersection of the street right-of-way lines. See Standard Diagram No. 3.
C-4. Radius at Street Intersections
At street intersections, the intersections of the paved surfaces shall be rounded
with a minimum radius as shown in Standard Diagram No. 4 and No. 5. Where streets
intersect at less than right angles, a greater radius may be required.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-2
C-5. Clearing and Grubbing
Clearing and grubbing shall be performed within the limits shown on the plans. All
timber, brush, roots, stumps, trees, or other vegetation cut during the clearing
operations shall become the contractor's responsibility to dispose of, and shall be either
removed from the project by him, or satisfactorily disposed of on-site.
C-6. Grading and Compaction
Streets shall be graded in accordance with the lines and grade set by the
engineer. Before placing curb and gutter or base on the graded subgrade, the subgrade
shall be compacted to 95% ASSHO T99 for a depth of 6 inches and then shall be proof
rolled in the presence of the engineer. Places that are found to be loose, or soft, or
composed of unsuitable materials, whether in the subgrade or below it, must be dug out
and refilled with suitable material. All embankments or fills shall be made in one-foot
horizontal lifts of suitable material. The fill shall be rolled twice with a vibratory roller
weighing not less than eight tons.
C-7. Street Base
Arterial, collector, and marginal access streets shall have a base course 8 inches
thick which shall be crushed stone conforming to D.0.T. Type ABC stone. The stone
base course shall be placed in 4 inch layers, watered as necessary, and compacted to
100% AASHO T99. The contractor shall be responsible for keeping the stone base free
of contamination from clay or other foreign materials. Handling and placement of stone
base shall all be in accordance with D.0.T. specifications. Minor, local and subcollector
streets shall have a 7-inch thick base course utilizing soil type and compacted to 95%
AAASHO T99.
C-8. Street Surfaces
The asphalt surface course shall meet D.0.T. specs for Type I-2 asphalt. At a
minimum, the asphalt shall be placed in one 2-inch layer, and shall be handled and
placed in accordance with D.0.T. specifications. A pavement design study shall be
required before surfacing arterial and marginal access streets.
C-9. Pavement Section Variations
Sections C-6, C-7, and C-8 set the standards that shall apply under normal soils
conditions. However, where soils are unusually unstable, the public works director may
allow or require the developer to have soil tests run and a pavement design made by a
qualified soils engineer. Under these circumstances, the public works director may
allow pavement sections constructed to lesser standards than those set forth above (for
good soils) or require pavement sections constructed to greater standards than those
set forth above (for unstable soils).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-3
C-10. Street Cross Sections
Streets shall be constructed and utilities located in accordance with Standard
Drawing No. 6 or No. 7.
C-11. Curb and Gutter
(a) The concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed according to the lines and
grades established by the engineer. The concrete shall meet the State Highway
requirements. The curb and gutter shall be 24 inches wide, and shall have a vertical
curb face. The forms shall be of metal, free of marks or kinks, and shall be rigidly held
in position. The engineer shall approve the positioning of the forms before concrete is
poured. The concrete shall be placed in the forms in a manner to prevent segregation,
and tamped or vibrated sufficiently to prevent honeycombs. The concrete shall be
finished smooth and even by means of rollers or floats. Expansion joints shall be
provided every 30 feet, and false joints every 10 feet.
(b) Curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with Standard Drawing
No. 8.
C-12. Sidewalks
Sidewalk construction shall be similar to street construction, with subgrade
compacted to 95% AAASHO T99. Concrete sidewalks shall be 4 inches thick
(increasing to 6 inches thick at driveway entrances), and shall be at least 4 feet wide.
Expansion joints shall be provided every 30 feet; false joints at 10 feet.
C-13. Wheel Chair Ramps
Where required, wheel chair ramps shall be constructed in accordance with
Standard Drawing No. 9.
C-14. Storm Water Runoff Control
(a) The minimum design frequency for storm runoff shall be 10 years for storm
sewer collection and 25 years for cross drainage (i.e., drainage facilities crossing a
street).
(b) All storm drainage pipe shall be reinforced concrete and no pipe may be
smaller than fifteen inch diameter.
(c) Culvert outlet protection and swale erosion protection shall be designed
based on a 10 year storm.
(d) All storm drainage structures and pipes shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with Department of Transportation specifications and Standard Drawings
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-4
No. 10 through No. 14, as amended. However, in case of a conflict, the standard
drawings shall prevail.
C-15. Sedimentation Control
Road shoulders, swales, back-of-curbs, and cut and fill banks shall be completely
dressed up by the contractor and seeded as soon as possible.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-5
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-6
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-7
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-8
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-9
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-10
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-11
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-12
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix C-13
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix D-1
Appendix D
VEHICLE ACCOMMODATION AREA SURFACES
D-1. Paved Surfaces
Vehicle accommodation areas paved with asphalt shall be constructed in the
same manner as street surfaces (Appendix C, Sections C-6 through C-9). If concrete is
used as the paving material, vehicle accommodation areas shall be similarly constructed
except that six inches of concrete shall be used instead of two inches of asphalt. The
public works director may allow other paving materials to be used so long as the
equivalent level of stability is achieved.
D-2. Unpaved Surfaces
Vehicle accommodation areas without paving shall be constructed in the same
manner as paved areas except that crushed stone of the following types may be used in
lieu of asphalt, concrete, or other paving material:
Size 13 Crushed Stone
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-1
APPENDIX E
SCREENING AND TREES
E-1 Guide for Protecting Existing Trees
Section 316 provides for the retention and protection of large trees when land is
developed. In order to better ensure the survival of existing trees, the developer shall
heed the following guidelines:
(a) Protect trees with fencing and armoring during the entire construction
period. The fences should enclose an area ten feet square with the tree at
the center.
(b) Do not excavate beneath the crown of the tree.
(c) Do not compact the soil around existing trees with any equipment. Do not
pile direct or store material or park equipment beneath the crown of the
tree.
(d) Keep fires or other sources of extreme heat well clear of existing trees.
(e) Repair damaged roots and branches immediately. Exposed roots should
be covered with topsoil. Whenever roots are destroyed, a proportional
amount of branches must be pruned so that the tree doesn't transpire
more water than it takes in. Injured trees must be thoroughly watered
during the ensuing growing year.
(f) All existing trees which will be surrounded by paving should be pruned to
prevent dehydration. The method of pruning will depend upon the tree
species.
(g) No paving or other impermeable ground cover should be placed within the
dripline of large trees (12 inches or greater in diameter) or within two-thirds
of the distance from the trunk to the dripline of any other size tree to be
retained.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-2
E-2 Standards for Street and Parking Lot Trees
Trees planted in compliance with the requirements of Sections 315 and 317
should have most or all of the following qualities. The trees recommended in Section E-
10 represent the best combinations of these characteristics.
(a) Hardiness:
(1) Resistance to extreme temperatures.
(2) Drought resistance.
(3) Resistance to storm damage.
(4) Resistance to air pollution.
(5) Ability to survive physical damage from human activity.
(b) Life Cycle:
(1) Moderate to rapid rate of growth.
(2) Long life.
(c) Foliage and Branching:
(1) Tendency to branch high above the ground.
(2) Wide spreading habit.
(3) Relatively dense foliage for maximum shading.
(d) Maintenance:
(1) Resistance to pests.
(2) Resistance to plant diseases.
(3) Little or no pruning requirements.
(4) No significant litter problems.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-3
E-3 Formula for Calculating 20% Shading of Paved Vehicle Accommodation Areas
Following is an elementary formula for determining the number of shade trees
required in and around paved parking lots in order to presumptively satisfy the shading
requirements of Section 317.
[1] Calculate square footage of the vehicle accommodation
area. Include parking spaces, driveways, loading
areas, sidewalks, and other circulation areas. Do not
include building area and any area which will remain
completely undeveloped:
sq.ft.
[2] Multiply: X .20
[3] Area to be shaded: sq.ft.
Add:
[4] Areas shaded by existing trees to be retained in and
around the vehicle accommodation area:*
sq.ft.
[5] Area shaded by required screening trees, if any:*
[6] Area shaded by required street trees, if any:*
[7] Subtotal: sq.ft.
(If line [7] is greater than line [3], then the shading
requirement has been met. If not, go on to line [8].
[8] Enter the difference between line [7] and line [3]: sq.ft.
[9] Divide line [8] by 707
[10] Total number of shade trees required within the vehicle
accommodation area:
trees
*Existing trees retained in compliance with Section 316 will be credited according to their actual
crown radius. Shaded area may be calculated as follows: 3.14 X (crown radius)2 = shaded
area. Trees planted within the vehicle accommodation area are credited with shading 707 sq.ft.
(Based on a crown radius of 15 ft.). New or existing trees on the perimeter of the parking lot
are credited for having only half a crown over the vehicle accommodation area (e.g., new
perimeter trees will be crediting for shading 354 sq. ft.). Generally all trees planted in
compliance with the screening requirements of Article XIX, Part I and the street tree
requirements of Section 315 will be considered perimeter trees.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-4
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-5
E-5 Guide for Planting and Maintaining Trees
The trees recommended in Section E-10 have minimal maintenance
requirements. However, all trees must receive a certain degree of care, especially
during and immediately after planting. In order to protect an investment in new trees,
the developer and his or her agents should follow these guidelines when planting:
(a) Plant trees with a minimum caliper of two inches measured six inches
above the ground and a root ball no smaller than two feet in diameter.
(b) The best times for planting are early spring and early fall. Trees planted in
the summer run the risk of dehydration.
(c) Plant all trees at least three-and-a-half feet from the end of head-in
parking spaces in order to prevent damage from car overhangs.
(d) Dig the tree pit at least one foot wider than the root ball and at least six
inches deeper than the ball's vertical dimension.
(e) Especially in areas where construction activity has compacted the soil, the
bottom of the pit should be scarified or loosened with a pick ax or shovel.
(f) After the pit is dug, observe sub-surface drainage conditions. Where poor
drainage exists, the tree pit should be dug at least an additional twelve
inches and the soil amended to allow roots to grow properly.
(g) Backfill should include a proper mix of soil and fertilizer. All roots must be
completely covered. Backfill should be thoroughly watered as it is placed
around the roots.
(h) Immediately after it is planted, the tree should be supported with stakes
and guy wires to firmly hold it in place as its root system begins to develop.
Remove stakes and ties after one year.
(i) Spread at least three inches of mulch over the entire excavation in order to
retain moisture and keep down weeds. An additional three-inch saucer of
mulch should be provided to form a basin around the trunk of the tree.
This saucer helps catch and retain moisture.
(j) The lower trunks of new trees should be wrapped with burlap or paper to
prevent evaporation and sun scald. The wrapping should remain on the
tree for at least a year.
(k) Conscientious post-planting care, especially watering, pruning and
fertilizing, is a must for street and parking lot trees. Branches of new trees
may be reduced by as much as a third to prevent excessive evaporation.
For more detailed information regarding the planting and maintenance practices for trees, refer
to guidelines prepared by Harriet F. Phillips and entitled, Planting, Pruning and Annual
Maintenance Practices for Street and Park Trees, Appendix F.
Insert Exhibit E-6
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-6
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-7
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-8
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-9
E-9 Guide for Planting Shrubs
Shrubs planted for screening purposes should be given a proper culture and
sufficient room in which to grown. Shrubs should, at a minimum, be in three gallon
containers and a minimum of 30 inches in height. They should be planted no more than
18 inches apart in a diamond or staggered pattern. Many of the guidelines for tree
planting listed in Section E-5 also apply to shrubs. However, because specific
requirements vary considerably between shrub trees, this Appendix does not attempt to
generalize the needs of all shrubs. For detailed planting information or individual
species, refer to: Landscape Plants of the Southeast by R. Gordon Halfacre and Anne
R. Shawcroft.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-10
E-10 Lists of Recommended Trees and Shrubs
The following lists indicate plantings which will meet the screening and shading
requirements of Article XIX of the Land Development Ordinance. The lists are by no
means comprehensive and are intended merely to suggest the types of flora which
would be appropriate for screening and shading purposes. Plants were selected for
inclusion on these lists according to four principal criteria: general suitability for the
coastal plain section of North Carolina, ease of maintenance, tolerance of town
conditions, and availability from area nurseries. When selecting new plantings for a
particular site, a developer should first consider the types of plants which are thriving on
or near that site. Accordingly, native North Carolina species should often be favored.
However, if an introduced species has proven highly effective for screening or shading
in coastal plain towns, it too may be a proper selection.
Recommendations for suitable plants for buffering and parking lot landscaping are
contained in Appendix G and recommendations for street trees are listed in Appendix H.
Both sets of recommendations were prepared by Harriet F. Phillips and are used
extensively by the Edenton Tree Committee.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-11
E-11 Small Trees for Partial Screening
The following trees are recommended for use in all types of screens. Though
smaller than the trees listed in planting lists E-12 and E-13, each of these trees will
reach a height of at least 20 feet.
RIVER BIRCH (Betula nigra) Height: 20-40'; Spread: 8-16'.
The River Birch is a native tree which usually grows along stream banks.
In landscape design, it is adaptable to either high or low locations, but still
requires a lot of moisture. This tree has an interesting, papery bark and a
graceful branching habit. It has no special pest or maintenance problems.
AMERICAN HORNBEAM (Carpinus carolinia) Height: 20-30'; Spread: 15-20'.
This native tree has a natural yet refined appearance. It is slow growing,
but at maturity it serves as an excellent small shade tree. Its fluted, "muscular"
trunk is an interesting feature. In the wild, the American Hornbeam is common in
moist rich soil, yet, when used in landscape design, it is soil tolerant and does not
require an unusual amount of water. It has no pests and no special maintenance
problems.
EASTERN REDBUD (Cercis canadensis) Height: 20-30'; Spread: 12-25'.
This native tree is covered by beautiful pink flowers in the Spring and
develops a dense round crown when allowed to grown in direct sunlight. The
Redbud has some pests, and its fruit pods may present a litter problem, but it
recommends itself for being drought resistant and tolerant of polluted city air.
FLOWERING DOGWOOD (Cornus florida) Height: 15-30'; Spread: 15-20'.
The Dogwood is a native woodland tree which is very popular for
landscape planting. It is considered to be a fairly hardy tree, but, when planted in
direct sun, it must be frequently watered. A healthy dogwood will develop
attractive horizontal branches and a bushy crown. Dogwoods look best when
planted in groups or when used as an accent in borders. These trees should be
guarded against borers and other pests.
RUSSIAN OLIVE (Elaegnus augustifolia) Height: 15-20'; Spread: 20-30'.
The Russian Olive can withstand severe exposure and will grow in almost
any soil. Its toughness and wide spreading habit make it an exceptional screening
plant. The foliage is an attractive silver-gray color and its flowers, though
inconspicuous, are very fragrant. The Russian Olive is especially notable for its
rapid growth. It has no pest problems but it may require periodic trimming of dead
twigs.
MOUNTAIN SILVERBELL (Halesia monticola) Height: 20-40'; Spread: 20'.
Silverbells are attractive multi-stem trees which are native to the
southeastern United States. They are excellent plants for a natural effect and are
best placed where their small flowers and pods will be closely observed.
Compared to other trees on this list, its crown is more open and irregular. The
Mountain Silverbell has no pests, no maintenance problems, and no special soil
requirements.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-12
AMERICAN HOLLY (Ilex opaca) Height: 15-30'; Spread: 10-20'.
This familiar native tree possesses a pyramidal evergreen crown with
abundant red berries in the winter. It grows best in full sun and prefers moist yet
well drained soils. If the lower limbs are allowed to grow naturally, they will branch
to the ground. Hollies should be protected from high winds. The American Holly
is a relatively slow grower.
CRAPE MYRTLE (Lagerstroemia indica) Height: 15-25'; Spread: 15-20'.
This popular flowering tree is decorative and interesting in all seasons.
However, it should not be expected to stand alone as a screen. It is most
effective against an evergreen background. It grows best in direct sun and may
develop mildew problems when planted in shade. Crape Myrtle may be pruned to
a desired shape, but when left on its own it will form a densely branching crown.
SOURWOOD (Oxyndrum arboreum) Height: 20-30'; Spread: 10-15'.
Sourwoods are handsome native trees which are most effective in
landscape design when planted in groups. They are easy to transplant and as
each tree matures it assumes a slender form with upright branches. Sourwood
prefers relatively dry acid soils. Its only special maintenance problems may be
infestations of webworms.
CAROLINA CHERRY-LAUREL (Prunus caroliniana) Height: 20-30';
Spread: 15-20'.
This tree is prized for its dense evergreen foliage. It may be trimmed as a
hedge, but also serves as an excellent screen in its natural form. The Cherry-
Laurel grows rapidly and has no pests. However, it may not be as cold hardy as
other trees on this list.
CALLERY PEAR (Pyrus calleryana) Height: 20-40'; Spread: 20-30'.
The Callery Pear has recently gained popularity as a city street tree
because it is impervious to air pollution. Furthermore, it will grow in relatively
infertile soils. It is a beautiful, upright tree which grows rapidly and is long lived.
However, it may be subject to an assortment of pests and diseases. The
"Bradford" variety is not recommended, due to its poor branching structure
resulting in a short life.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-13
E-12 Large Trees for Evergreen Screening
The following trees are ideal for screening large scale areas such as shopping
centers and industrial sites. They are also effective in combination with other, smaller
screening plants. All three are moderate to fast growers. They are not considered to be
shade trees.
DEODAR CEDAR (Cedrus deodara) Height: 40-150'; Spread: 30'+.
The Deodar Cedar is a useful attractive evergreen. It should be
allowed plenty of room in order to assume its beautiful natural form. Its pendulous
branches should be allowed to touch the ground. It prefers relatively dry soils,
grows rapidly, and is easy to maintain. "True Cedars" such as the Deodar are not
native to North America, but they have become quite popular in the South as a
landscape tree.
SOUTHERN MAGNOLIA (Magnolia grandiflora) Height: 40-60';
Spread: 25'+.
Magnolias are striking trees which serve well as screens when their
branches are allowed to grow to the ground. Generally, this tree does well in city
conditions, but it should be planted in quite rich acidic soils and it requires a lot of
moisture. Furthermore, Magnolias require ample space for growth. It planted in
full sunlight, they will grow rapidly. Because it drops large waxy leaves, seed
pods, and flowers, the Magnolias may present a litter problem.
CANADIAN HEMLOCK (Tsuga canadensis) Height: 30-70';
Spread: 20'+.
It may be sheared or pruned to any shape, but when it grows naturally, its
graceful branches form an excellent high screen. The Hemlock prefers cooler,
partially shaded locations and does best in highly fertile soils. It grows quite
rapidly. Carolina hemlocks are not widely available and are not as reliable to
withstand heat as the Canadian Hemlock.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-14
E-13 Large Trees for Shading
The following trees may be used for screening, but they are recommended
especially for shading trees and parking lots. Unless otherwise noted, they will grow
rapidly. Each species will attain a mature spread of a least thirty feet.
NORWAY MAPLE (Acer platanoides) Height: 40-50'; Spread: 50'+.
Maples as a group are not particularly tolerant to city conditions. The
Norway Maple is an exception, however, as it is relatively invulnerable to air
pollution and has no special maintenance requirements. This tree assumes a
wide spreading form and provides very dense shade. In the autumn, the leaves
are a brilliant red and yellow. The Norway Maple grows rapidly, but it is subject to
ice and wind damage. Plenty of room should be available for its shallow roots and
it should be given ample water.
RED MAPLE (Acer rubrum) Height: 40-50'; Spread: 25'+.
This tree is an example of a Maple which is not recommended where there
will be high concentrations of air pollution. However, with its excellent shading
characteristics and beautiful colors, it should not be ignored. This tree grows
rapidly, but, unlike the Norway Maple, it does not become brittle with age. The
Red Maple is a native tree which is usually found in moist, even swampy areas,
but it adapts will to a variety of situations. Although subject to Maple insects and
diseases, it is usually a long lived tree. Cultivars of this species should be used.
GINKGO or MAIDENHAIR TREE (Ginkgo biloba) Height: 40-80'; Spread: 30'+.
The Ginkgo is a tree which is recommended for several outstanding
reasons. It is one of the oldest surviving species of trees. It is adaptable to any
soil, climate, or degree of exposure to the sun. It does quite well in the city. It has
no pests, no diseases, and no pruning requirements. In sum, it is a tree of
exceptional vitality. The N.C. Department of Forest Resources call the Ginkgo,
"probably the best all around street tree". Two reservations are worth stating,
however. First, only male trees should be planted because female Ginkgos bear
a messy, malodorous fruit. Second, the Ginkgo is a slow grower. When young, it
has a rather gangly appearance. It takes 25 to 30 years to assume its mature,
symmetrically spreading form.
HONEYLOCUST (Gleditisia triacanthos) Height: 50-75'; Spread: 25'+.
Its open, spreading form and feathery leaves may give the Honeylocust a
frail appearance, but it is in fact a quite sturdy tree, notable for its resistance to
city conditions. Grass and shrubs thrive beneath a Honeylocust because it casts
a light shade.
This tree is especially useful for its ability to be transplanted at a relatively
advanced age. Accordingly, it may be used for immediate effect in a landscape
design. The Honeylocust has its own pests and diseases, but it is fairly hardy.
Thornless and fruitless varieties such as "Moraine" are strongly recommended.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-15
SWEET GUM (Liquidamber styraciflua) Height: 60-100'; Spread: 50'+.
The Sweet Gum is a native bottomland tree which adapts to a variety of
soils. Its dense foliage and balanced form make it an excellent shade tree for
large open areas. The Sweet Gum needs sun and plenty of room to achieve
maximum size and beauty. In the fall, its leaves turn a brilliant wine and gold
color. Other than clean up of its prickly seed balls, the Sweet Gum poses no
special maintenance problems. Seedless varieties are available.
LONDON PLANE-TREE (Platanus acerifolia) Height: 70-100'; Spread: 30'+.
The London Plane-Tree is excellent for streets and parking lots for a
variety of reasons. It puts out its branches high enough above the ground so as
not to obstruct traffic. Its broadly spreading crown makes is especially useful
along wide streets. The London Plane is one of the world's hardiest trees in
polluted air. Although it needs plenty of sun and moisture, it is undemanding
about soil. Finally, it is very long lived. The London Plane-Tree is a hybrid of the
Sycamore, and like the Sycamore, it may suffer from certain diseases. However,
it is more resistant. Cultivars are available.
EASTERN RED OAK (Quercus rubra) Height: 50-70'; Spread: 40'+.
This tree grows faster than any other oak, two feet or more per year. It is
prized as a tree because its high branching habit gives it an ideal shape. The Red
Oak grows in almost any average soil and presents no special maintenance
problems.
WILLOW OAK (Quercus phellos) Height: 60-80'; Spread: 30'+.
This is another rapidly growing oak. It has proven to be quite successful
as a street and parking lot tree. Its slender leaves give it a finer texture than that
of other oaks, but it still casts excellent shade. The Willow Oak is native to
bottomland soils, and, thus, it needs plenty of moisture. It often spreads
majestically as it matures so it should be given ample room to grow. No
significant pests or diseases afflict the Willow Oak.
SCARLET OAK (Quercus coccinea) Height: 60-80'; Spread: 40'+.
This is a third oak which grows rapidly and is easy to maintain. The
Scarlet Oak is more difficult to transplant that the red or the willow, but it may be a
worthwhile selection for its excellent foliage.
LAUREL OAK (Quercus laurifolia) Height: 40-60'; Spread: 30'+.
The Laurel Oak grows more slowly than the other oaks listed above, but it
has the advantage of being nearly evergreen in piedmont sections of North
Carolina. It has proven to be a good street tree and does quite well under city
conditions. It presents no special maintenance problems.
LITTLELEAF LINDEN (Tilia cordata) Height: 30-50'; Spread: 25'+.
Lindens are notable for their exceptional symmetry and their ability to grow
in poor soils. The Littleleaf Linden requires plenty of moisture, but it has proven to
be useful for city planting and is especially recommended as a street tree. With
its many thick branches and abundant foliage, the Linden provides very dense
shade. It should be sprayed for aphids in order to prevent sticky droppings from
the leaves. Best suited for parks.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-16
E-14 Small Shrubs for Evergreen Screening
The following shrubs are recommended for informal (unclipped) hedges or
screens. Each species grows to a height of less than six feet; therefore, these shrubs
are appropriate for Semi-opaque Screens.
GLOSSY ABELIA (Abelia grandflora) Height: 4-6'; Spread: 3-5'.
Abelia is quite common in local nurseries and tends to be less expensive
than other shrubs on this list. It bears pale pink flowers throughout the summer.
Although it has proven quite popular for informal hedges, it has several
drawbacks. Abelia should be pruned and thinned to maintain its best form. It may
drop its leaves due to low temperatures, lack of pruning, or starvation.
WARTY BARBERRY (Barberis verruculosa) Height: 3-4'; Spread: 3-4'.
Barberrys as a group have proven to be excellent as hedge plants.
With their dense, spiny limbs, they are effective barriers in public places. The
Warty Barberry is a shrub with a neat, compact habit. It is soil tolerant and has no
special maintenance requirements. It grows slowly, but it will reach a height of 3
to 4 feet within five years.
WINTERGREEN BARBERRY (Berberis julianae) Height: 4-6'; Spread: 2-5'.
This is another Barberry which forms an impenetrable thorny hedge. In
fact, it grows even more densely than the Warty Barberry. It is pest resistant and
is very hardy. No pruning is required. Because it is fairly slow growing, it will take
eight to ten years to reach a height of 5 to 6 feet.
DWARF HORNED HOLLY (Ilex cornuta 'rotunda') Height: 3'; Spread: 3-4'.
This shrub is an excellent selection for a low hedge. It is soil tolerant and
requires no pruning or other special care once established. With its spiny leaves,
this plant appears to be and is, in fact, rugged. Like all hollies, it grows best in full
sun, but unlike others of its species, it produces bright red berries without both
sexes being present.
LITTLELEAF JAPANESE HOLLY (Ilex crenata 'microphylla') Height: 4-6';
Spread: 5-7'.
This holly is a good substitute for the more finicky and often more
expensive boxwood. It withstands pruning, but is quite attractive in its natural
form. Although considered to be slow growing, it will form a stiff 6-foot tall hedge
within ten years. The Littleleaf Japanese Holly grows will in both sun and shade
and does will in city conditions.
CONVEXA JAPANESE HOLLY (Ilex crenata 'convexa') Height: 4-6";
Spread: 3-5'.
The Convexa Japanese Holly is another good boxwood substitute. This
shrub is considered to be one of the most attractive, hardy and serviceable hollies
for landscape use. It is attractive in either a clipped or unclipped form. It grows
faster than the Littleleaf Japanese Holly.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-17
INDIA HAWTHORN (Raphiolepis indica) Height: 3-4'; Spread: 4-5'.
With its spreading, irregularly branching, the India Hawthorn makes an
excellent informal hedge. It is tolerant of a variety of soils and is fairly drought
resistant. However, it is not as cold tolerant and pest resistant as other shrubs on
this list.
AZALEAS and RHODODENDRONS (Rhododendron species) Height: 3'+;
Spread: 3'+.
Many varieties of azaleas and rhododendrons are dense and evergreen
and are, therefore, good screening material. The universal popularity of this large
shrub family belies the fact that its members must not be planted indiscriminately.
As a group, Rhododendron species prefer cool, moist, well drained, acidic soil
which has a fairly high organic content. They do best in shade or partial shade
particularly when they are planted in extremely hot or windy locations. Planting in
full sun is not recommended. In spite of these requirements, once established in
good soil with the correct culture and water, both rhododendrons and azaleas tend
to take care of themselves. Some relatively hardy and vigorous species are:
Kurume Azaleas (R. obtusum), Snow Azaleas (R. mucronatum), Indian Azaleas
(R. indicum), and the native Carolina Rhododendron (R. carolinianum).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-18
E-15 Large Shrubs For Evergreen Screening
The following shrubs are recommended for high hedges or screens. Each
species grows to a height of more than 6 feet; therefore, these shrubs are appropriate
for Opaque Screens.
THORNY ELAENGUS (Elaengus pungens) Height: 8-10'; Spread: 6-10'.
This shrub is tolerant of may adverse conditions. It will grow rapidly in
relatively infertile, dry soils. Its dense thorny branches form an excellent natural
hedge. It is one of the most common evergreen shrubs in the South.
BURFORD HOLLY (Ilex cornuta 'Burfordii') Height: 8-15';
Spread: 6-8'.
The Burford Holly has been called, "one of the best and most serviceable
of all broad leaved evergreens for general planting in the South". It is soil tolerant,
grows rapidly, requires no pruning, and usually has no pest problems. Its dark
green leaves lack the usual holly spines.
YAUPON HOLLY (Ilex vomitorial) Height: 5-15'; Spread: 6-12'.
This is another versatile holly, slower growing than the Burford, but equally
as adaptable to adverse conditions. It is a native shrub which has proven to be
one of the most drought resistant of all hollies. It may be clipped to maintain any
desired height. The Yaupon Holly is very heavily fruited and will attract birds.
LAUREL or SWEET BAY (Laurel nobilis) Height: 10-12'; Spread: 8-10'.
Laurel is a tough low maintenance shrub which does best in fertile, well
drained soils. Pruning is not required but it may be sheared to any desired form.
It screens well with a single row planting. The Laurel has been a popular
landscaping plant since ancient times.
JAPANESE PRIVET (Ligustrum japonicum) Height: 6-10'; Spread: 5-6'.
The Japanese Privet will survive almost any adversity including heat, cold,
drought, air pollution, and poor soil. Accordingly, it is one of the most popular
hedge plants in America. This and other Ligustrums are fast growing and
remarkable pest free. They are ideal as a high screen in large scale areas. It has
been said that if a Ligustrum will not grow in a particular location, then nothing will.
FORTUNE TEA OLIVE (Osmanthus fortunei) Height: 9-12'; Spread: 5-7'.
This Osmanthus hybrid is a popular, though non-descript, shrub. With its
vigorous growth, it will form an excellent screen or border. It is soil tolerant. The
Fortune Tea Olive is most notable for its inconspicuous yet highly fragrant flowers.
RED PHOTINIA (Photinia glabra) Height: 6-10'; Spread: 4-5'.
This low maintenance shrub is often selected for its glossy saw toothed
leaves which are a bright red when they first appear. Photinia forms a good
hedge when planted in full sun. It has somewhat looser foliage than other plants
on this list. In recent years, Red Photinia has become very popular in the
Southeast.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix E-19
LAURESTINUS VIBURNUM (Viburnum tinus) Height: 10-12';
Spread: 10-12'.
This Viburnum is prized for its luxuriant dark green foliage. It is valuable
for screens and, though sometimes clipped as a formal hedge, it can remain
uncut for years and still keep its good form. It grows best in medium fertile soils
and prefers dry conditions in the late summer. All Viburnums withstand city
conditions well.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-1
APPENDIX F
Planting, Printing and Annual Maintenance Practices
For Street and Park Trees
Prepared by: Harriet F. Phillips, Ph.D.
Herein are contained recommended practices to be followed in the planting and pruning
of Street and Park trees and those annual maintenance practices that will contribute to the
health and appearance of public plantings in the Town of Edenton, North Carolina.
I. Selection and Planting of Street and Park Trees
A. Time to Plant
Most hardy trees and shrubs can be moved successfully in the fall or spring.
The fall planting season extends from the time the leaves begin to turn color until
after the leaves have fallen (October-November in Edenton). The spring planting
season begins when the soil warms up and is dry enough to work and continues
until growth starts (March and April in Edenton). Fall planting has the advantage
of allowing the root system to grow in the late fall before top growth begins the
following spring. Planting can be done to the likelihood of greater moisture
stress.
B. Selection of Specimens
1. What to Look for When Purchasing Plants
Nursery-grown plants generally have better root and branch structure and
become established more quickly than trees collected from fields or woods.
The quality of plants selected can be as important in determining their
success in the landscape as proper selection of species, planting and
maintenance. A young plant with structural defects may never thrive and
produce a suitable specimen. A healthy well-grown nursery plant is a good
investment.
The following factors should be considered when purchasing trees and
shrubs:
a) Apparent health and vigor—live buds; no buds; no dried out wood; if
in leaf, normal color, density and size of leaves.
b) Healthy root system—free of kinks or circling roots; if in containers,
sufficient root volume to anchor plant but not pot bound.
c) Top-to-root ratio—moderate ratio of top growth to root system. A
small root system may not be able to support a large top.
d) Well-trained branch structure—straight trunk standing without
support, evenly distributed branches radially and vertically, branches
set as wide angles to the trunk; for vertically, branches set at wide
angles to the trunk; for shrubs—evenly distributed branches and
symmetry of growth.
e) Freedom from disease, insect pests or mechanical injury.
2. Size of Nursery Stock
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-2
Large shade trees are measured in caliper determined at 6” above the
soil line for trees up to and including 4” in diameter. Tree caliper is
measured 12” above the soil line for trees greater than 4” in diameter.
Trees are classified by size in one-fourth inch intervals up to 2” in diameter,
one-half inch intervals up to 4” in diameter, and 1” intervals over 4” in
diameter.
For public plantings, trees with a minimum one and one-fourth inch to one
and one-half inch caliper are recommended. Trees of this size become
established more quickly and are less subject to vandalism and accidental
breakage than smaller plants. Trees over 4” caliper are not routinely
recommended due to expense, need for heavy equipment and extra longterm
care required.
Small trees are measure in height determined at one foot intervals up to
6’ in height, and two foot intervals over 6’. Plants of 6’-8’ size are
recommended.
Shrubs are measured in height or spread depending on their growth
habit. They are classified in groups with 3” increments up to 18”, and in 6”
increments over 18” in height or spread. Availability of various size grades
depends somewhat on the species and its growth rate. A size intermediate
in the range of those available is recommended.
3. Types of Nursery Stock
Trees are handled “bare-root” (roots free of soil and wrapped in moist
packing moist packing material), “balled and burlapped” (dug with a ball of
soil, wrapped in burlap and tied), or in containers.
Dormant deciduous trees of less than 2” caliper may be available “bareroot”
for fall or early spring planting. Some kinds of small deciduous trees,
most large trees, and evergreens are moved “balled and burlapped” in the
spring or fall. Many deciduous and evergreen trees are shrubs are now
available at all times of the year in containers ranging from one (1) gallon to
ten (10) gallons or more in size. Balled and burlapped and container grown
plants tend to suffer less transplanting shock than plants moved bare-root.
C. Planting Instructions
1. Preplant Care
If planting can not be done immediately after plants are purchased, they
must be kept cool and moist. Bare-root plants should be heeled-in by
digging a trench in a shaded location large enough to accommodate the
root system without crowding. Lay the tree roots in the trench and mound
moist soil, wood shavings, or peat over the roots. Store balled and
burlapped plants in the shade and keep the root ball moist. Take care not
to break the root ball when moving the plants. Container-grown plants
should be kept shaded and watered.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-3
2. Preparing the Planting Hole
A properly dug planting hole is roomy with good bottom drainage. Holes
need be no deeper than needed to allow the plant’s crown to sit an inch or
so above the surrounding soil level. For bare-root trees, make the hole
wide enough to accommodate the roots when they are spread out naturally.
For balled and burlapped and container plants, dig the hole twice the
diameter of the root ball container.
Loosen the soil on the bottom and sides of the hole to provide easier
penetration of developing roots. The soil dug from the planting hole is
satisfactory fro backfilling around the roots if it is a well-drained, average
loam. Heavy clay soil or very sandy soil may benefit from thoroughly mixing
organic matter (compost, damp peat) with the backfill.
3. Planting Care Root Plants
a) Soak root system in water about twelve (12) hours.
b) Remove any broken or bruised roots.
c) Mound and firm the soil in the center of the planting hole to hold
the crown of the plant up with the roots spread out naturally at about
a 6” depth.
d) Holding the trunk so the previous soil line is 1-2” above finished
ground level, gradually fill and tamp soil around roots taking care
not to break or bruise the roots and to avoid air pockets.
4. Planting Balled and Burlapped Plants
a) Carefully set the ball in the planting hole without cracking the ball
of soil. The ball should sit about an inch or two higher than the
surrounding soil. Add backfill under the ball to bring to correct
height.
b) Check that the ball is centered and the trunk aligned vertically.
c) Alternatively backfill and firm the soul halfway up the ball.
d) Loosen the twine and burlap from around the top and shoulder of
the ball. Fold the burlap back into the hole or cut it off.
e) Finish filling the hole making sure the burlap is well buried.
5. Container Plants
a) Handle the plant by the container, not the trunk.
b) Carefully remove the container (cut it, if necessary).
c) Loosen the root ball by hand or slit with a knife to provide good
soil contact. If roots are matted around the bottom and sides of
the ball or circling the ball, remove or straighten them. Removing
as much as one-half of the roots from the outer 1” of the ball
should not harm the plant.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-4
d) Set the plant in the hole so that it sits an inch or two higher than
the surrounding soil.
e) Alternately fill and firm the soil around the root ball.
6. Finishing the Job
a) Shape the soil on top of the hole to form a broad shallow saucer
with the rim just inside the lip of the original hole.
b) Fill the basin slowly with the water. Water thoroughly.
c) After the water has soaked in, reshape the basin to make the
base of the plant slightly higher than the bottom of the basin.
Unless the soil has washed off the top of the root ball, do not add
soil over the root ball to obtain the desired basin shape.
d) Place 2”-3” of mulch (wood chips, shredded bark, etc.) over the
basin and surrounding lip to reduce moisture loss, moderate soil
loss, moderate soil temperature, and reduce settling and cracking
of the soil.
e) Fertilizer at planting is not necessary or recommended.
f) See directions for pruning “Newly Planted Trees”, page F-11.
g) Staking is not always needed to make a tree stand upright, but
trees in public planting areas need to be staked to help them
achieve good root anchorage and protect them from vehicles,
lawn mowers, animals and vandals.
Drive two or three 2 x 2” stakes one and one-half feet deep into the soil
just clear of the planting hole. If wind is not a problem, the stakes should be
placed so as to provide maximum protection from traffic and equipment. In
moderate to strong wind situations, an imaginary line drawn through the
support stakes should be at right angles to the wind direction.
Wire covered with hose or tubing to protect the trunk, elastic webbing,
belting, or polyethylene tape can be used for ties. Ties are located near the
top of the stake and a figure eight loop is made between trunk and stake.
The ties should not be within two and one-half feet from the top of the tree
in order to avoid unnecessary stress on the trunk. (See Figure 1, page F-
14).
II. Annual Maintenance
A. Newly Planted Trees (1st and 2nd growing season after planting)
The first two years after planting are critical in the life of a tree. For street
trees they are particularly difficult because of the often less than ideal site
conditions. It is better to plant a smaller number of trees at one time with
reasonable assurance of care for several years thereafter, than to over plant and
neglect them. The following instructions pertain to trees but, with the exception of
stake and tie care, apply equally well to shrub plantings.
Seasonal care includes a minimum of two visits to each tree the first two growing
seasons: one in March and one in August.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-5
First Season: The following maintenance operations should be performed at
each visit:
1. Check condition of mulch. Aerate (loosen) with pitchfork if tightly
packed. Add new mulch to maintain 2-3” level.
2. Remove weeds and grass from mulched area. These compete with the
tree for water and increase the likelihood of mower damage to tree.
3. Check stakes and ties. Keep taut.
4. Prune off any broken branches in proper manner (see Where and How
to Make a Pruning Cut.”, page F-9)
5. Check health of plant including possible attack by insects and disease.
Seek advice of extension agent for control measures.
6. Water thoroughly, if needed. Deep watering is necessary to avoid
shallow root systems and unstable trees. Additional watering should be
done, one a week whenever rainfall levels during the growing season
are less than 1” per month.
Second Season: Same operations as first year except:
1. Remove stakes and ties unless trunk and root anchorage appear to be
weak, in which case, leave stakes and ties one more year. Removing
all wire and tie material is especially important to avoid its cutting into
the bark and girdling the trunk.
2. Fertilize the tree just before new growth starts in the spring. A fertilizer
containing only nitrogen is sufficient for most new trees. It can be
applied to the soil surface in readily soluble form (ammonium nitrate,
ammonium sulfate) at the rate of .10-.25 lb-sq. yd. and watered in.
B. Established Plants
Plants in the ground three of more years are usually considered
“established”. The following procedures for the maintenance of street and
park plantings should be done each year.
1. Late Winter to Early Spring
a) Prune to train young plants for proper shape and branch structure.
(See directions for “Newly Planted and Young Trees, pg 11). To avoid
later problems and the need for heavy equipment it is wise to correct
structural defects early in the life of a plant.
b) Apply fertilizer, as needed, to plants showing poor growth and/or
foliage color. Fertilize plants in restricted root zone areas (e.g.
downtown Broad Street) annually. (See following section on
Fertilization).
c) Aerate and replenish mulch in park shrub borders.
d) Broad-leaf weed control for lawn areas in parks.
e) Perform previously outlines spring maintenance for newly planted
trees.
2. Mid-Summer
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-6
a) Water plants weekly in areas of restricted root space whenever
rainfall is less than 1” per month. Water other trees and shrubs if
signs of wilting occur.
b) Use Poast or Fusilade with a non-ionic surfactant (Enduce, Agri-Dex)
for grass control in shrub borders and for edging.
c) Check for insect and disease problem. Ask county extension agent
for diagnosis and recommended control measures.
d) Prune hedges and shrubs to keep within bounds.
3. Late Summer
a) Prune out dead, diseased and broken limbs according to
recommended procedures (See page F-9).
b) Remove excessive basel sucker growth and limb up street trees to
provide proper clearance and sight distance.
4. All Seasons
After storms, cleanly prune stub ends of broken limbs within the crown of
the tree back to the next largest branch.
Broken and town stubs are prime decay entry points and lead to major
problems if not cleanly pruned at the time of breakage.
C. Fertilization
The extent to which fertilizers are applied to established plantings
depends on the fertility of the soil in which they are growing. If plants are
making good growth and have good foliage color, the soil is probably fertile
enough. On plantings showing signs of malnutrition, fertilizer is best applied
in the spring about the time buds are beginning to grow. The results of a
soil analysis can provide recommended treatment and application rates for
general fertilization and micronutrients needs. The following information
contains broad guidelines for application methods and rates for various
plantings.
1. Shrub Beds
A 5-10-5 fertilizer may be broadcast on the beds at a rate of 25
lbs/1000 sq ft. Individual plants, depending on size would receive 1 to 3
or 4 handfuls.
Several application methods are used, but some require specialized
equipment for injection of fertilizer. More common methods include
surface broadcasting and soil incorporation.
In non-lawn areas, surface application is the easiest and most
effective method for nitrogen and micronutrient fertilizers. The rate of
application depends on tree size. Apply fertilizer starting two and one-half
feet from the trunk to a distance extending 25-30% beyond the spread of
the branches.
For trees up to 3” in diameter:
5-10-5: 2 lbs/inch trunk diameter
10-6-4: 1 lb/inch trunk diameter
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-7
For trees over 3” in diameter:
5-10-5: 5 lb/inch trunk diameter
10-6-4: 3 lb/inch trunk diameter
If rate is indicated in excess of 20 lbs. of 5-10-5 or 10 lbs. of 10-6-4 in
100 square feet of surface area, divide the fertilizer in two or more portions
and apply at 4-6 week intervals. When roads and sidewalks cover much of
the surface area under the plant, the rate of application should be reduced
and the amount apportioned in several smaller applications.
For plants in lawn area, soil incorporation is a more effective method of
fertilizer application. Fertilizer is placed in holes bored in the soil to more
directly place nutrients in the root zone area and avoid over fertilization of
the lawn.
Holes should be drilled with an auger or punched with a soil corer to
avoid soil compaction resulting from merely pounding holes into the soul.
Drill holes 10-12” deep and 2-3’ apart beginning away from the trunk to
avoid injury to the main support roots. Continue drilling holes in a spiral
pattern extending 25-30% beyond the spread of the branches. Pour one (1)
cup of 5-10-5 or one-half cup 10-6-4 in each hole. Fill holes with water.
After water drains, refill hole with good topsoil.
Plants located in paved areas providing limited root space and little
surface soil area benefit from annual fertilizer application. Micronutrient
(e.g. iron and zinc) deficiencies may also be more common and require
special attention. Spring surface application at a reduced rate is
recommended for such plants.
Slow release fertilizers are available which release small amounts of
nutrients over 6-18 months. These are often expensive and no more
effective than other methods, but may be used for plants that are difficult to
reach for more regular fertilizations.
III. General Pruning Principles.
Successful pruning requires knowledge of plant growth and development,
growth habits of different kinds of plants and an ability to mentally envision the
future from of a given specimen. It is not possible to provide directions for every
situation that necessitates pruning. The following are only general guidelines.
Additional references should be consulted for further information of handling
particular problems or plant species. Only with good pruning and training can the
maximum aesthetic and functional benefit be acquired from plants.
A. Purposes of Pruning
One must have a clear purpose in mind before any pruning is done. This
purpose will dictate the time of pruning and the kind of cuts to be made. Valid
reasons for pruning include:
1. To Train Young Plants—The arrangement, attachment, and size of scaffold
branches (main structural branches) can be controlled to produce vigorous
and mechanically strong plants. The early removal of crowded, rubbing and
crossing branches will eliminate later
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-8
problems. Pruning should take advantage of the plant’s natural growth habit.
2. To Maintain Health and Appearance—Pruning must be done to remove
dead, diseased and broken branches. A dense top may be thinned to allow
for passage of light and to reduce wind resistance.
3. To Control Plant Size—Control of plant height and spread may be needed to
reduce interference with utility wires, views and traffic. Initial selection of
plants with a size and growth habit compatible with site conditions can
minimize such pruning, but existing plantings may require pruning to direct
their growth in an appropriate manner.
4. For Safety—The safety of citizens and property must always be considered.
Trees or branches that through age, storm damage, old pruning wounds or
disease become sufficiently decayed internally to pose an imminent threat to
people or property must be removed promptly.
B. When to Prune
The correct time to prune depends of the type of plant, its condition and the
results desired. Some general rules are as follows:
1. Light pruning can be done anytime. Unwanted growth is most easily
removed when it is small.
2. Broken, dead, weak or hazardous branches should be removed
whenever they occur. It is often more easy to see theses problems
during the growing season.
3. Young plants are best trained during the dormant season from after leaf
fall to before the period of rapid spring growth. Pruning at this time
results in more rapid plant development and wound healing. A few
broadleaf evergreens grow most rapidly after the weather warms up in
late spring and pruning should be delayed until spring growth occurs.
4. Control of plant growth is best achieved when pruning is done soon
after growth is complete for the season. Such pruning should not be so
severe or early to encourage new shoot growth. In general, mid to late
summer pruning results in maximum growth reduction.
5. Trees and shrubs with desirable flowers should be pruned according to
the time the plant blooms. Plants that bloom in spring should be pruned
near the end of their blooming period. Plants that bloom in summer or
fall should be pruned in winter.
6. Research has shown that pruning wounds heal 20% more quickly in the
spring due to decay fungi produce spores. Therefore, fall pruning is
discouraged.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-9
C. Basic Pruning Methods
The type of pruning cut not only affects the initial appearance of the branch
or plant but also determines growth. The following pruning methods produce
quite different growth responses.
1. Heading back is cutting a one year old shoot back to a bud (“tip pruning”),
or cutting an older branch back to a stub or a munch smaller later. Heading
back a large branch is often called “topping”, “lopping” or “stubbing” (See
Figure 2, page F-14).
In response to tip pruning, new growth develops from one or more buds
just below the cut (See Figure 3, page F-15). The result is denser branching.
The response to topping or stubbing is a flush of shoots growing from
latent buds in the trunk. These shoots are new and will branch internally.
These can break out easily as well as increase wind resistance within the
crown.
Tip pruning is acceptable in the training of young trees. Topping or
stubbing is prohibited by the Edenton Tree Ordinance. (See later section of
correct pruning of Mature Trees.)
2. Thinning Out is the removal of a lateral branch at its point of origin of
shortening a branch by cutting to a lateral large enough to assume the
terminal role (Figure 4, page F-15). Reducing the height of a tree or
branch by cutting back to a large lateral is called “drop-crotching”. The
lateral back to which a branch is cut should have at least one-third the
diameter of the branch removed.
The growth response to thinning is distributed more evenly throughout the
plant than the response to heading. The plant becomes more open and
retains a more natural form. Thinning is the more commonly used pruning
method.
D. Where and How to Make a Pruning Cut
The location of the pruning cut in relation to branch attachment determines
the size of the wound, the rate of wound healing and exposure to decay
organisms. The closeness of the cut also affects the amount of regrowth from
the base of the cut and the strength of attachment when a branch is thinned to a
lateral.
Current research indicated pruning cuts should be made close to, but
beyond, the branch bark ridges and the collar at the base of a branch. Branch
bark ridges are areas, rings or lines of bulging bark that may be rough and
darker in color than the surrounding bark (See Figure 5, page F-16).
This zone is a naturally strong physical barrier to decay. Pruning just outside
the branch bark ridges is not the same as a “flush” cut, which is made as close
as possible to the base of the branch. Flush cuts produce unnecessarily large
wounds and increase the likelihood of decay.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-10
In removing small branches with hand shears of long-handled lopping
shears, make a close cut by placing the blade just to the outside of the branch
bark ridge of the limb to be removed (Figure 6). In heading back to a bud, a
diagonal cut is made about one-fourth inch above the bud. The cut should be
made above a bud that will grow in the desired direction (See Figures 6 & 7, p.
F-16, p. F-17).
Limbs over 1” in diameter must usually be cut with a saw. Those over 2”
should be cut in three steps to avoid splitting and tearing the bark. The first cut
should be made on the underside of the branch, 1-2 feet from the crotch. Cut the
branch about one-fourth of the way through or until the saw begins to bind. The
second cut is made from the top within 1-2 inches out from the first cut. The third
cut is made just beyond the branch back ridge or color to remove the stub (see
Figure 8, page F-17). If the stub is heavy it should be removed with two cuts
instead of one, the first cut made from the underside.
Removing a large branch with a narrow crotch angle is similar to the above
except the third cut should be made upward at a 30-40 degree angle to the
actual union of the branch and trunk. The actual union is often much lower than
the apparent junction where they touch (See Figure 9, page F-18).
The use of pruning paints the cover the surface of the wound is of doubtful
value. People think it looks “professional”, but current research indicates that no
dressing currently available in the United States will prevent decay of influence
the rate of wound healing. In fact, some indications are that wound dressings
can actually increase decay when they crack with age and allow water to
accumulate on the cut surface.
A correctly made, smooth pruning cut is the best insurance against decay. It
is wise to prune branches as soon as it becomes evident of their need for
removal. Smaller wounds heal more rapidly. In order to make smooth cuts, tools
should be kept sharp and when pruning diseased or decayed wood, tools should
also be disinfected with rubbing alcohol before using them on healthy plants.
E. Pruning Trees of Different Ages
1. Newly Planted and Young Trees
At planting, prune only broken or rubbing branches. Other branches,
however low on the trunk should not be removed at this time as they will provide
nutrition to the plant during the critical first years of establishment. Do not
indiscriminately prune back ends of branches or the main trunk. Continue to
remove only broken branches and dead twigs during the first growing seasons.
The third year after planting, prune only the crown of the plant. This process
will continue over several years. A young tree should be left with more branches
than will ultimately be wanted to provide for the greatest total growth.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-11
Start by removing or heading back those branches that are clearly unwanted,
such as those growing inward across the crown or those with narrow angles of
attachment to the trunk (See figure 10, page F-18).
Trees that form a central leader (e.g. Ginkgo, Pines, Holly) should be pruned
to maintain a leader. This may be achieved by heading back competing laterals
(See Figure 11, page F-19), removing vigorous erect watersprouts (See Figure
12, page F-19), or removing the leader if it has already been outgrown by a
vigorous lateral (See Figure 13, page F-19).
Trees along streets and sidewalks will need to have their major scaffold limbs
at least above head height, but until trees have reached the desired height of the
lowest scaffold, some lower lateral branched are allowed to remain. Select
laterals of weak to moderate vigor spaced 4-12 inches apart to remain as
temporary branches to protect and nourish the trunk. As the tree develops a
sturdy trunk and top, gradually remove the temporary branches.
Eventually, the main permanent scaffold branches of a tree must be
selected. Depending on the plant’s size and growth rate, this process may take
several years. When selecting permanent limbs it is important to remember that
the position of a limb on a trunk remains essentially the same throughout the life
of the tree. As the branch increases in diameter, the distance to the ground
actually decreases (See Figure 14, page F-19)
Scaffold branches should have wide angles of attachment to the trunk,
should be vertically spaced 12-24 inches apart and should be evenly spaced all
around the trunk (See Figure 15, page F-20).
Trees that do not naturally form a central leader but instead have a vaseshaped
habit or multiple trunks (e.g., Elms, Crepe myrtle) require care in
selection of scaffold branches. Vertical spacing is critical to avoid weak branch
structure.
2. Mature Trees
Mature street tree plantings need to be evaluated for clearance for vehicular
and pedestrian traffic. Training young trees for suitable height of lowest branch
may eliminate the need for pruning; however, lower limbs may have bent
downward over time necessitating pruning to raise the crown (also called crown
lifting and heading-up). When raising the crown, thin back to a more upright
large lateral or remove the limb entirely. Cutting back to a small upright lateral
often results in the need to further pruning as the branch eventually loses vigor
due to loss of photosynthetic foliage area and shade from upper branches.
Maintain a tree’s symmetry by pruning branches opposite those removed in
raising the crown.
Crown lifting may need to be done over several years to avoid removing too
much foliage and thereby weakening the tree. Removing too many lower limbs at
once also decreases a tree’s stability. For a
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-12
properly balanced tree, at least one-half of the foliage should be on
branches originating in the lower two thirds of the trunk.
Pruning may also be needed over time to correct branches interfering with
utility wires. Both trees and wires are essential for the health and prosperity of
the community. Inexperienced topping results in complaints and unnecessary
butchering of trees. Careful tree trimming can remedy the problem and preserve
the shape of trees. Directional pruning has the most lasting benefits. This
method involved opening paths for wires through trees by removing smaller
branches. The branches selected to remain are those growing away from the
wires.
Initial selection of plants with a mature size and shape appropriate for the
planting site will reduce the need for pruning of mature trees to control growth.
Existing plants and changing site conditions will still make crown reduction a
necessary pruning operation. Crown reduction is the thinning of branches to
reduce spread, height or to remove limbs jutting out beyond the general outline
of the tree. Size can be most effectively maintained if crown reduction is begun
as the plant reaches maximum acceptable size. Pruning will be more difficult and
the larger wounds harder to heal if pruning is delayed.
Topping is often mistakenly done to reduce size. Topping is cutting main
branches back to stubs with little regard for their location. Size reduction is
correctly done by a thinning process called “drop-crotching” (see F- 9). This
practice retains the natural shape of the tree, reduces regrowth of watersprouts
and minimizes the chance of decay in the wound (See Figure 16, page F-20).
Dense headed trees may benefit from crown thinning to open up the crown
and allow better light penetration, more productive growth and lessen wind
resistance. Start from the top and work down removing small, weaker, heavily
shaded inner branches. If a tree was poorly trained, cuts up to six inch diameter
may be needed to remove branches arising to close together.
Stubs of limbs broken by storms and wind should be pruned back to the next
larger branch as a routine practice of storm clean up (See Figure 17, page F-20).
Such stubs are the major point of entry for decay causing organisms. Their
subsequent decay makes them a hazard to persons and property.
Mature trees may also require routine removal of basal sucker growth and
vigorous watersprouts arising from earlier pruning wounds.
3. Aging Trees
Older trees will require periodic cleaning out to remove dead, dying of broken
wood. Watersprouts arising from old pruning cuts should also be removed as
close to their base as possible. Examine old pruning wounds for defects and
signs of decay.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-13
Crown reduction may be called for where the branch system seems
inadequate for the height and weight carried, or the tree as a whole is in
declining health. Some kinds of trees, such as Oak, Elm and Linden, will tolerate
relatively severe pruning, others, such as Maple, Sycamore and Ash, are less
tolerant. As previously stated, drop-crotching is the correct procedure for crown
reduction. Large pruning wounds on older trees rarely heal and can be expected
to show signs of decay in the future.
Crown renewal of restorative pruning may be needed on trees that were
pruned improperly in earlier years. Crown renewal is the practice of reshaping a
tree that has been topped to restore a more natural form, improve health and
give it greater structural strength. A tree is probably worth saving if the main
scaffold branched and trunk are sound or can be cut back to sound wood. A
dead branch stub that has a collar of live wood should be cut just at the outer
edge of the collar (See Figure 18, page F-21). Branches that have grown from
topped scaffold branches should be thinned until only 1-3 remain on each
scaffold. These remaining branches should be thinned back to large, low laterals
to reduce possible wind damage and to encourage stronger attachment. Crown
renewal is best done during the growing season gradually over a 2-4 year period.
Restorative work on topped trees must be recognized as a stop gap method and
action should be taken to provide eventual replacements for such plants.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-14
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-15
Figure 3
Figure 4
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-16
Figure 5
Figure 6
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-17
Figure 7
Figure 8
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-18
Figure 9
Figure 10
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-19
Figure 11
Figure 12, 13
Figure 14
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-20
Figure 15
Figure 16
Figure 17
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-21
Figure 18
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix F-22
References and Photo Credits
Brown, G.E. 1972. The Pruning of Trees, Shrubs, and Conifers. Faber & Faber, London.
Harris, R.W. 1983. Arboriculture. Prentice-Hall, N.J.
Hartmann, H.T., W.J. Flocker and A.M. Kofranek, 1981. Plant Science: Growth, Development
and Utilization of Cultivated Plants. Prentice-Hall, N.J.
Pirone, P.P. 1972. Tree Maintenance. Oxford University Press, N.Y.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-1
APPENDIX G
Plants for Buffer and Parking Lot Landscaping
Prepared by: Dee Phillips
September, 1988
The following plants, grouped by size, are suitable for use in northeastern North
Carolina. The list is meant to provide suggestions for developers and is by no means to provide
suggestions for developers and is by no means inclusive. Effective use of these plants can be
obtained only with attention to their specific cultural requirements.
A further list of shade trees for use in parking areas and selected references on
landscape plants is included in a separate handout entitled, “Street Trees Approved for Use”.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-2
Groundcovers
Ajuga reptans, Carpet Bugle
Cotoneaster dammeri, Bearberry Cotoneaster
Cotoneaster salicifolius, “Scarlet Leader”, Scarlet Leader Cotoneaster
Euonvmus fortunei, “Coloratus”, Wintercreeper
Hedera helix, English Ivy
Hypericum calycinum, St. John’s Wort
Juniperus chinesis, “Sea Spray”, Sea Spray Juniper
Juniperus conferta, “Blue Pacific”, Blue Pacific Juniper
Juniperus conferta, “Emerald Sea”, Emerald Sea Juniper
Juniperus horizontalis, “Bar Harbor”, Bar Harbor Juniper
Juniperus horizontalis, “Blue Chip”, Blue Chip Juniper
Juniperus horizontalis, “Wiltonii”, Blue Rug Juniper
Lirope spicata, Lilyturf
Lirope spicata, “Variegata”, Variegated Creeping Liriope
Festuca ovina, “Glauca”, Blue Fescue
Ophiopogon japonicus, Mondo Grass
Vinca minor, Periwinkle
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-3
Shrubs to 3’
Abelia x *grandiflora, “Sherwoodie”, Dwarf Abelia
Aspidistra elotior, Cast-iron plant
Cotoneaster salicifoluius, “Autumn Fire”, Autumn Fire Cotoneaster
Euonymus japonica, “Microphylla”, Box Leaf Euonymus
Ilex crenata, “Helleri”, Heller Holly
Ilex crenata, ”Repandens”, Repandens Holly
Ilex vometoria, “Schilling’s Dwarf”, Schilling’s Holly
Janiperus conferta, Shore Juniper
Janiperus sargentii, Sargent Juniper
Lirope muscari, “Big Blue”, Big Blue Lilyturf
Nandina domestica, “Nana”, Dwarf Nandina
Nandina domestica, “Harbour Dwarf”, Harbour Dwarf Nandina
Pittosporum tobira, “Wheeler’s Dwarf”, Dwarf Pittosporum
Rhododendron, “Gumpo”, Gumpo Azaleas
Spiraea x bumalda, Bumald Spirea
Yucca filamentosa, Beargrass
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-4
Shrubs 3’-5’
Abelia x grandiflora, Glossy Abelia
Clethra alnifolia, Summersweet
Cytisus scoparius, Scotch Bloom
Diervilla sessilifolia, Southern Bush honeysuckle
Hydrangea macrophylla, Bigleaf Hydrangea
Hydrangea guercifolia, Oakleaf Hydrangea
Ilex crenata, “Burfordi Nana”, Dwarf Burford Holly
Ilex cornuta, “Carissa”, Carissa Holly
Ilex cornuta, “Rotunda”, Dwarf Chinese Holly
Ilex crenata, “Compacta”, Dwarf Japanese Holly
Ilex glabra, “Compacta”, Compact Inkberry
Ilex verticillata, “Nana”, Dwarf Winterberry
Ilex vomitoria, “Nana”, Dwarf Yaupon
Kerria japonica, Japanese Kerria
Ligustrum japonicum, “Coriaceum”, Dwarf Japanese Provet or Curlyleaf Privet
Prunus laurocerasus, “Otto Luyken”, Dwarf Cherry Laurel
Prunus laurocerasus, “Schipkaensis”, Shipka Cherry Laurel
Raphiolepis indica, Indian Hawthorne, (e.g. “Clara”, “Janis”, “Pinkie”, “Snow White”)
Rhododendron, Glenn Dale Hybrids (e.g. “Fashion”, “Glacier”)
Rhododendron obtusum, Kurum Azalea (e.g. “Coral Bells”, “Hino Crimson”)
Rhus aromatica, Fragrant sumac
Spiraea nipponica, “Snowmound”, Snowmound Spirea
Weigela florida, Weigela
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-5
Shrubs 5’ to 8’
Acuba japonica, Japanese Acuba
Acuba japonica, “Variegata”, Gold Dust Plant
Buddleia davidii, Butterfly Bush
Calvcanthus floridus, Carolina Allspice
Cortaderia sellowana, Pampas Grass
Forsythia intermedia, Border Forsyhis
Ilex certicillata, Winterberry
Juniperus chinensis, “Pfitzerana”, Pfitzer Juniper
Nandina domestica, Heavenly Bamboo
Pyracantha coccinea, “Navajo”, Navajo Firethorn
Rhodedendron indica, Indica Azalea (e.g. “Formosa”, “George Taber”, “Mrs. G.G. Gerbing”,
“Pride of Mobile”, “Southern Charm”)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-6
Shrubs 8’ to 12’
Acanthopanax sieboldianus, Five-leaf Aralia
Buxus sempervirens, American boxwood
Buxus microphylla, var. japonicus, Japanese Boxwood
Camellia japonica, Japanese Camellia
Clevera japonica, Japanese Cleyera
Cytisus x praecox, Warminster Broom
Euonymus kiautschovicus, “Manhattan”, Spreading Euonymus
Hibiscus syriacus, Rose of Sharon
Ilex crenata, “Convexa”, Blisterleaf Holly
Illicum parviflorum, Anise-tree
Juniperus chinesis, “Hetzii”, Hetz Juniper
Ligustrum japonicum, Japanese Privet
Osmanthus heterophyllus, Holly Osmanthus
Pyracantha coccinea, “Mohave”, Mohave Firethorn
Raphiolepis umbellata, Yeddo Hawthorn (e.g. “Majestic Beauty”, “Springtime”)
Viburnum japonicum, Japanese Viburnum
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-7
Shrubs 12’ or More
Eleagnus pungens, Thorny Eleagnus
Eleagnus umbellate, Autumn Eleagnus
Ilex cornuta, “Burfordii”, Burford Holly
Ligustrum lucidum, Wax-Leaf Ligustrum
Myrica cerifera, Wax Myrtle
Osmanthus x fraseri, Red-tip
Pittosporum tobira, Japanese Pittosporum
Podocarpus macrophyllus, English Cherry Laurel
Pyracantha coccinea, “Teton”, Teton Firethorn
Platycladus orientalis, “Oriental Arborvitae”
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-8
Small Trees 10’-20’
Aesculus pavia, Red Buckeye
Amelanchier arborea, Juneberry
Chionanthus virginicus, Fringetree
Cotinus coggygria, Smoketree
Ilex attenuate, “Nellie R. Stevens, Nellie Stevens Holly
Magnolia stellata, Star magnolia
Vitex agnus-castus, Chastetree
Medium Trees 20’-35’
Acer palmatum, Japanese Maple
Albizia julibrissin, Mimosa
Crataegus phaenopyrum, Washington Thorn
Ilex opaca, American Holly
Ilex x attenuata, “Foster #2” Foster Holly
Ilex, “Savannah”, Savannah Holly
Ilex vomitoria, Yaupon
Koelreuteria paniculata, Golden Raintree
Magnolia x soulangina, Saucer Magnolia
Pinus thunbergiana, Japanese Black Pine
Prunus coroliniana, Carolina Cherry Laurel
Viburnum plicatum, var. tomentosum, Doublefile Viburnum
Large Trees 40’ or More
Betula nigra, River Birch
Cedrus atlantica, Blue Atlas Ceder
Credrus deodora, Deodar Cedar
Cupressocyprus leylandii, Leland Cypress
Pinus elliottii, Slash Pine
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix G-9
Pinus taeda, Loblolly Pine
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix H-1
APPENDIX H
Street Trees Approved for Use
Botanical name, common name and occasional descriptive comments are given for each plant.
Cultivars are specified where appropriate to distinguish superior selections of a species. In
some cases, use is restricted only to specified cultivars.
Large Trees
 American Holly (Ilex opaca)—Evergreen. To 50 feet but slow growing. Sun/shade.
Fruits best in sun. Best left color in shade. Good specimen of background plant.
Many cultivated varieties available. Berries on female plants only but need male to
pollinate. Pyramidal shape. Requires male and female for fruit. Native.
 Atlantic White Cedar (Chamaecyparis thyoides)—Evergreen. 40 to 50 feet. Sun.
Native to southern swamps where stands provide cover to wildlife. Medium growth
rate. Green/bluish needles.
 Black Cherry (Prunus serotina)—To 80 feet but few attain this height. Sun for fruit
production. Shade tolerant. Plant near hedgerows for maximum benefit to wildlife
and to minimize leaf and fruit drip in traffic areas. Has messy fruit and insects.
Pyramidal shape. Fast growth.
 Eastern Red Cedar (Juniperus virginiana)—Evergreen. 40 to 60 feet. Sun/light
shade. Tolerates wide range of soils. Grows fast; can be pruned. Good windbreak.
Birds love berries. Pyramidal shape. Medium growth. Has exfoliating bark.
 Green Ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica)—Deciduous. Average size is 50 to 60 feet.
Sun/shade tolerant. Prefers sun. Rugged, fast growing, good breeding, nesting sites
for birds. Seeds provide food for wildlife.
 Ginkgo biloba (Maidenhair Tree)—50 to 80 feet. Slow to medium growth. Full sun.
Male plants only, seed grown plants prohibited, known male cultivars include:
o Autumn Gold—Nice fall color
o Lakeview—Cone form
o Mayfield—Narrow Habit
o Palo Alto—Broad Spreading
o Princeton Sentry (narrow-upright habit)—Tapered Trunk
o Santa Cruz—Low Spreading
 Oak (Quercus)—75 to 100 feet. Sun/shade. Varieties: Laurel (Q. laurifolia), Willow
(Q. phellos), Live (Q. virginiana, Chestnut (Q. prinus), Red (Q. rubra), Scarlet (Q.
coccinea), Shingle (Q. imbricaria), semi-evergreen. Water (Q. nigra), Swamp White
(Q. bicolor), deciduous. Among the best trees for attracting wildlife. Other varieties
do well in drier soils.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix H-2
 Red Maple (Acer rubrum)—Deciduous. 60 to 90 feet. Tolerant of shade. First to
bloom in spring. Good fall color. Medium to rapid growth. Range of soil types.
Produces dense shade, cover for birds. Surface roots. Most widely distributed tree in
the east. Subject to approval of Tree Committee.
 River Birch (Betula nigra)—Deciduous. 40 to 70 feet. Sun Grows rapidly. Irregular,
open crown. Does will along streams. Native. Pyramidal. Multi-trunk, exfoliating bark.
 Southern Magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora)—Evergreen. Sun. Slow to medium
growth. Magnificent fragrant white flowers. Cones and leaves prized for floral
decorations. Aggressive shallow roots. Needs space. Plant as specimen. Native.
 Sweetgum (liquidambar styraciflua)—Deciduous. To 100 feet. Sun Fast growing.
Produces spiny fruit loved by animals; plant in beds, away from foot traffic. Good fall
color. Encourage male species without gum balls (retundiloba’ = fruitless).
Pyramidal.
 Tulip popular (liriodendron tulipfera)—Deciduous. To 100 feet. Sun. showy blossoms
often unnoticed because of height. Fast growing shade tree. Aggressive roots. Nice
fall color. Native. Oval shape.
 Tupelo (Nyssa silvatica, N. aquatica)—Deciduous. 40 to 60 feet. Slow to medium
growth. Thrives in shade or full sun. Silvatica likes moist soil; aquatica standing
water. Spectacular fall color. Fruits eaten by wide variety of birds. Native.
Small Trees
 Crabapple (Malus species)—Deciduous. To 30 feet. Sun Moderate growth. Many
varieties available. Brilliant though short lived show in spring. Fruit devoured by
many birds. Good massed at woodland edge. Avoid planting near paths because of
fruit drop.
o Persistent Fruit: Callaway, Centurion, Sugar Tyme
 Crapemyrtle (Lagerstroemia indica)—Deciduous. There are many cultivars available
but the following are recommended because of their tolerance or resistance to
powdery mildew.
o Apalachee--15’ to 20’, light lavender flowers, cinnamon bark, flowers early.
o Biloxi—20’ to 30’, pale pink flowers, recurrent flowering
o Comanche—15’ to 20’, coral pink flowers
o Lipan—15’ to 20’, medium lavender flowers, white/beige bark
o Miami—20’ to 30’, dark pink flowers
o Muskogee—20’ to 30’, light lavender flowers
o Natchez—20’ to 30’, white flowers
o Osage—15’ to 20’, clear pink flowers, heavy flowering, late June flowering
o Sioux—15’ to 20’, dark pink flowers, gray bark
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix H-3
o Tuscarora—20’ to 30’, carol pink flowers
o Tuskegee—20’ to 30’, dark pink to near red flowers
o Wichita—20’ to 30’, light magenta flowers
o Yuma—15’ to 20’, medium lavender flowers
 Flowering Dogwood (Cornus florida)—Deciduous. 20’ to 30’, the best plants are from
regional seed sources, needs to be well watered. Slow to medium growth. Native.
 Hawthorn (Crataegus species)—Deciduous. 20’ to 30’. Sun. Rapid growth. Brilliant white
flowers similar to cherry. Bright red berried attract birds. Spike like thorns. Washington
Hawthorn (C. phaenopyrum) is found in moist areas from Florida to Pennsylvania and is
a good landscape tree. Native. Green Hawthorne for poor soil and poor drainage.
 Holly, Foster (Ilex x attenuate)—Evergreen. 20’ to 30’. Rapid growth. Sun to park shade.
Pyramidal. Heavy berry production.
 Savannah Holly (Ilex)—Evergreen. 25’ to 30’ Rapid Growth.
 Pawpaw (Asimina triloba)—Deciduous. 20’ to 30’ feet. Light sun u under tall hardwoods.
Yellow fall color. Late summer fruit is delicious, tastes like bananas, prized by mammals
and birds. Tends to form colonies. Difficult to find in nurseries. Native.
 Persimmon (Diospyros virginiana)—Deciduous. 30’ to 60’ but slow growing. Sun. Also
known as Possumwood. Male and female flowers on separate plants. Fruit astringent
until ripe, sought after by birds and mammals. Best growth in moist, rich soil. Native.
 Possumhaw (Ilex deciduas)—Deciduous. 10’ to 20’ feet. Sun/Partial shade. Multitrunked.
Male plant needed to pollinate female for fruiting. Bright red berried attract
wildlife in winter. Also known as Deciduous Holly. Fruit persists in fall, spring.
 Red Buckeye (Aesculus pavia)—Deciduous. 10’ to 20’ feet. Medium growth rate.
Dappled shade to avoid leaf scorch. Good planted as specimen or at the edge of a
woodland. Showy red flowers attract hummingbirds. Numerous cultivars but hard to find.
Native.
 Red Mulberry (Morus rubra)—Deciduous. 40 to 70. Sun/some shade. Blackberry-like
fruits prized by birds. Male and female flowers on separate plants. Plant near woodland
edge to avoid fruit drop in traffic areas. Unripe fruit poisonous.
 Sassafras (Sassafras albidum)—Deciduous. 30 to 60 feet. Sun Medium to fast growth.
Grows naturally along woodland’s edge Attractive yellow-green spring flowers, bright
yellow fall color, and bluish berries. Interesting leaves aromatic when crushed. Native.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix H-4
 Shadbush Serviceberry (Amelanchier Canadensis)—To 20 feet. Light sun. Plant along
woodland’s edge to avoid fruit drop on paths. Among the earliest to bloom in spring.
Early fruit provides food for nesting birds. Also known as Shadbush, Sarvis and
Juneberry. Good naturalized in hedgerows. Native.
 Silverbell (Halesia carolina)—Deciduous. 20 to 40 feet. Medium growth rate. Sun/shade.
Needs moisture. Delicate white bell-like flowers in spring. Good near wetland, creek. H.
Diptera a more showy variety. Native. White, bell shape flowers.
 Sweet Bay (Magnolia virginiana)—Semi-Evergreen. 15 to 30 feet. Sun/shade. Moderate
to fast growth. Showy white fragrant flowers and aromatic leaves. Carefree but highly
under used. Prefers soil with neutral acidity but highly tolerant of moisture and soil
conditions. Native.
 Waxmyrtle (Myrica cerifera)—Evergreen. 20 feet. Fast growth. Train to tree form.
Native.
 White Fringetree (Chionanthis virginicus)—Deciduous. 15 to 30 feet with narrow crown.
Sun/part shade. Fragrant white flowers with narrow petals. Dark purple fruit. Native.
 Winged Sumac (Rhus copallina)—Deciduous. To 25 feet. Sun. Open Crown. Fast
growing. Good for woodland edge. Forms colonies. Reddish hairy berries are late winter
food for birds. Likes good drainage. Drought tolerant. Nice fall color.
 Trident Maple (Acer buergeranum)—Deciduous. 30 feet. Oval form. Sun. Very tolerant
of adverse conditions.
 Kousa Dogwood (Comus kousa)—Deciduous. 20’ to 30’ feet. Horizontal branches.
Resistant to anthrachose. Sun to part shade.
 Saucer Magnolia (Magnolia soulagiana)—Deciduous. 15’ to 25’ feet. Beautiful, large
pink flowers in late winter/early spring. Can be killed by frost. Medium growth.
 Purple-leaf Plum (Prunis cerasifera)—Deciduous. Moderate to rapid growth. Reddish
purple leaves. Short-lived.
 Yoshino cherry (Prunus yedoensis)—Deciduous. 30’ to 40’ feet. Celebrated in
Washington, D.C. Clustered white/pink flowers in March and April. Sun.
 Yaupon Holly (Ilex vomitoria)—Evergreen. Sun. Moderate growth rate. Gray stems, red
fruit. Range soil types. 15’ to 20’ feet. Native.
 Goldenraintree (Koelveuteria paniculata)—Deciduous. 20’ to 35’ feet. Sun to part
shade. Moderate to rapid growth. Yellow flowers with remaining seed display through
fall. Tolerant of poor, dry urban conditions.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix H-5
 Chinese Pistache (Pisracia chinensis)—Deciduous. 20’ to 35’ feet. Sun. Moderate to
rapid growth. Tolerant of soil (not wet). Nice fall foliage.
 Honey Locust (Gleditsia tracanthos)—Deciduous. Sun. 20’ to 75’ feet. Moderate fast
growth.
 Littleleaf Linden (Tila cordata)—Deciduous. Sun 30’ to 50’ feet. Rapid growth rate.
Pyramidal Tolerates poor soil.
 Japanese Zelkova (Zelkova serrata)—Deciduous. Sun to part shade. 50’ to 80’ feet.
Medium to rapid growth rate. Tolerant of adverse conditions. Vase shape and easy fall
cleanup.
 Ironwood, American hornbeam (Carpinos caroliniana)—Deciduous. 20’ to 30’ feet. Slow
growth. Sun to part shade. M
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix I-1
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix I-2
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix I-3
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix I-4
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix I-5
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix I-6
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix I-7
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix I-8
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix J-1
APPENDIX J
GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION
OF
A TRAFFIC IMPACT ASSESSMENT
J-1. Thresholds for Requiring a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)
(a) Utilizing the chart below as a general guideline, the Town staff will obtain
pertinent information concerning the proposed development from the applicant and will
make a recommendation regarding the need for the preparation of a TIA to the Town
Council.
Level of Study Required
None Standard TIA Enhanced TIA
Land Use Density/Intensity of Proposed Development
Residential < 100 units 100 to 500 units >500 units
Office < 50,000 sf 50,000 to 350,000 sf > 350,000 sf
Hotel < 100 rooms 100,000 to 500 rooms > 500 rooms
Industrial or warehouse < 150 employees 150 to 1,000 employees > 1,000 employees
Shopping Center < 80,000 sf 80,000to 100,000 sf > 100,000-sf
Retail < 25,000 sf 25,000 - 80,000 sf > 80,000 sf
Other Uses < 100 peak hour trips 100 to 500 peak hour trips > 500 peak hour trips
J-2. General Requirements for a Standard TIA
(a) A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) is to be prepared and sealed by an engineer
registered in North Carolina and specializing in traffic or transportation, with
experience in preparing TIA’s.
(b) A standard TIA includes the following elements:
(1) Abstract-or Summary—summarize description of proposed development,
location, traffic generation, existing and future conditions (level of
service), and recommended improvements. Should not exceed two
pages, preferably one page.
(2) Description of Development—describe acreage included in development,
existing and proposed land use, existing and proposed zoning, proposed
density (number of houses, square feet of development, etc.).
(3) Study Area—generally 1/4 mile to li2 mile from each proposed site access
along roads accessed by the site. This area may in a few cases be
greater if the site is on a road with no intersections within that distance.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix J-2
(4) Site Location—include location map showing site in relation to major
streets and at least one mile radius from site.
(5) Traffic Generation—indicate number of trips generated by site daily, AM
peak hour, PM peak hour (AM peak hour may be omitted for retail uses
which are not expected to generate significant traffic volumes during this
period). Indicate internal or pass-by traffic generation if appropriate. For
rezoning may indicate traffic generation under existing zoning as well as
proposed zoning. Indicate source of trip generation rate, land use code,
and units used to derive generation.
(6) Trip Distribution—indicate percentage distribution of trips by direction
within study area and method used to obtain.
(7) Access Location(s)—location of planned streets or driveways and access
to existing streets. Indicate other streets or driveways within study area,
including those across the street. Indicate coordination with NCDOT
where appropriate.
(8) Existing Road and Traffic Conditions—street laneage and classification,
traffic control devices, existing daily traffic volumes within study area.
Show traffic volumes and level of service of signalized intersections and
proposed site access points within study area during AM and PM peak
hour (PM only for retail). Include work sheets or computer printouts
showing counted traffic volumes and level-of-service. Illustrate in
figure(s) showing peak hour volumes, lanes, level of service. For
unsignalized intersections, show level-of-service for individual
movements. Discuss transit service if applicable. Discuss accident
history, if appropriate.
(9) Planned Improvements—discuss and describe any. planned road
improvements in the study area or which could affect future traffic. Note
whether project is shown on thoroughfare plan, collector street plan, or
NCDOT Transportation Improvements Program (TIP).
(10) Future Conditions—same as for existing -conditions, plus site traffic
assigned to driveways or access points, for conditions with full build-out
of Project, at buildout year. Include growth in background traffic due to
other approved developments or to general growth in area. May show
more than one phase, if project is to be phased. Discuss any conflicts
with other driveways or streets, queuing problems, potential safety
problems.
(11) Pedestrian Facilities—indicate location of existing and proposed
sidewalks and crosswalks, internal pedestrian paths.
(12) Recommended Improvements—indicate improvements required for
access points and signalized intersections within study area to operate at
acceptable level of service (D or better). These may include site access,
internal site circulation, signalization, signal modification (retiming,
additional phases), lane modifications or additions, or street widening. A
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix J-3
signal warrant study is not required but may be included as supporting
documentation where a traffic signal is requested. Note: showing
recommended improvement does not necessarily indicate responsibility
for improvement. Report may indicate which improvements are due to
development and which are due to existing problems or other growth in
traffic, and may suggest responsibility of developer or of other parties for
improvements. Proposed improvements should be shown schematically
on figure.
J-3. General Requirements for an Enhanced TIA
(a) An enhanced TIA includes all of the elements of a standard TIA plus the
following:
(1) Study Area—generally from 1 to 3 miles from each proposed site access
along roads accessed by the site. The extent of the study area should be
discussed with Town staff prior to initiating the TIA.
(2) Internal Circulation—review internal circulation patterns and note
recommended changes.
(3) Trip Distribution—use of a computer model for distribution may be
desirable for major projects.
(4) Future Conditions—projects in this category, other than perhaps shopping
centers, are likely to be phased. Desirable-to show conditions at-end of
planning period (generally 20 years or horizon used for thoroughfare
plan) -
(5) Recommended Improvements—for major projects, these may involve
changes to the thoroughfare plan or collector street plan. The project
may include the construction of portions of thoroughfares within or
adjacent to the site.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix K-1
APPENDIX K
GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION
OF
AN ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
K-1 Purpose.
The purpose of an Environmental Review (ER) is to provide the Town of Edenton with
information necessary to evaluate the probable effects of a proposed major development upon
the natural and man-made environment. The ER generally consists of (1) an inventory of
existing natural and man-made conditions at the project site and in the general vicinity of the
project, (2) an assessment of the probable impact of the project upon the identified natural and
man-made conditions, (3) a listing of all licenses, permits, and other approvals required by
local, state, and federal law, and (4) a plan for mitigating the identified adverse impacts of the
project. The ER is not intended to be a duplication of State of NC environmental regulations. It
is intended to be a "Review" that inventories conditions utilizing data and information from
various local, state and federal agencies.
K-2 Contents.
An ER shall include the following elements:
(a) Description of the proposed project.
(b) Inventory of existing natural and man-made conditions at the project site and the
vicinity of the site:
(1) Topography and slope.
(2) Geology.
(3) Floodplains, wetlands, and water bodies.
(4) Areas of Environmental Concern as identified by CAMA.
(5) Soils suitability.
(6) Vegetation, including endangered and threatened species.
(7) Wildlife, including endangered and threatened species habitat.
(8) Historical, cultural, and archaeological resources.
(9) Unique natural features.
(10) Existing land use.
(11) Existing utilities, including stormwater drainage systems.
(12) Existing street system and transportation facilities.
(13) Man-made hazard areas.
(c) Statement as to the conformance of the proposed project with the Town’s Land
Use, Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Utilities Plan, and similar local,
regional, and state plans.
(d) Statement as to the compatibility of the proposed project with the existing and
projected character of the neighborhood or area surrounding the site.
(e) An assessment of the probable impacts of the proposed project on the following:
(1) The existing natural features identified in (b) above.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix K-2
(2) Historical, cultural, and archaeological resources.
(3) Air quality.
(4) Water quality.
(5) Noise.
(6) Use, scale, and visual coherence of the surrounding neighborhood
or area.
(7) Demographic and community character changes.
(8) Community facilities and services such as schools, health care
facilities, water and sewer systems, storm water drainage systems,
solid waste collection and disposal, public safety, open space and
recreation, and street and transportation system.
(9) Man-made hazards.
(f) A listing of all applicable licenses, permits, and other approvals required by local,
state, and federal law.
(g) A plan outlining what steps the applicant proposes to undertake to mitigate
significant adverse impacts during construction and operation of the proposed
project. The mitigation plan should evaluate alternatives for mitigating adverse
impacts and should identify those adverse impacts which can not be avoided.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix L-1
APPENDIX L
GUIDELINES FOR THE PREPARATION
OF
A FISCAL IMPACT STATEMENT
L-1 Rationale for Fiscal Impact Analysis.
Given the increasing strain on municipal budgets throughout the United States, elected officials
and municipal staff members have become increasingly aware of the direct public costs
associated with private land development projects. New development brings with it new homes,
jobs and land uses which in turn mean new residents, businesses and visitors will be introduced
to a growing community. Such growth places new burdens on local governments which are
often unequipped to efficiently or even adequately provide the public services required by new
residents, employers and visitors, especially in light of the rapid pace at which new
development proposals are being processed in towns such as Edenton.
In order to properly plan for new growth in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of
existing and new residents, local government officials must be able to accurately project
resident and school-age children populations attributable to new development. They must also
plan an appropriate governmental response to such a project. For instance, they must project
the number of additional public employees-policemen, firemen, teachers, etc.-and the kinds of
municipal facilities that will be needed to serve the changing population. Furthermore, they
must decide whether or not the proposed land use fits in with the locality’s future land use plan,
as expressed in Edenton's Land Classification Map, which graphically represents the
community's vision for its future. A fiscal impact analysis provides municipal officials with
access to the information needed to make these kind of decisions.
A fiscal impact analysis provides a realistic projection of the direct, current, public costs and
revenues associated with a proposed development project to the local jurisdiction(s) in which
the development would be located. When properly done, a formal fiscal impact study should
include simple, straightforward procedural steps used to estimate costs and revenues
associated with development so that all citizens may understand its assumptions and
calculations. Such an analysis provides a participating locality with several major benefits. First
and foremost, it can help the community to project service requirements of anticipated
development. It can also aid municipal officials in the process of monitoring the costs
associated with significant land use, rezoning and annexation decisions.
Fiscal impact analysis can also provide certain projections of how a new development may
impact the existing marketplace, (i.e. the local housing market and/or the local retail economy).
Finally, it can also help a community maintain a reasonable long-term balance in its fiscal
management by comparing fiscally beneficial decisions with those that are not.
The following six distinct methods are commonly used in developing a formal fiscal impact
analysis:
1. Per Capital Multiplier Method
2. Case Study Method
3. Service Standard Method
4. Comparable City Method
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix L-2
5. Proportional Valuation Method
6. Employment Anticipation Method
Each method has its particular strengths and weaknesses and is more applicable to certain
types of development within a given geopolitical context. However, while each of these various
methods incorporate a different projection model based upon unique fiscal and development
assumptions, all generally focus upon developing a public cost-benefit analysis of a proposed
new development. Thus, no matter which method is ultimately used in developing a fiscal
impact analysis for the Edenton community, each study should consider, if not directly
incorporate into the formal cost-benefit analysis, each of the items delineated in subsection L-2.
L-2 General Fiscal Impact Study Requirements.
(a) General Market Analysis
(1) Demographic Analysis
(i) Local and regional population and growth trends, including school
population trends
(2). Land Use Analysis
(i) Inventory of existing land uses
(ii) Inventory of land uses proposed by the Land Classification Map
(3) Existing Tax Base Analysis
(i) Total local accessed real property value
1. Commercial property
2. Industrial property
3. Residential property
(ii) Total number of taxable land parcels
1. Commercial properties
2. Industrial properties
3. Residential properties
(4) Real Estate Market Analysis
(i) Provide a general range of market values for residential or nonresidential
products similar to those proposed in the development
being analyzed.
(5) Retail Market Analysis
(i) Identify Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Marketplaces
(ii) Identify Retail Market Strengths
(ii) Identify Retail Market Weaknesses
(iv) Identify Degree of ‘Leakage’ of Retail Spending to Peripheral
Marketplaces
(v) Identify Existing Market Linkages
(vi) Estimated Linkage and Market Recapture Opportunities
(b) Municipal Cost/Benefit Analysis
(1) General Assumptions
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix L-3
(i) Project population and population-induced demand resulting from
the proposed development
(ii) Determine population and student increase resulting from the
proposed development
(iii) Project square footage of commercial space added and growthinduced
demand for retail consumption and office space resulting
from the proposed development
(2) Cost Calculation
(i) Municipal Operating Expense Impacts
Determine the anticipated local service response by each
category below, including number of public employees and
additional capital investments resulting from the proposed
development:
Total and per capita municipal operating costs and capital
expenditures
a. General government
b. Financial and administrative
c. General control and public buildings
d. Public safety
1. Police protection
2. Fire protection
e. Community Development (Planning)
f. Public works
1. Highways
2. Sewerage
3. Sanitation
4. Water supply
g. Health and Welfare
1. Public Welfare
2. Hospitals
3. Health Department
4. Office of Social Services
h. Recreation and culture
1. Parks
2. Libraries
i. Debt service
(ii) School System Operating Expense Impacts
Estimate the impact of the proposed development on the following
local school system operating expenditures:
Total and per capita school district operating costs
a. Operating
1. Local, primary and secondary
2. School district administration
b. Debt service
(3) Revenue Calculation
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix L-4
(i) Projecting Own Source Revenues
a. Tax Revenues
 Real property taxes
 Personal property taxes
 Income taxes
 Sales taxes
 Property transfer taxes
 Occupation and business privilege taxes
(ii) In developing fiscal impact assessments for non-residential
developments (particularly retail developments), it will be
imperative that the analysis include an estimate for the impact of
the proposed business on existing businesses in the locality. This
analysis should project the net effect of the new business on local
income in light of the increased competition for local spending,
jobs, office or retail space, etc. The net impact could affect each
of the tax revenue categories listed above, and thus impact the
final calculation of projected revenues associated with the
proposed project.
For each of these categories, a fiscal impact analysis of a
nonresidential project should incorporate a coefficient
representing net new business and income drawn to the locality
as a percentage of total income attributable to the proposed
project. This coefficient is very difficult to estimate due to the
difficulty in quantifying the impact of a new business on the
existing marketplace. Nevertheless, this estimate is vital to the
development of an accurate fiscal impact assessment of a
commercial project. In order to provide the best estimate
possible, the fiscal analyst must assess the local competition as
well as the capacity of the local population to support the new
facility. For instance, a freestanding discount retail store
developed without significant, planned residential growth has to
depend mightily on capturing a significant proportion of existing
similar business. This existing similar business could be captured
to a certain extent from currently untapped consumers from a
neighboring town or county; however, the new development will
almost certainly absorb some consumer spending away from
existing local merchants.
(iii) Charges/Miscellaneous Revenues
a. Interest earnings
b. Application Fees and permit revenue
c. User and hook-up fees
d. Fine revenue
e. Forfeiture and penalty revenue
(iv) Projecting Intergovernmental Transfers From:
a. State Government
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix L-5
 Sales tax redistribution
 Income tax redistribution
 Motor Fuels tax
 NCDOT investment
 Cigarette and Alcohol tax impacts
 Educational basic assistance impacts
 Educational categorical aid impacts
b. Federal Government
 Revenue sharing
 CDBG funding
 ISTEA funding
4. Cost/Benefit (Revenue/Expenditure) Analysis
Compare projected costs and revenues associated with the proposed
project and determine the net, direct fiscal impact of the project on the
locality. (Amended 3/99)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-1
TOWN OF EDENTON
DESIGN STANDARDS
FOR COMMERCIAL & MEDICAL DISTRICTS
(OUTSIDE OF THE HISTORIC DISTRICT)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Purpose, Scope & Authority ……………………………………………………..3
District Boundaries Map ………………………………………………………….4
1. Site Planning & Landscaping …………………………………………………5
2. Scale & Massing ……………………………………………………………….7
3. Building Height & Roof Design …………………………………………….…9
4. Proportions ……………………………………………………………………..10
5. Fenestration ……………………………………………………………………11
6. Materials & Colors ……………………………………………………………..12
Appendix A Design Standards Example Photos (Catalogue)
Appendix B Substantial Renovation Chart
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-3
PURPOSE, SCOPE AND AUTHORITY
PURPOSE
The Town of Edenton is expected to experience growth in the coming years. It is the role of the Town Council,
Planning Board and other boards and commissions to ensure that future development is in keeping with Council’s
vision of the Town and in the best long term interest of the residents.
In 2004, the Town of Edenton asked a group of citizens to study architectural standards and make
recommendations to Council for possible inclusion of standards in the Town’s Unified Development Ordinance.
Design standards such as these are intended to document a community’s design objectives with the use of
illustrations and other examples so that developers and consultants can visualize how their projects work towards
the goals of the Town Plan. They are intended to assist property owners, developers and town review boards with
the preliminary planning, design and evaluation of proposals and approval of projects. By incorporating the
standards in the early phases of design, time consuming and costly changes can often be avoided. In addition, they
are intended to reduce or eliminate the more common architectural characteristics of sprawl development, and work
towards a common vision for Edenton’s future.
The goal of this document is to ensure that, over time, the standards will improve the character and natural beauty
of the community making it an even more attractive and prosperous place.
SCOPE
This manual provides design standards for all new construction and substantial renovations (see Appendix B) of
commercial and medical properties outside of Edenton’s Historic District. A map of affected areas has been
illustrated on page 4 of this manual for easy reference; however it is recommended that you check with the latest
zoning maps on file at the Town Planning Office to verify what properties are covered.
AUTHORITY
For all projects involving new construction or substantial renovation (see Appendix B) of a building or buildings; the
Town reserves the right to retain a licensed architect, at the applicant’s expense, to review the application and
provide a report regarding whether or not the application complies with these design standards.
This document is intended to act in conjunction with the Town of Edenton’s Unified Development Ordinance. In the
event of a conflict or discrepancy between the two documents, the most restrictive standard shall apply.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-4
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES MAP
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-5
SITE PLANNING & LANDSCAPING
Figure 1: Sample Site Layout. The building is brought forward as close to the street as possible, with parking and other services tucked
around the side and back. This helps to define the identity of the street and gives the business maximum public exposure.
1.1 The primary building entry should always be placed at the front of the building (facing the front lot line) and be clearly identifiable from
the street. (A) In this example, an entry vestibule is created which faces the front, side and rear parking area simultaneously. (NOTE:
Property boundaries adjacent to controlled access highways will require a 50-foot foliated buffer yard; and secondary frontages on major or
minor arterials will require formal street tree plantings).
1.2 Parking should be placed at the side or rear of the lot and screened from view whenever possible. Break the parking areas up into
groups of no more than 20 spaces per area separated by landscaping areas. (B)
1.3 Place as much of the building width at the front of the lot as possible to maximize front façade exposure to the public. (C) The front
façade should be kept parallel to the street.
1.4 To reinforce the “street-edge”, align with neighboring buildings which are also close to the front setback line. Landscaping can also be
used to reinforce this line. (D)
1.5 Whenever possible, attempt to link with adjacent parking lots or provide shared parking areas which can serve neighboring buildings
simultaneously. (E) This provides a secondary means of access to the site and can ease congestion on the main road.
1.6 Provide sidewalks for the full width of the property with a direct link to the primary building entry. (F)
1.7 Loading docks, service areas and trash facilities should be located at the rear of the building and not visible from the street. Fences
(no chain link), walls or landscaping can be used to shield them from view. (G)
1.8 Incorporate any existing, older trees into new site plan development whenever possible to reduce waste and salvage good shade trees.
(H)
1.9 Minimize the amount of curb-cuts by having a single driveway in and out of the property from the main road whenever possible.
Secondary access points from side roads are encouraged on larger projects when warranted. Curb cuts should only be as wide as
necessary to accommodate needed lanes. Curb radiuses should be kept to a minimum. (I)
1.10 The parking lot areas should be designed in regular, rectangular shapes. Irregular wedge shaped parking areas created by following
angled property lines are discouraged. However, this does not prohibit angled parking. Only create as much paved area as absolutely
necessary. The Town encourages the use of pervious pavers.
1.11 Landscaped islands and other green space should be consolidated into useful areas, and not just narrow
strips of grass or plantings. (J) (NOTE: Property boundaries adjacent to controlled access highways will require a 50-foot foliated buffer
yard; and secondary frontages on major or minor arterials will require formal street tree plantings).
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-6
SITE PLANNING & LANDSCAPING
Figure 2: Redefining the Edges. Corner lots are especially important in defining the street. Special attention should be paid to bringing the
building mass all the way out to meet the corner. Large shopping plazas should also attempt to infill the front of their lots with new commercial
space to take advantage of the road frontage.
1.12 Corner lots should try to place as much building mass near the intersection as possible to help anchor the lot and take advantage of the
high visibility. (A)
1.13 Gas station canopies should be designed as an integral part of the station architecture whenever possible. This can allow for a visual or
even physical connection which provides shelter between the vehicle and the building. (B) See Appendix ‘A’ for examples.
1.14 Alternative gas station layouts include placing the pumps near the rear of the lot while having the convenience store out in front near the
street. (C) This helps to highlight the building, shield the utilitarian pump canopy and pulls the curb-cuts away from the intersection, creating
easier access.
1.15 When it is not feasible to place the building entry directly on the front façade, attempts should be made to ensure that it is still readily
visible and faces the main road or internal street. (D)
1.16 Older shopping plazas set back far from the street can benefit from developing the land at the front of their lot. This helps to define the
street character and allows for more “one-stop” shopping and shared parking opportunities. (E)
1.17 Provide trees and other landscape screening to shield large parking areas from adjacent lots. (F)
1.18 Large parking lots are encouraged to provide landscaped islands and walkways which help to break up the visual expanse of blacktop and
encourage safe pedestrian travel areas. (G)
1.19 Some developments may benefit from having a shared access to a common dumpster location which both neighboring properties can use.
(H)
1.20 All public access ways on the site should comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act. Visit their Web page
www.usdoj.gov/crt/ada/adahom1.htm for more information.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-7
SCALE & MASSING
Figure 3: Breaking up the Masses Helps Reduce the Scale. Dividing the building volume up into a variety of shapes helps to
reduce the perceived scale of the architecture and allows placement of the more important volumes up near the front of the
site.
2.1 Place a majority of the building mass close to the road to help define the street edge. In this example, the two-story mass is placed
at the front of the lot, and likely contains the most public functions including reception, offices, showroom, retail space, etc. (A)
2.2 Less public areas such as warehouses, storage and manufacturing spaces can be shielded from view in the rear. This often allows
for warehouse/utilitarian style construction to be hidden behind the smaller scale public spaces that are in front. (B)
2.3 The building mass near the front of the site should be articulated with design features which give it a more pedestrian scale
appearance. Natural, smaller scale materials should be used near the front of the site and pedestrian areas whenever possible (C)
2.4 Large scale features such as long, uninterrupted picture windows are discouraged. They should instead be separated into smaller
groups to help reduce their scale, and give them a more vertical orientation. (D) The scale of these large windows can be further
divided with the use of mullions and muntins.
2.5 Larger scale design features such as garage doors should be reserved for the rear of the facility whenever possible and out of
sight from the street. (E)
2.6 Different massing at the entry to the building helps to further define a reduced scale appearance and improves visibility from many
directions.
2.7 In this example, the utility area in the rear is only one story, (F) but this could instead be a two or three story area which is still
shielded from view behind the front portion of the building.
2.8 Large areas of blank wall should be avoided, or should be reserved for the side or rear of the facility whenever possible. If they
cannot be avoided, design accents such as pilasters or other façade articulations can help to reduce the overall scale appearance.(G)
2.9 Special design elements which help to articulate the façade help to further reduce the overall building scale. Articulations of the
facade or breaks in the roofline help to define different masses and reduce the scale. See Also ‘Fenestration’.
2.10 The use of covered porches and similar recessed front entry areas is encouraged to help create a more human scale
appearance to the building. These also help to draw attention to the point of entry and provide shelter from the rain and sun.
2.11 In lieu of a formal porch entry, a small canopy or awning over the main entry also helps to provide a pedestrian scale
appearance.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-8
SCALE & MASSING
Figure 4: By articulating the façade with different massing elements, you can help to give a smaller scale appearance to an
otherwise featureless mass.
2.12 Large retail structures are encouraged to articulate their primary façade(s) with various design features to help reduce the
overall scale of the building with the use of roofline articulation or mass divisions. (A) These can be used to highlight entry
points, exits, specialty areas (such as a garden/landscaping center or auto service) customer pick-up zones or separate places
of business.
2.13 The Town encourages multi-story construction and discourages single story with large building footprint. Build up, not out!
2.14 The front façade or entry areas may be designed to accommodate façade lettering where appropriate. (B)
2.15 The use of banding designs (continuous horizontal stripes) across large areas of façade is not recommended.
2.16 Smaller scale materials should be used on these front façade massing elements whenever possible.
2.17 The size, scale, motif and use of materials for the front façade design should be kept consistent across the façade in order
to tie the entire composition together. The use of a variety of design styles across the façade is not recommended.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-9
BUILDING HEIGHT & ROOF DESIGN
Figure 5: Different Roof Configurations. A well designed building roof provides screening, reduces the building scale, diverts
the fall of rainwater, highlights important areas and creates a graceful “cap” to the structure, among other things.
3.1 The tallest façade of the building should face the street, stepping down in back if necessary.
3.2 The roof of the building should be in keeping with the scale of the structure itself.
3.3 Flat roof structures should be capped by an articulated parapet design which acts as a structural expression of the building façade
and its materials. (A) Fake roof fronts and similar applied designs are discouraged.
3.4 Subtle variations which help to differentiate the ‘base’, ‘middle’ and ‘top’ of the structure are encouraged. (B)
3.5 Exposed roof structures are encouraged to maintain a pitch between ¼ :12 minimum and 6:12 maximum slope on all primary roof
areas. (Not including dormers, entry canopies or similar elements.) Shed roofs should have minimum slope of 3:12. Mansard roof
designs are discouraged.
3.6 Buildings with sloped roofs are encouraged to employ the use of dormers and gables of a commercial/industrial style along the
front to help maintain a prominent façade when feasible. These also help to divert rainwater away from doorways.
3.7 Buildings with sloped roofs (except sheds) shall provide roof overhangs not less than 12 inches horizontal dimension on exposed
eaves.
3.8 Breaks and fluctuations in the roofline are encouraged to highlight important areas of the building (such as the entry) and break up
longer runs of façade/roof area.
3.9 Air handling units, condensers, satellite dishes and other equipment placed on the roof should not be visible from the street, and
instead should be screened by building elements so they are shielded from sight. (C) In addition, roof mounted equipment shall be
visually minimized with painted colors and finish complementary to the overall building design.
3.10 The roof of a structure should be designed so as to divert the fall of rain away from pedestrian areas such as walkways and
doors. The use of canopies, awnings or similar protective designs is also encouraged at entry locations.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-10
PROPORTIONS
Figure 6: A Consistent Proportioning System. Many of the façade characteristics of this building are determined by the same
width to height proportioning ratio (1:1.75). This can help to visually balance and tie the building together.
4.1 The proportions of design elements such as windows, columns or bay spacing should be consistent on the
façade. In this example, the windows on the second floor have the same width to height ratio as the windows on the
first floor. (A)
4.2 Proportioning systems also can be very effective in guiding other design characteristics of the façade. Here, the
same width to height ratio of the windows was used to determine the proportions of many other features. (B)
4.3 The use of vertically proportioned elements (elements which are generally taller then they are wide) is
encouraged to help give the building a taller, lighter and more stately appearance. Strong horizontal influences such
as large fascias or banding designs are discouraged, or should be adequately balanced with vertical elements. (C)
4.4 The proportion of structural elements such as posts or columns should be appropriate to the weight they appear
to be carrying. Columns which support larger masses, such as upper floors, generally have a low width to height
ratio (For example 1:5). Columns supporting lighter elements such as a porch roof generally have larger ratio (For
example 1:15). These relative proportions help balance a façade visually.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-11
FENESTRATION
Figure 8: Fenestration Is A Measure Of The 3-Dimensional Depth Of A Façade Created By Fluctuations Or Openings In
A Wall. Recesses such as archways or deep windows are two examples of fenestration. They help to give a façade a more 3-
dimensional appearance by casting shadows and creating a visual contrast.
5.1 Variations and breaks in the plane of the façade are encouraged to create an interesting design, reinforce rhythms and cast
shadows. (A) Flat façade designs are discouraged.
5.2 Typically, the most fenestration is found at the first floor level near pedestrian areas. Here, the use of larger openings and
increased depth is encouraged. (B) This creates a more open and inviting area.
5.3 Openings in masonry buildings should express a structural lintel or arch to express how it is carrying the weight above. (D)
Likewise, door and window frames can also use a wider trim at the head than is used on the sides to achieve the same visual
effect.
5.4 The primary entry to a building is one of the best places to be creative with the use of depth in a façade. The added depth
and articulation help to draw attention to the entry and highlight it as an important place. (E)
5.5 The use of façade articulation such as expressing the structural bays of the building with pilasters or other detailing can be
useful in animating an otherwise blank area of wall. (F) The Town strongly discourages false, tower-like entrances that are not
reflective of the architecture of the building.
5.6 The use of porches, colonnades, canopies or awnings is a great way to introduce shadows on a façade, and are
encouraged. (G)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-12
MATERIALS & COLORS
Figure 9: Smaller Scale Materials. The use of smaller building materials is recommended to help give the structure a more
pedestrian scale.
6.1 Smaller scale, natural materials are encouraged.
6.2 When using more then one material on a façade, it is recommended to have one as the dominant theme with the others
acting only to compliment or accentuate the design. In this example, the main brick façade is accented with the use of a special
concrete block at the base, with matching concrete lintels. (A)& (B) This helps to tie the design together and provides a visual
base for the building to rest on.
6.3 When making a transition from one material to the next, it is recommended that the change occur at a hard vertical edge or
“bump-out” in the façade. This helps to create a surface for the first material to terminate into before the second one begins. (C)
6.4 When using multiple colors on the exterior of the building only one color should be used as the main theme, with the other
colors used more sparingly to create accents. (D)
6.5 The main color theme should typically be of a natural, muted shade. Brighter, more vibrant colors such as red or yellow
should generally be reserved for minor accents and highlights only, and should be used sparingly.
6.6 The Town strongly encourages different store front detailing for multi-tenant retail buildings.
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-13
MATERIALS & COLORS
Table 1: Recommended Materials Chart. The following chart is intended as a general guide to the materials most and least
preferred for use within the Commercial District. It is not intended to be comprehensive. Actual exterior materials and colors
should be approved by the Town. Materials not specifically listed in this chart, may be permitted, but are subject to review and
approval by the Administrator to ensure appropriateness.
ELEMENT ALLOWED NOT ALLOWED
Façade Brick Multi-colored Brick
Bare (natural hue consistent tone) Imitation Brick Siding
Painted (approved color)
Natural Simulated Slate Rubble or Field Stone
Wood Clapboard Plain (bare) Concrete Masonry Units
Wood Shingle Metal Siding
Stucco, EIFS (Simulated Stucco) Vinyl Siding
Cementitious Siding (Clapboard) Asphalt Siding
Trim Wood (Painted or Stained) Bare Wood
Finished Grade Lumber Grade
Aluminum (approved color) Clear Anodized Aluminum
Windows Anodized Aluminum Frame Clear Anodized Aluminum
Approved Color
Wood Frame Tinted Glass (Non code driven)
Painted or Stained Approved Color
Vinyl Clad
Expressed Lintels (over openings) Steel Plate or Angle
Brick
Limestone
Colored Concrete
Clear Glass Mirrored Glass
Roof Natural Slate (or simulated)
Standing Seam Metal
Small Seam Width, Approved Color
Architectural Shingles (on accent features only)
Parapet Caps / Chimney Caps
Stone, Pre-Cast Concrete or Limestone
Wood, simulated wood shakes (on accent
features only)
Other Canvas Awnings Plastic Awnings
3 color maximum, approved colors
Walkway Pavers /sidewalk Asphalt walkways
Stamped or Poured Concrete Long Bubble awnings that exceeds 1.5 width of
door opening
Brick or Colored Paving Stone
Accents Special Masonry Units
Etched or Frosted Windows
Textured Concrete Block
Colored Concrete Block
Split – Faced Block
Stucco or EIFS (simulated stucco)
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-14
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-15
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-16
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-17
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-18
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-19
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-20
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-21
Town of Edenton
Unified Development Ordinance, 10/99 Appendix M-22
Building
Placement
Parking
Requirements
Landscaping
Scale &
Massing
Building
Height and
Roof Design
Proportions
Fenestration
Material and
Colors
Parking Area Modification
Minor: 12-24 spaces
 
Major: 25 or more
spaces
 
Existing Development
Renovation Due to
Disaster (Fire, Flood,
etcetera)
For existing buildings that are damaged due to flood, fire, or other
disaster, the property owner/ developers, may opt out of the
requirements of this article but must comply with this existing
underlying zoning district requirements
Reoccupation after
extended Vacancy
An existing building that may be vacant for any length of time does
not have to come into compliance with the provisions of the design
standards before it may become reoccupied
Exterior Renovation
(< 25% of surface
area)
without expansion

Exterior Renovation
(> 25% of surface
area) without
expansion
   
Minor Expansion (<
25% of total floor
area)
    
Major expansion (>
25% of total floor
area)
       
New Construction
New Construction on an
undeveloped site
(Including out parcels)
       
Exemptions:
The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this article
1. Modifications to parking areas that consist only of routine maintenance or repair that do not involve a change of design
and do not significantly change the outward appearance of the parking lot.
2. Modifications of parking areas with the modification being less than 12 spaces.
3. For existing buildings that are damaged due to flood, fire, or other disaster, the property owner/ developers, may opt
out of the requirements of this article but must comply with this existing underlying zoning district requirements.
4. Modifications to facades that consist only of routine maintenance, or repair that do not involve a change of design.
5. Reoccupation of an existing building after any period of vacancy.
6. Interior renovations that do not add square footage to an existing structure. 
 
 
 
 




 


