
Fairmont, NC Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF FAIRMONT,  NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 19-186, passed 1-15-2019
State legislation current through 2018 A.L.S. #6




 




Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation




One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



OFFICIALS
of the
TOWN OF FAIRMONT, NORTH CAROLINA




AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION




 



MAYOR
 
Bobby Charles Townsend




 





BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



COMMISSIONER
 
Monte McCallum


COMMISSIONER
 
Terry Evans


COMMISSIONER
 
Cassandra Gaddy


COMMISSIONER
 
Charles Kemp


COMMISSIONER
 
Jeffrey J. McCree


COMMISSIONER
 
Felecia McLean-Kesler




 





TOWN OFFICIALS



TOWN MANAGER
 
Katrina Y. Tatum


TOWN ATTORNEY
 
Robert E. Price


TOWN CLERK-FINANCE DIRECTOR
 
Jennifer H. Larson, NCCMC




 



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE 06-103



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF FAIRMONT, NORTH
CAROLINA, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.



WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Fairmont
are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and
substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its
affairs; and



WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of North Carolina empower
and authorize municipalities to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile
any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or
published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form;
and



WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Fairmont has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town
of Fairmont of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and



WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take
effect at an early date.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE TOWN OF
FAIRMONT:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby
adopted as and shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Fairmont, North Carolina."



Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinance as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following Titles:



         Charter



         Title I. General Provisions



               10. General Provisions



         Title III. Administration



               30. Mayor; Board of Commissioners



               31. Officers and Employees



               32. Organizations



               33. Police Department



         Title V. Public Works



               50. Water and Sewers



               51. Water and Sewer Extensions



               52. Solid Waste



         Title VII. Traffic Code



               70. General Provisions



               71. Traffic-control Devices



               72. Vehicle Operation Generally



               73. Stopping, Standing and Parking



               74. Pedestrians and Bicycles



               75. Traffic Schedules



               76. Parking Schedules



         Title IX. General Regulations



               90. Streets and Sidewalks



               91. Nuisances



               92. Fire Prevention and Protection



               93. Health and Sanitation



               94. Animals



               95. Parks and Recreation



         Title XI. Business Regulations



               110. General Provisions



               111. Vehicles for Hire



               112. Peddlers and Solicitors



               113. Game Rooms



               114. Motor Vehicle Storage Yards



         Title XIII. General Offenses



               130. Generally



               131. Offenses Against Public Safety



               132. Offenses Against Public Peace and Order



               133. Offenses Against Public Morals



         Title XV: Land Usage



               150. Flood Prevention



               151. Buildings; Construction Regulations



               152. Minimum Housing Standards



               153. Subdivisions



               154. Zoning



         Parallel References



            References to North Carolina General Statutes



            References to 1988 Code



            References to  Ordinances



         Index



Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or
in part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense
committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective
date of this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of
ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching
territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain
persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds 
or borrowing  of money, authorizing  the purchase or sale of real or
personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of
land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other
public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or
covered by the Code.



Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Board of Commissioners and the Clerk of the Town
of Fairmont is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.



Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and
places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same
is properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved.



Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and
general welfare of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at
the earliest date provided by law.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Fairmont on
this 21st day of November, 2006.



ATTEST:



                        /s/                 
       



                        Charles Kemp, Mayor



/s/                                                 
 



Jennifer H. Larson, CMC, Town Clerk



THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF FAIRMONT



Art. I.      Incorporation And General Powers, §§ 1.1—1.4



Art. II.     Corporate Boundaries, §§ 2.1, 2.2



Art. III.   Mayor And Board Of Commissioners, §§ 3.1—3.7



Art. IV.   Election Procedure, § 4.1



Art. V.     Town Manager, § 5.1



Art. VI.   Administrative Officers And Employees, §§ 6.1—6.4



Art. VII.   Finance, §§ 7.1, 7.2



Art. VIII.   Claims Against The Town, § 8.1



Art. IX.   [Eminent Domain], § 9.1



ARTICLE I.  INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS



SEC. 1.1  INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS.



   The Town of Fairmont shall continue to be a body politic and corporate
under the name and style of the "Town of Fairmont," and shall continue to be
vested with all property and rights which now belong to the town; shall have
perpetual succession; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at
pleasure; may sue and be sued; may contract, may acquire and hold all such
property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any
manner conveyed or dedicated to it, or otherwise acquired by it, and may from
time to time hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; and shall have and
may exercise in conformity with this charter all municipal powers, functions,
rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature.



Editor's note: 



   The town charter, being section 1 of Acts 1973, chapter 288 is printed
herein as enacted.



   The printing style, however, has been made consistent with that of the
Fairmont Municipal Code. Other changes are encased in brackets [ ].
Immediately following the last section of the charter is an editor's note in
which is printed to [sic, the] title, etc., of chapter 288, the "introductory
language" in section 1 of chapter 288 and the "remainder" (being "legal
status" sections) of chapter 288.



SEC. 1.2  EXERCISE OF POWERS.



   All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the town,
its officers, agencies, or employees, shall be carried into execution as
provided by this charter, or, if this charter makes no provision, as provided
by ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners and as provided by
the general laws of North Carolina pertaining to municipal corporations,
including Chapter[s] 160 and 160A of the General Statutes of North Carolina.



SEC. 1.3  ENUMERATED POWERS NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be held
or deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, or those appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the Town
of Fairmont shall have and may exercise all powers which are granted to
municipal corporations by the general laws of North Carolina and all powers
which, under the Constitution of North Carolina, it would be competent for
this charter specifically to enumerate.



SEC. 1.4  FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The form of government of the Town of Fairmont shall be the
council-manager form.



ARTICLE II.  CORPORATE BOUNDARIES



SEC. 2.1  EXISTING CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.



   The corporate boundaries of the Town of Fairmont as of the date of
ratification of this act [May 1, 1973] are as follows:  [The original
boundary description is deleted in this document; the boundaries are as set
forth in the corporate map, which is on file in the clerk’s office.]



SEC. 2.2  EXTENSION OF CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.



   All extensions of the corporate boundaries shall be governed by the
General Statutes of North Carolina.



ARTICLE III.  MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



SEC. 3.1  MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.



   The town shall be governed by a mayor and a board of commissioners
consisting of six (6) members to be elected by the qualified voters of the
town voting at large.



SEC. 3.2  MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.



   The mayor shall be the official head of the town government and shall
preside at all meetings of the board of commissioners. Where there is an
equal division on a question, the mayor shall determine the matter by his
vote, but he shall vote in no other case. The mayor shall exercise such
powers and perform such duties as are or may be conferred upon him by the
general laws of North Carolina, by this charter, and by the ordinances of the
town. The board of commissioners shall choose one of its numbers to act as
mayor pro tempore, and he shall perform the duties of the mayor in the
mayor's absence or disability. The mayor pro tempore as such shall have no
fixed term of office, but shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the
remaining members of the board.



SEC. 3.3  TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS; VACANCIES.



   (a)   The mayor and members of the board of commissioners shall
serve for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and
qualified. Their terms of office shall begin at the first regular meeting
following their election.



[Language relating to the Board which adopted the first Code for the Town is
deleted in this document.]



   (b)   No person shall be eligible to be a candidate or be elected as
mayor or as a member of the board of commissioners or to serve in such
capacity, unless he is a resident and a qualified voter of the town.



   (c)   In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or
commissioner, the board of commissioners shall by majority vote appoint some
qualified person to fill the same for the remainder of the unexpired term.



   (d)   The mayor and commissioners shall continue to receive the same
compensation they now receive until such time as this may be changed pursuant
to the provisions of G.S. 160A-64.



SEC. 3.4  ORGANIZATION OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS; OATHS OF OFFICE.



   The board of commissioners shall meet and organize for the transaction
of business at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the board following
each biennial election. Before entering upon their offices, the mayor and
each commissioner shall take, subscribe, and have entered upon the minutes of
the board the oath of office prescribed in article VI, section 7 of the
Constitution of North Carolina.



SEC. 3.5  MEETINGS OF BOARD.



   (a)   The town board shall fix the time and place for its regular
meetings, which shall be as often as once monthly. Special meetings may be
held as provided in G.S. 160A-71.



   (b)   All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.



SEC. 3.6  QUORUM.



   A majority of the membership of the board of commissioners shall
constitute a quorum. The number required for a quorum shall not be affected
by vacancies. A member who has withdrawn from a meeting without being excused
by majority vote of the remaining members present shall be counted as present
for purposes of determining whether or not a quorum is present.



   The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading, or proving of ordinances
shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the general laws of
North Carolina not inconsistent with this charter. The yeas and nays shall be
taken upon all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the minutes of the
board. The enacting clauses of all ordinances shall be "Be it ordained by the
board of commissioners of the Town of Fairmont". All ordinances and
resolutions shall take effect upon adoption unless otherwise provided therein.



ARTICLE IV.  ELECTION PROCEDURE



[SEC. 4.1.  GENERALLY.]



   Elections for mayor and commissioners for the Town of Fairmont shall be
conducted, in all respects, according to the procedures set forth in article
23, chapter 163 of the General Statutes of North Carolina.



ARTICLE V.  TOWN MANAGER



SEC. 5.1  [GENERALLY.]



   The board of commissioners shall appoint a town manager who shall be
the administrative head of the town government responsible for the
supervision and administration of all departments. The town manager shall be
appointed with regard to merit only, and he need not be a resident of the
town at the time of his appointment. He shall hold office during the pleasure
of the board of commissioners and shall receive such compensation as it shall
fix by ordinance.



   The town manager shall be the administrative head of the town
government and see that within the town the laws of the state and the
ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the board of commissioners are
faithfully executed. He shall attend all meetings of the board of
commissioners and recommend for adoption such measures as he shall deem
expedient. He shall make reports to the board of commissioners from time to
time upon the affairs of the town and keep the board fully advised of the
town's financial condition and its future financial needs. He shall be
responsible for the appointment and removal of all employees of the town,
including heads of departments and superintendents, but not including the
town attorney. All appointments and removals made by the town manager shall
be reported to the board of commissioners at its next regular meeting.



   It shall be the duty of all officers and employees of the town to
perform such duties as may be required of them by the town manager under
General Regulations of the board of commissioners.



   The town manager shall have the powers and duties set forth in this
section of the charter, those specified in G.S. 160A-148, and such other as
may necessarily be implied for him to efficiently perform and carry out the
duties of his office.



ARTICLE VI.  ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



SEC. 6.1  TOWN CLERK.



   The town manager may appoint a town clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the board of commissioners and to maintain in a safe place all
records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the town, and to perform
such other duties as may be required by law or as the town manager may direct.



SEC. 6.2  TOWN TAX COLLECTOR.



   The town manager may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes,
licenses, fees and other moneys belonging to the town, subject to the
provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the town, and he shall
diligently comply with and enforce all the general laws of North Carolina
relating to the collection, sale, and foreclosure of taxes by municipalities.



SEC. 6.3  TOWN ACCOUNTANT.



   The town manager may appoint a town accountant to perform the duties of
the accountant as required by the Municipal Fiscal Control Act.



SEC. 6.4  CONSOLIDATION OF FUNCTIONS.



   The town manager may, with the approval of the board of commissioners,
consolidate any two (2) or more of the positions of the town clerk, town tax
collector, and town accountant, or may assign the functions of any one (1) or
more of these positions to the holder or holders of any other of these
positions. The town manager may also, with the approval of the board of
commissioners, himself perform all or any part of the functions of any of the
named officers, in lieu of appointing other persons to perform the same.



ARTICLE VII.  FINANCE



SEC. 7.1  CUSTODY OF TOWN MONEY.



   All moneys received by the town for or in connection with the business
of the town government shall be paid promptly into the town depository or
depositories. Such institutions shall be designated by the town board in
accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to
security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by the
General Statutes of North Carolina. All interest on moneys belonging to the
town shall accrue to the benefit of the town. All moneys belonging to the
town shall be disbursed only in accordance with the provisions of the
Municipal Fiscal Control Act.



SEC. 7.2  INDEPENDENT AUDIT.



   As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, an
independent audit shall be made of all books and accounts of the town
government by a certified public accountant or a qualified public accountant
registered under chapter 93 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, who
shall have no personal interest directly or indirectly in the affairs of the
town or of any of its officers. The board of commissioners shall select the
public accountant, and the results of such audit shall be made available for
inspection by any interested citizen of the town, and may be published if so
ordered by the board of commissioners.



ARTICLE VIII.  CLAIMS AGAINST THE TOWN



SEC. 8.1  PRESENTATION OF CLAIM; SUIT UPON CLAIMS.



   (a)   All claims or demands against the Town of Fairmont arising in
tort or in contract shall be presented to the board of commissioners in
writing, signed by the claimant, his attorney or agent, within ninety (90)
days after the claim or demand is due or the cause of action accrues, and no
suit or action shall be brought thereon within thirty (30) days or after the
expiration of twelve (12) months from the time said claim or demand is so
presented. Unless the claim or demand is so presented within ninety (90) days
after the cause of action accrues, and unless suit is brought within twelve
(12) months thereafter, any action thereon is barred.



   (b)   No action shall be instituted against the town on account of
damages to or compensation for real property taken or used by the town for
any public purpose, or for the ejectment of the town therefrom, or to remove
a cloud upon the title thereof, unless, within two (2) years after such
alleged use, the owner, his executor, administrator, guardian, or next
friend, shall have given notice in writing to the board of commissioners of
the claim, stating in the notice the date that the alleged use commenced, a
description of property alleged to have been used, and the amount of the
damage or compensation claimed.



   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of
this section, if a complainant suffers from physical or mental incapacity
that renders it impossible for him to give notice, his action shall not be
barred if notice of claim is given by him or on his behalf within six (6)
months after the termination of his incapacity; provided, that minority shall
not of itself constitute physical or mental incapacity. If the complainant is
a minor, his action shall not be barred if notice of claim is given on his
behalf within three (3) years after the happening or the infliction of the
injury complained of; or, if the minor suffers from physical or mental
incapacity that renders it impossible for him to give notice, his action
shall not be barred if notice of claim is given on his behalf within six (6)
months after termination of the incapacity, or within three (3) years after
the happening or the infliction of the injury complained of, whichever is the
longer period. The town may at any time request the appointment of a next
friend to represent any person having a potential claim against the town and
known to be suffering from physical or mental incapacity.



ARTICLE IX. [EMINENT DOMAIN]



[SEC. 9.1.  GENERALLY.]



   In exercising the power of eminent domain the Town of Fairmont may, in
its discretion, use the procedures set forth in article 9 of chapter 136 of
the General Statutes, or the procedures of any general law or local act
applicable to the town.



Editor's note:



   The following are the portions of Acts 1973, chapter 288 referred to in
the editor's note located at the beginning of the charter. The material is
printed in a style consistent with the Fairmont Municipal Code.



 



CHAPTER 288
SENATE BILL 508



   AN ACT TO REVISE AND CONSOLIDATE THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF FAIRMONT
AND TO REPEAL PRIOR CHARTER ACTS.



The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:



   Section 1. The Charter of the Town of Fairmont is hereby revised and
consolidated to read as follows:



"THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF FAIRMONT



   Section 2. The purpose of this act is to revise the Charter of the Town
of Fairmont and to consolidate herein certain acts concerning the property,
affairs, and government of the town. It is intended to continue without
interruption those provisions of prior acts which are consolidated,
specifically or by implication, into this act, so that all rights and
liabilities that have accrued are preserved and may be enforced.



   Section 3. This act shall not be deemed to repeal, modify, nor in any
manner to affect any of the following acts, portions of acts, or amendments
thereto, whether or not such acts, portions of acts, or amendments are
expressly set forth herein:



   (a)   Any acts concerning the property, affairs, or government of
public schools in the Town of Fairmont;



   (b)   Any acts validating, confirming, approving, or legalizing
official proceedings, actions, contracts, or obligations of any kind.



   Section 4. The following acts or portions of acts, having served the
purpose for which enacted, or having been consolidated into this act, are
hereby repealed: c. 112, Private Laws of 1899; c. 82, Private Laws of 1901;
c. 42, Private Laws of 1907; c. 308, Private Laws of 1913; c. 312, Private
Laws of 1913; c. 476, Private Laws of 1913; c. 151, Private Laws of 1915; c.
149, Private Laws of 1919; c. 64, Private Laws of 1921; c. 149, Private Laws
of 1929; c. 183, Private Laws of 1929; c. 157, Private - Local Laws of 1931;
c. 282, Session Laws of 1943; c. 198, Session Laws of 1947; c. 555, Session
Laws of 1947; c. 86, Session Laws of 1949; c. 446, Session Laws of 1949; c.
800, Session Laws of 1949; c. 148, Session Laws of 1951; c. 223, Session Laws
of 1953; c. 203, Session Laws of 1955; c. 452, Session Laws of 1957; c. 666,
Session Laws of 1957; c. 741, Session Laws of 1957; c. 43, Session Laws of
1963; c. 172, Session Laws of 1965; c. 752, Session Laws of 1967; c. 308,
Session Laws of 1969; c. 323, Session Laws of 1969; c. 772, Session Laws of
1969; c. 1007, Session Laws of 1969.



   Section 5. No provision of this act is intended, nor shall be
construed, to affect in any way any rights or interests (whether public or
private):



   (a)   Now vested or accrued, in whole or in part, the validity of
which might be sustained or preserved by reference to any provisions of law
repealed by this act;



   (b)   Derived from, or which might be sustained or preserved in
reliance upon, action heretofore taken (including the adoption of ordinances
or resolutions) pursuant to or within the scope of any provision of law
repealed by this act.



   Section 6. No law heretofore repealed expressly or by implication, and
no law granting authority which has been exhausted, shall be revived by:



   (a)   The repeal herein of any act repealing such law, or



   (b)   Any provision of this act that disclaims an intention to
repeal or affect enumerated or designated laws.



   Section 7. (a) All existing ordinances and resolutions of the Town of
Fairmont, and all existing rules or regulations of departments or agencies of
the Town of Fairmont, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, shall
continue in full force and effect until repealed, modified or amended.



   (b)   No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or
criminal, judicial or administrative, or otherwise) pending at the effective
date of this act by or against the Town of Fairmont or any of its departments
or agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this act.



   Section 8. Severability. If any provision of this act or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this act
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and
to this end the provisions of this act are declared to be severable.



   Section 9. All laws and clauses of laws in conflict with this act are
hereby repealed.



   Section 10. This act shall become effective upon its ratification.



In the General Assembly read three (3) times and ratified, this the 1st day
of May, 1973.



/s/ James E. Hunt, Jr.



President of the Senate



/s/ James E. Ramsey



Speaker of the House of Representatives



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time; computing time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Fairmont shall
be designated as the Code of Fairmont, North Carolina, and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code,
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS or TOWN BOARD.  The governing body of the
Town of Fairmont, North Carolina.



      CHARTER.  The Charter of the Town of Fairmont, North Carolina.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code
as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Robeson County, North Carolina.



      GOVERNOR.  The Governor of North Carolina.



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to 3 or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a
majority of those persons or officers.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality,
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      OWNER.  Applied to any property, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of that property.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.  Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property except real
property.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK.  Any portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of North Carolina.



      STREET.  Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches
thereto within the town, and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way
between abutting property lines.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT.  When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or a part of that building or land,
whether alone or with others.



      TOWN or MUNICIPALITY.  The Town of Fairmont, North Carolina.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, the requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in a section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall
take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force, unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein.  When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, subchapter, section or division, or any
portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by
omission from reprinted pages.  The subsequent ordinances as numbered and
printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that
the subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by
the town.



   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made
by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this code in language substantially similar to the following:  “Section  
            of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Fairmont, North
Carolina, is hereby amended as follows:  ....”  The new provisions shall
then be set out in full as desired.



   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be
added, language substantially similar to the following shall be used: 
“The Code of Ordinances, Town of Fairmont, North Carolina, is hereby
amended by adding a section, to be numbered               , which
section shall read as follows:  ....”  The new section shall then be set
out in full as desired.



   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters or provisions desired to
be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, subchapter or chapter
number, as the case may be.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance and the amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. 
Example:  (G.S. § 160A-11)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1985)



      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



§ 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.



Statutory reference:



   Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   In accordance with G.S. 160A-175 and 14-4:



      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), if any person
shall violate any provision of this code, he or she shall be guilty of a
Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.  No fine shall
exceed $50 unless the pertinent section of the code expressly states that the
maximum fine is greater than $50.



      (2)   If any person shall violate any provision of this code
regulating the operation or parking of vehicles, he or she shall be
responsible for a civil fine or penalty as set by the code or by separate
town ordinance.



   (B)   An ordinance contained herein may provide for its enforcement
by other remedies, as authorized in G.S. 160A-175, including the imposition
of civil fines, the ordering of specific equitable relief, including
injunctions, or a combination of remedies.  In addition, any ordinance
contained herein may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing
from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (C)   An ordinance may provide, when appropriate, that each day’s
continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.



S tatutory reference:



   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   MAYOR; BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



      31.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



      32.   ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



      34.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES; PREPAREDNESS



CHAPTER 30:
MAYOR; BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



Section




Mayor and Board of Commissioners




   30.01   Duties of Mayor



   30.02   Committees



   30.03   Regular meetings



   30.04   Ordinances



   30.05   Use of telephonic devices to attend Commission meetings




Rules of Order and Procedure




   30.15   Scope



   30.16   Order of business



   30.17   Agenda



   30.18   Rules of debate



   30.19   Addressing the Board



   30.20   Points of order and procedure



   30.21   Previous question; main question



   30.22   Motions having precedence



   30.23   Motions to adjourn; voting



Code of Ethics



   30.40   Purpose



   30.41   General principles underlying this Code of Ethics



   30.42   Ethical conduct



   30.43   Acting with integrity



   30.44   Impropriety



   30.45   Setting a good example



   30.46   Openness in Board affairs



MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



§ 30.01  DUTIES OF MAYOR.



   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to:



   (A)   Keep himself or herself informed as to the town’s business;



   (B)   Outline the powers and duties of special committees as the
Board may direct;



   (C)   Make recommendations to the Board; and



   (D)   Perform other duties as authorized by law or this code.



(1988 Code, § 2-26)



Statutory reference:



   General duties of Mayor, see G.S. §§ 160A-167, 160A-69



§ 30.02  COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint whenever he or she deems necessary all
special committees except where the Board shall otherwise order. Any
appointed special committee shall cease to exist upon completion of the
purpose for which it was initially created.



   (B)   Any special committee so appointed shall have, regarding the
subject or issue for which it was created, all the rights, duties,
responsibilities, authority and powers of the Board except for the entering
into or making of any decision, contract or agreement, written or verbal,
which commits or obligates any town property, resource or official or in any
other manner legally binds the town.



   (C)   Findings, alternatives, results, recommendations or any other
data or information discovered, created or determined by any special
committee shall be presented to the Board at a time and for the purpose
established or decreed by the Board.



(1988 Code, § 2-27)



§ 30.03  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   The regular meetings of the Board shall be held on on those dates and
at those times determined by the Board of Commissioners from time to time,
with the meetings being held at the town hall unless otherwise designated by
the Board. Every member of the Board and officer shall attend all meetings of
the Board, unless excused.



(1988 Code, § 2-28)



Statutory references:



   Quorum, see G.S. § 160A-74



   Regular meeting time, place and the like, see G.S. § 160A-71



§ 30.04  ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Every ordinance amending or repealing any ordinance and every
new ordinance shall be proposed in writing and shall be approved as to form
by the Town Attorney.



   (B)   A true copy of an ordinance, which has been duly enacted by
the Board, signed by the Mayor and attested to by the Clerk, shall be known
as an official copy of any ordinance of the town.



(1988 Code, § 2-29)



§ 30.05  USE OF TELEPHONIC DEVICES TO ATTEND COMMISSION MEETINGS.



   (A)   When a Commissioner is unable to attend a regular Commission
meeting due to being unavoidably called out of town on either business or a
personal emergency, that Commissioner may make use of a telephone conference
call by speaker phone (teleconference) to participate in the Commission
meeting.



   (B)   Prior to utilizing a teleconference call, the affected
Commissioner must make all efforts to rearrange his or her schedule to be in
attendance at the meeting; it shall be the responsibility of the affected
Commissioner to make arrangements for using the teleconference call method of
attendance at the meeting.



   (C)   Upon request, town administrative staff shall set up the
speaker phone prior to the meeting; the affected Commissioner shall, at his
or her own expense, call into the Town Hall at least 5 minutes prior to the
scheduled start of the meeting. Thereafter, the meeting shall proceed as if
all members were in physical attendance; Commissioners attending a Commission
meeting via teleconference shall be authorized to cast their vote on any
issue; however, should that Commissioner’s vote be a deciding vote on an
issue, that issue must be ratified at the next meeting.



   (D)   Two Commissioners may make use of this meeting attendance
method at the same meeting, and on a first-come, first-served basis. Each
Commissioner may use this method of attendance for regular meetings up to 6
times in each calendar year, and there is no limit on Commissioner
participation by telephone for special and emergency meetings.



(Ord. 07-108, passed 4-17-2007; Am. Ord. 10-139, passed 10-19-2010; Am. Ord.
16-164, passed 5-17-2016)



RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE



§ 30.15  SCOPE.



   The subchapter below applies to meetings of the Board.



(1988 Code, § 2-41)



§ 30.16  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   At the hour appointed for the meeting of the Board, the Mayor
shall take the chair and direct a call of the members by the Clerk, who shall
note the absentees. If a quorum is not present the Mayor shall send for the
absentees, and upon the appearance of a quorum shall call to order and
proceed with the order of business; if a quorum fails to attend, the meeting
shall stand adjourned to a time agreed on by a majority of the members
present. The Mayor may, when present, substitute any member of the Board to
perform the duties of the chair, but substitution shall not extend beyond
adjournment, except by special consent of the Board.



   (B)   The business of the Board shall be taken up for consideration
and disposition at regular meetings in the order determined by the Board.



   (C)   If the Board shall direct any matter to be the special
business of a future meeting, the matter shall have precedence over all other
business thereat.



(1988 Code, § 2-42)



§ 30.17  AGENDA.



   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts,
documents or other matters to be submitted to the Board shall be delivered or
submitted to the Manager at least 11 days prior to its meeting. The Manager
shall arrange a list of matters according to the order of business and
furnish each member of the Board and the Town Attorney with a copy of same
prior to the Board meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit.



(1988 Code, § 2-43)  (Am. Ord. passed 1-17-2006)



§ 30.18  RULES OF DEBATE.



   (A)   Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair and
upon recognition by the Mayor shall confine himself or herself to the
question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language.



   (B)   A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when
speaking, unless it be to call him or her to order or as otherwise provided
in this subchapter. If a member, while speaking is called to order, he or she
shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined and, if in
order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed.



   (C)   The member moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution
shall have the privilege of closing the debate.



   (D)   A motion to reconsider a vote may be made at the same or any
adjourned meeting to that at which the vote is taken, or upon notice by 1
voting with the majority that a motion to reconsider will be made at the next
regular meeting. Motion must be made by a member of the Board voting on the
prevailing side, but may be seconded by any other member and may be made at
any time and have precedence over all other motions or while a member has the
floor.



   (E)   A member may request from the Mayor the privilege of having an
abstract of his or her statement on any subject under consideration by the
Board entered in the minutes.



   (F)   The Clerk may be directed by the Mayor, with consent of the
Board, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question
coming before the Board.



(1988 Code, § 2-44)



§ 30.19  ADDRESSING THE BOARD.



   (A)   Any person desiring to address the Board shall first secure
the permission of the Mayor. Any interested parties or their authorized
representatives may address the Board on matters listed on the agenda.
Preference shall be given to those persons who may have notified the Mayor in
advance of their desire to speak on the matter listed on the agenda of the
Board. After a motion is before the Board, no person shall address the Board
without first securing the permission of the Board so to do.



   (B)   Every person addressing the Board shall give his or her name
and address for the records and, unless special time is granted by the Board,
shall limit his or her remarks to 10 minutes. All remarks shall be addressed
to the Board as a body and not to any member thereof. No person, other than
Board members, the person having the floor or the Manager after obtaining
permission from the Mayor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion
either directly or through a member of the Board. No question shall be asked
a member except through the Mayor.



   (C)   Those persons wishing to exercise their rights under G.S. §
160A-81.9 to be heard during the public comment period of a regular meeting
of the Board may do so pursuant to the current public comment procedures of
the town kept on file in the Town Clerk’s office.



(1988 Code, § 2-45)



§ 30.20  POINTS OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE.



   (A)   All questions of order shall be decided by the Mayor without
debate, subject to an appeal to the Board.



   (B)   When any point of procedure shall arise not covered by this
chapter, Robert’s Rules of Order, newly revised, shall determine the
question of procedure.



(1988 Code, § 2-46)



§ 30.21  PREVIOUS QUESTION; MAIN QUESTION.



   When the previous question is moved, and seconded by 1 other member, it
shall be put as follows: “Shall the main question be now put?” There
shall be no further amendment or debate; but following an affirmative vote by
a majority of the members present, pending amendments shall be put in their
order before the main question. If the question “Shall the main question be
put?” be decided in the negative, the main question remains before the
Board.



(1988 Code, § 2-47)



§ 30.22  MOTIONS HAVING PRECEDENCE.



   When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received
except as follows: to lay on the table; to postpone to a time certain; to
postpone indefinitely; to refer to a committee; to amend or to divide.
Motions for any of those purposes shall have precedence in the order named.



(1988 Code, § 2-48)



§ 30.23  MOTIONS TO ADJOURN; VOTING.



   (A)   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be
decided without debate.



(1988 Code, § 2-49)



   (B)   All votes by the Board shall be made by roll call vote if
required by any 2 members present. A member may be permitted to explain his
or her vote only by leave of a majority of the members present, and for
explanation, he or she may be allowed not more than 5 minutes. He or she may,
if he or she desires, have his or her reason for voting for or against any
measure recorded in the minutes.



(1988 Code, § 2-50)



CODE OF ETHICS



§ 30.40  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to establish guidelines for
ethical standards for the Mayor and Board of Commissioners, and to help
determine what conduct is appropriate in particular cases. It should not be
considered a substitute for the law nor for a Board member’s best judgment.



(Ord. 10-137, passed 7-20-2010)



§ 30.41  GENERAL PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING THIS CODE OF ETHICS.



   (A)   The stability and proper operation of democratic
representative government depend upon public confidence in the integrity of
the government and upon responsible exercise of the trust conferred by the
people upon their elected officials.



   (B)   Governmental decisions and policy must be made and implemented
through proper channels and processes of the governmental structure.



   (C)   Board members must be able to act in a manner that maintains
their integrity and independence, yet is responsive to the interests and
needs of those they represent.



   (D)   Board members must always remain aware that at various times
they play different roles:



      (1)   As advocates, who strive to advance the legitimate needs
of their citizens;



      (2)   As legislators, who balance the public interest and
private rights in considering and enacting ordinances, resolutions, and
orders;



      (3)   As decision-makers, who arrive at fair and impartial
quasi-judicial and administrative determinations.



   (E)   Board members must know how to distinguish among these roles,
to determine when each role is appropriate, and to act accordingly.



   (F)   Board members must be aware of their obligation to conform
their behavior to standards of ethical conduct that warrant the trust of
their constituents. Each official must find within his or her own conscience
the touchstone by which to determine what conduct is appropriate.



(Ord. 10-137, passed 7-20-2010)



§ 30.42  ETHICAL CONDUCT.



   (A)   Board members should obey all laws applicable to their
official actions as members of the Board. Board members should be guided by
the spirit as well as the letter of the law in whatever they do.



   (B)   At the same time, Board members should feel free to assert
policy positions and opinions without fear of reprisal from fellow Board
members or citizens. To declare that a Board member is behaving unethically
because one disagrees with that Board member on a question of policy (and not
because of that Board member’s behavior) is unfair, dishonest, and
irresponsible, and is itself unethical.



(Ord. 10-137, passed 7-20-2010)



§ 30.43  ACTING WITH INTEGRITY.



   Board members should act with integrity and independence from improper
influence as they exercise the duties of their offices. Characteristics and
behaviors consistent with this standard include the following:



   (A)   Adhering firmly to a code of sound values.



   (B)   Behaving consistently and with respect toward everyone with
whom they interact.



   (C)   Exhibiting trustworthiness.



   (D)   Living as if they are on duty as elected officials regardless
of where they are or what they are doing.



   (E)   Using their best independent judgment to pursue the common
good as they see it, presenting their opinions to all in a reasonable,
forthright, consistent manner.



   (F)   Remaining incorruptible, self-governing, and unaffected by
improper influence while at the same time being able to consider the options
and ideas of others.



   (G)   Disclosing contacts and information about issues that they
receive outside of public meetings and refraining from seeking or receiving
information about quasi-judicial matters outside of the quasi-judicial
proceedings themselves.



   (H)   Treating other Board members and the public with respect, and
honoring the opinions of others even when the Board members disagree with
those opinions.



   (I)   Not reaching conclusions on issues until all sides have been
heard.



   (J)   Showing respect for their offices and not behaving in ways
that reflect badly on those offices.



   (K)   Recognizing that they are part of a group and acting
accordingly.



   (L)   Recognizing that individual Board members are not generally
allowed to act on behalf of the Board, but may do so only if the Board
specifically authorizes it, and that the Board must nonetheless take official
action as a body.



(Ord. 10-137, passed 7-20-2010)



§ 30.44  IMPROPRIETY.



   (A)   Board members should avoid impropriety in the exercise of
their official duties. Their official actions should be above reproach.
Although opinions may vary about what behavior is inappropriate, this Board
will consider impropriety in terms of whether a reasonable person who is
aware of all the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding the Board
member’s action would conclude that the action was inappropriate.



   (B)   If a Board member believes that his or her actions, while
legal and ethical, may be misunderstood, that member should seek the advice
of the Town Attorney, and should consider publicly disclosing the facts of
the situation and the steps taken to resolve it.



(Ord. 10-137, passed 7-20-2010)



§ 30.45  SETTING A GOOD EXAMPLE.



   (A)   Board members should faithfully perform the duties of their
offices. They should act as especially responsible citizens whom others can
trust and respect. They should set a good example for others in the
community, keeping in mind that trust and respect must continually be earned.



   (B)   Board members should faithfully prepare for and attend
meetings. They should carefully analyze all credible information properly
submitted to them, mindful of the need not to engage in communications
outside the meeting in quasi-judicial matters. They should demand full
accountability from those over whom the Board has authority.



   (C)   Board members should be willing to bear their fair share of
the Board’s workload. To the extent appropriate, they should be willing to
put the Board’s interests ahead of their own.



(Ord. 10-137, passed 7-20-2010)



§ 30.46  OPENNESS IN BOARD AFFAIRS.



   (A)   Board members should conduct the affairs of the Board in an
open and public manner. They should comply with all applicable laws governing
open meetings and public records, recognizing that doing so is an important
way to be worthy of the public’s trust. They should remember when they meet
that they are conducting the public’s business.



   (B)   They should also remember that local government records belong
to the public and not to Board members or their employees.



   (C)   In order to ensure strict compliance with the laws concerning
openness, Board members should make clear that an environment of transparency
and candor is to be maintained at all times in the town government: they
should prohibit unjustified delay in fulfilling public records requests; they
should take deliberate steps to make certain that any closed sessions held by
the Board are lawfully conducted, and that any such sessions do not stray
from the purposes for which they are called.



(Ord. 10-137, passed 7-20-2010)



CHAPTER 31:
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



Section




General Provisions




   31.001   Employees subject to chapter



   31.002   Guiding principle



   31.003   Personnel Director



   31.004   Responsibility of Town Manager



   31.005   Employee manual adopted




Authorization, Classification and Salary Plans




   31.020   Authorization plan to be established



   31.021   Allocations of positions



   31.022   Maintenance of authorization plan



   31.023   Organization of positions



   31.024   Amendment of authorization plan



   31.025   Classification plan to be established



   31.026   Maintenance of classification plan



   31.027   Amendment of classification plan



   31.028   Salary schedule to be established



   31.029   Maintenance of salary plan



   31.030   Transition to new salary plan



   31.031   Entrance at minimum salary



   31.032   Salary of trainee



   31.033   Salary of department heads



   31.034   Earned salary increments



   31.035   Salary; reclassified and demoted employees



   31.036   Pay periods; effective date of salary adjustments



   31.037   Part-time employees




Appointment, Dismissal, Demotion and Suspension




   31.050   Applicability to subchapter



   31.051   Statement of policy



   31.052   Employment opportunities to be publicized; recruiting



   31.053   Application form; re-application



   31.054   Contents of application



   31.055   Testing; qualification standards



   31.056   Recommendation; determination of classification and
starting salary



   31.057   Appointments; probationary period; benefits



   31.058   Performance reports; general and for probationary employees



   31.059   Promotion



   31.060   General rules of conduct; disciplinary actions



   31.061   Reduction in force




Conditions of Employment




   31.075   Applicability of subchapter



   31.076   Work performed on job basis



   31.077   Vacation and sick leave



   31.078   Education bonus



   31.079   Leave without pay



   31.080   Clothing allowance




Conflict of Interest and Political Activity




   31.095   Applicability of subchapter



   31.096   Outside employment; political activity



   31.097   Disclosure of confidential information



   31.098   Gifts and favors



   31.099   Penalty for violation




Officers, Employees and Departments




   31.110   Town Manager



   31.111   Department heads and organizations



   31.112   Purchasing



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 31.001  EMPLOYEES SUBJECT TO CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all employees
except as provided below:



   (A)   Elected officials, the Town Manager and the Town Attorney
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Employees not covered by the classification plan of this
chapter shall be exempt from subchapters, “Authorization, Classification
and Salary Plans”; “Appointment, Dismissal, Demotion and Suspension”;
and “Conditions of Employment” of this chapter (except §§ 31.051 and
31.053 through 31.055).



   (C)   Part-time officials appointed by the Board of Commissioners,
and employees of advisory or special boards and commissioners who work an
irregular schedule, shall be exempt from all provisions of this chapter
except § 31.055(B).



(1988 Code, § 16-1)



§ 31.002  GUIDING PRINCIPLE.



   The following rules and regulations shall govern the appointment,
classification, salary, promotion, demotion, dismissal and conditions of
employment of the employees of the town. All appointments and promotions of
town employees subject to the authority exercised by the Town Manager shall
be made on the basis of merit, fitness and demonstrated ability.



(1988 Code, § 16-2)



Statutory reference:



   Personnel rules authorized, see G.S. §§ 160A-162, 160A-164



§ 31.003  PERSONNEL DIRECTOR.



   The Town Manager shall serve as Personnel Director and shall:



   (A)   Establish and maintain a roster of all employees, in which
there shall be set forth as to each employee the class title of the position
held, the salary or pay status and any other necessary data;



   (B)   Assign and direct the work of any and all assistants provided
for by the Board;



   (C)   Advise and consult with the department heads in the
development of training programs;



   (D)   Make annual reports and special reports as he or she deems
advisable regarding personnel administration and recommendations for
improvement therein to the Board; and



   (E)   Perform other duties as may be required by statute and
ordinance.



(1988 Code, § 16-3)



§ 31.004  RESPONSIBILITY OF TOWN MANAGER.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall be responsible for the administration
of this chapter which shall apply to all persons employed by the town except
those specifically exempted. The Manager shall prepare and maintain the
position classification plan, pay plan and the evaluation program and perform
other duties in connection with a modern personnel program as the Board of
Commissioners may direct. The Manager shall maintain a complete system of
personnel files and records. Performance reports and disciplinary related
records shall be considered privileged information and shall not be used for
public purposes. The Manager shall periodically publish a synopsis of the
provisions of this chapter in the form of a personnel handbook which shall be
given to each town employee. Specific procedures and interpretations of the
provisions of this chapter may be made by the Manager as required in the
administering of this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 16-4)



   (B)   (1)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized, pursuant to
G.S. § 160A-226(c), to dispose of any surplus property owned by the Town of
Fairmont, whenever he or she determines, in his or her discretion, that:



         (a)   The item or group of items has a fair market value
of less that $500;



         (b)   The property is no longer necessary for the
conduct of public business; and



         (c)   Sound property management principles and financial
considerations indicate that the interests of the town would be best served
by disposing of the property.



      (2)   The Town Manager may dispose of any surplus personal
property by any means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to yield
the highest attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including
but not limited to the methods of sale provided in G.S. § 160A-12. The sale
may be public or private, and with or without notice and minimum waiting
period.



      (3)   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who
tenders the highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful
to the town if greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the Town
Manager is hereby authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title
documents. If no offers are received within a reasonable time, the Town
Manager may retain the property, obtain any reasonably available salvage
value or cause it to be disposed of as waste material. No surplus property
may be donated to any individual or organization except by resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.



      (4)   The Town Manager shall, on or before June 15, report in
writing to the Board of Commissioners on any property disposed under these
provisions for each fiscal year. The written report shall generally describe
the property sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold or with whom exchanged,
and the amount of money or other consideration received for each sale or
exchange since the last report was submitted.



(Ord. passed 7-11-2000)



§ 31.005  EMPLOYEE MANUAL ADOPTED.



   The current personnel policy of the town is meant only to serve as a
guide for the administration of personnel matters, has not been adopted as an
ordinance, and is not a part of this code.



AUTHORIZATION, CLASSIFICATION AND SALARY PLANS



§ 31.020  AUTHORIZATION PLAN TO BE ESTABLISHED.



   The Board shall establish an official position authorization plan by
departments for the town. This authorization plan shall include all
permanently authorized personnel positions except those exempted in § 31.001
and shall be kept on file in the town Personnel Department.



(1988 Code, § 16-21)



§ 31.021  ALLOCATIONS OF POSITIONS.



   The Manager shall allocate each authorization included in the position
authorization plan to its appropriate class in the position classification
plan.



(1988 Code, § 16-22)



§ 31.022  MAINTENANCE OF AUTHORIZATION PLAN.



   The Manager shall be responsible for the administration and maintenance
of the position authorization plan. Department heads shall be responsible for
bringing to the attention of the Manager and for justifying the need for new
positions. The Manager shall study the request and he or she may request the
Board to authorize a new position. Subsequent to Board authorizations, the
Manager shall either allocate the position to the appropriate class within
the existing position classification plan or recommend that the Board amend
the position classification plan to establish a new class to which the new
position may be allocated.



(1988 Code, § 16-23)



§ 31.023  ORGANIZATION OF POSITIONS.



   The positions included in the approved position authorization plan
shall be organized in a way as to provide the most efficient and effective
delivery of services to the town’s citizens.



(1988 Code, § 16-24)



§ 31.024  AMENDMENT OF AUTHORIZATION PLAN.



   The total number of departmental positions shall be added to and
deleted from the position authorization plan upon recommendation of the
Manager with approval of the Board.



(1988 Code, § 16-25)



§ 31.025  CLASSIFICATION PLAN TO BE ESTABLISHED.



   The Board shall establish an official position classification plan
covering all positions included in the position authorization plan. The
position classification plan shall be kept on file in the Town Personnel
Department.



(1988 Code, § 16-26)



§ 31.026  MAINTENANCE OF CLASSIFICATION PLAN.



   (A)   The Manager shall be responsible for the administration and
maintenance of the position classification plan. Department heads shall be
responsible for bringing to the attention of the Manager material changes in
the nature of duties, responsibilities, working conditions and other factors
affecting the classification of any existing or proposed position.



   (B)   When the Manager finds that a substantial change has occurred
in the nature or level of duties and responsibilities of an existing
position, then he or she shall:



      (1)   Direct that the existing class specification be revised;



      (2)   Reallocate the position to the appropriate class within
the existing classification plan; or



      (3)   Recommend that the Board amend the position
classification plan to establish a new class to which the position may be
allocated.



(1988 Code, § 16-27)



§ 31.027  AMENDMENT OF CLASSIFICATION PLAN.



   Classes of positions shall be added to and deleted from the position
classification plan upon the recommendation of the Manager with the approval
of the Board.



(1988 Code, § 16-28)



§ 31.028  SALARY SCHEDULE TO BE ESTABLISHED.



   The Board shall establish an official salary schedule which in
conjunction with the position classification plan shall be the basis of the
salary plan for the town. The salary plan shall cover all permanent classes
of positions included in the official classification and authorization plans.
A job description or class specification for each position shall be prepared
and it, along with the salary schedule, shall be kept on file in the Town
Personnel Department.



(1988 Code, § 16-29)



§ 31.029  MAINTENANCE OF SALARY PLAN.



   Each year prior to the preparation of the annual budget, the Manager
shall determine the general level of salaries paid and fringe benefits
provided comparable county, municipal and state employees, and any change in
the cost of living in the area during the fiscal year. The Manager shall
conduct continuing studies of the internal relationships between classes in
order to reduce or eliminate inequities between classes of positions within
the town. Based on the studies and recommendations and the general financial
condition of the town, the Manager shall recommend to the Board increases,
reductions or amendments of the salary plan as he or she deems necessary to
maintain the fairness and adequacy of the plan.



(1988 Code, § 16-30)



§ 31.030  TRANSITION TO NEW SALARY PLAN.



   The following principles shall govern the transition to a new salary
plan:



   (A)   No employee shall receive a salary reduction as a result of
the transition to a new salary plan.



   (B)   All employees being paid at a rate lower than the minimum rate
established for their respective classes shall have their salaries raised to
the new minimum for their classes.



   (C)   All employees being paid at a rate above the maximum rate
established for their respective classes shall remain at their present rate.



§ 31.031  ENTRANCE AT MINIMUM SALARY.



   Each new employee shall be appointed at a minimum salary which has been
established for the classification in which he or she is employed except:



   (A)   If the new employee does not meet the minimum requirements of
the position and qualified applicants for the position are not available, the
Manager may designate the employee as a trainee to be appointed at a salary
below the minimum;



   (B)   When the Manager shall determine that there has been a
demonstrated inability to recruit at a minimum salary or that an applicant
possesses exceptional qualifications, he or she may authorize the employment
of an applicant at a step in the salary range higher than the normal entry
level.



(1988 Code, § 16-32)



§ 31.032  SALARY OF TRAINEE.



   An applicant hired or employee promoted to a position in a higher class
who does not meet all the established requirements of the position may be
appointed at a training salary as much as 2 steps below the minimum salary.
An employee in a trainee status shall continue to receive a reduced salary
until the department head or the Manager shall determine that the trainee is
qualified to assume the full responsibilities of the position.



(1988 Code, § 16-35)



§ 31.033  SALARY OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.



   Those employees classified as department heads shall be paid the
weekly, biweekly or monthly salary specified by the salary plan regardless of
the number of hours worked in excess of 40 hours per week. The Chief of the
Police Department shall have a regular workweek of 40 hours per week and
shall be compensated at the hourly rate specified by the salary plan for each
of those regular hours. It is recognized that all department heads will work
many hours in excess of their respective regular workweek in accomplishing
the many varied tasks assigned them; therefore, department heads may, with
approval of the Manager, take compensatory time off from time to time being
restricted only by the requirement to accomplish their assigned work in a
timely and acceptable manner.



(1988 Code, § 16-34)



§ 31.034  EARNED SALARY INCREMENTS.



   (A)   The pay ranges are intended to permit administrative
flexibility in recognizing individual differences between positions allocated
to the same class and to promote employee incentive by rewarding employees
for good and meritorious service. Each department head shall recommend, with
justification, those employees who are performing in a superior manner and
who should warrant consideration for step increases. However, no more than
50% of the employees within a department may be recommended for salary
increments at the beginning of the fiscal year. Recommendations will be made
by the department head in written form. Ordinarily, salary increments will be
limited to 1 established pay range step. An employee whose sustained
performance is outstanding may be granted an earned salary increment twice
during a fiscal year if:



      (1)   The department head recommends the increments and
indicates in writing the special circumstances warranting the increments;



      (2)   The Manager approves; and



      (3)   The department’s budget can absorb the increased
expense.



   (B)   Any increases shall be in addition to cost of living increases
as determined appropriate by the governing board which generally shall be on
a fixed percentage basis for all permanent employees of the town.



(1988 Code, § 16-35)



§ 31.035  SALARY; RECLASSIFIED AND DEMOTED EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The salary of an employee reclassified from 1 class to another
having a higher overlapping pay range shall be adjusted to the minimum of the
new range or to 1 step above his or her old salary, whichever is higher. The
reclassification of a position to a class having a lower pay range shall not
result in a reduction of the salary of the reclassified employee.



(1988 Code, § 16-36)



   (B)   An employee demoted to a position in a different class with a
lower minimum salary may be reduced in pay 1 step or to the maximum of the
pay range, whichever is lower, for the class to which he or she is demoted.
Successive demotions may be imposed should action be deemed appropriate and
prudent.



(1988 Code, § 16-37)



§ 31.036  PAY PERIODS; EFFECTIVE DATE OF SALARY ADJUSTMENTS.



   (A)   The Manager shall designate those employees to be paid
monthly, semimonthly and weekly. If pay day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or a
holiday, the employees shall be paid on the last working day prior thereto.



(1988 Code, § 16-38)



   (B)   Salary adjustments approved during any month shall become
effective at the beginning of the next pay period or at a later date as may
be provided. No retroactive adjustments will be awarded.



(1988 Code, § 16-39)



§ 31.037  PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Salary. The pay plan established by this chapter is for
full-time service. The compensation of any employee appointed for less than
full-time service shall be proportionally adjusted and established on an
hourly basis.



   (B)   Employment. Temporary employees shall be hired by the Manager
and shall receive compensation for their service as provided above. Payment
for service shall be made upon the presentation of proper documentation by
the supervising department head.



(1988 Code, § 16-40)



APPOINTMENT, DISMISSAL, DEMOTION AND SUSPENSION



§ 31.050  APPLICABILITY TO SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to all employees
except those exempted in § 31.001.



(1988 Code, § 16-61)



§ 31.051  STATEMENT OF POLICY.



   It shall be the policy of the municipal government to foster, maintain
and promote equal employment opportunities. The town will select employees on
the basis of individual ability and qualifications for a given position.
Equal treatment shall be accorded each employee concerning compensation,
promotion, advancement and training without regard for sex, race, age, color,
religion or place of national origin.



(1988 Code, § 16-62)



§ 31.052  EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES TO BE PUBLICIZED; RECRUITING.



   (A)   The Manager shall publicize opportunities for employment with
the town including the salary ranges and employment qualifications for
positions to be filled.



(1988 Code, § 16-63)



   (B)   Each department head shall be responsible for assisting the
Manager in recruiting employees as are authorized for his or her department
by the authorization and classification plans and by the budget.



(1988 Code, § 16-64)



§ 31.053  APPLICATION FORM; RE-APPLICATION.



   Each application for a town position shall be made in writing on a form
provided by the Administration Department. Applications which are more than 3
years old may be removed from the files and destroyed. Re-application for
employment may be made at any time.



(1988 Code, § 16-65)



§ 31.054  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   Each employment application shall denote the following: the data
received; the interviewer if an interview was conducted; any job
recommendation on the basis of qualifications and desire; and whether a test
is to be given or has been given.



(1988 Code, § 16-66)



§ 31.055  TESTING; QUALIFICATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   The town reserves the right to conduct testing of applicants
for any position regardless of whether the applicants will start at the entry
or the promotion levels. Any tests will measure the skills required for
performance of the job. Test results shall remain a matter of privileged
information.



(1988 Code, § 16-67)



   (B)   Employees shall meet the employment standards established by
the position classification plan and other reasonable minimum standards as to
character, aptitudes, ability to meet the public and physical conditions as
may be established by department heads, the Manager or the Board. Applicants
may be required to submit to appropriate competitive written examinations
prior to employment. No town employee shall be required to belong to a
particular political party or be of a particular sex, race or religion as a
condition of employment.



(1988 Code, § 16-68)



§ 31.056  RECOMMENDATION; DETERMINATION OF CLASSIFICATION AND STARTING
SALARY.



   Before any commitment is made to an applicant for employment, the
department head shall forward the applicant’s complete application form to
the Manager with a recommendation as to the position to be filled and the
salary to be paid. After investigating the duties and responsibilities of the
position and the qualifications and experience of the applicant, the Manager
shall determine the classification and the starting salary to be paid if the
applicant is selected for employment.



(1988 Code, § 16-69)



§ 31.057  APPOINTMENTS; PROBATIONARY PERIOD; BENEFITS.



   (A)   Appointments to any employment position shall be made by the
Manager.



(1988 Code, § 16-70)



   (B)   (1)   Before completion of the probationary period by an
employee, the department head shall indicate in writing to the Manager that
he or she has discussed the new employee’s progress, accomplishments,
strengths, failures and weaknesses with the employee and make 1 of the
following recommendations:



         (a)   The new employee is performing satisfactory work
for which the employee should be retained and be given a merit increase;



         (b)   The probationary period should be extended for up
to 3 additional months; or



         (c)   The employee should be discharged.



      (2)   If retained, the employee shall be designated a
permanent employee. An employee may be dismissed during the probationary
period at any time if the department head believes that the employee is not
capable of accomplishing his or her assigned duties. A performance report
will be submitted on an employee progressing from probationary to permanent
status.



(1988 Code, § 16-71)



   (C)   Employees serving a probationary period following initial
employment in a permanent position shall receive all benefits provided in
accordance with this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 16-72)



§ 31.058  PERFORMANCE REPORTS; GENERAL AND FOR PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   The immediate supervisor will render an annual performance
report on each town employee under his or her jurisdiction. Reports shall be
submitted to the Manager by December 15 of each year. The supervisor of the
reporting officer will endorse each report submitted by the reporting
officer. In the case of reports submitted by the Manager, the Mayor will
endorse the reports. All reports will be retained in the employee’s
personnel file.



(1988 Code, § 16-73)



   (B)   Performance reports for probationary employees shall conform
to division (A) above except that a report shall be completed every 3 months
during the probation period and immediately prior to a recommendation for
promotion to permanent status.



(1988 Code, § 16-74)



§ 31.059  PROMOTION.



   Department heads and supervisors of town employees shall anticipate
personnel turnover and shall make appropriate plans for replacement. Present
employees should be trained for greater responsibility and, if qualified,
should be considered for in-house promotion to fill vacancies.



(1988 Code, § 16-75)



§ 31.060  GENERAL RULES OF CONDUCT; DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.



   (A)   The Manager shall prepare general rules of conduct for town
employees and appropriate disciplinary actions to be followed if the rules
are violated. However, neither the rules of conduct nor the appropriate
disciplinary actions shall be limiting or considered all inclusive, nor shall
they bestow a legal property right of employment to the employee, but shall
only serve as examples for administering the provisions of this chapter.
Publication in the employee handbook and/or posting on departmental bulletin
boards shall constitute employee notification of rules and rule changes.



   (B)   An employee may be demoted if he or she should demonstrate
incapacity or incapability in his or her current assignment. Department heads
shall provide written justification for any recommended demotion to the
Manager who has the only authority to demote a permanent employee.



(1988 Code, § 16-76)



§ 31.061  REDUCTION IN FORCE.



   If a reduction in force becomes necessary, consideration will be given
to the quality of each town employee’s past performance and the needs of
the town in determining those employees to be released.



(1988 Code, § 16-77)



CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT



§ 31.075  APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to all town
employees except those specifically exempted such as officials, special
category employees, temporary employees and those on a professional service
basis. The benefits provided by this subchapter shall be for full-time
service. The benefits for any employees appointed for less than full-time
service in a position included in the authorization and classification plans
shall be reduced by that fraction which the employee works less than full
time.



(1988 Code, § 16-101)



§ 31.076  WORK PERFORMED ON JOB BASIS.



   There are jobs listed in the classification plan which are performed on
a job or quota basis and not strictly upon the number of hours that the
worker utilizes in doing the work. Pay for the work accomplished in these
classifications is for the accomplishment of the tasks assigned rather than
the hours worked. The pay received however is based upon an hourly rate which
is calculated on a 40-hour workweek. As an example, a worker who is
performing on a job basis works 35 hours and receives $100.00 for his or her
labor; he or she is paid at the rate of $2.50 an hour and the total
remuneration is considered to be for 40 hours’ work. Management reserves
the right to require any employee to perform, on the job, for 40 hours during
the workweek, regardless of the time which is required to accomplish the
regularly assigned task.



(1988 Code, § 16-102)



§ 31.077  VACATION AND SICK LEAVE.



   (A)   Vacation leave records will be maintained in the personnel
office. Saturdays, Sundays and holidays will not be considered days of leave
within the vacation period except when Saturday and/or Sunday would be a
regular workday for the employee if he or she were not on vacation leave.



(1988 Code, § 16-105)



   (B)   (1)   Physician’s certificate. The department head may
require a physician’s certificate as to the nature of the illness and as to
the employee’s physical capacity to resume his or her duties for each
occasion on which an employee is granted sick leave. The employee may be
required to undergo a medical examination if action is deemed necessary to
protect the health of other employees. The department head shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this section to the end that employees
shall not be on duty when their presence may endanger their health or the
well being of other employees, and abuses of sick leave privileges will not
be condoned or tolerated.



      (2)   Workers’ compensation leave. The foregoing provisions
as to sick leave shall not apply to employees injured by an accident arising
out of and in the course of employment, except in cases of injury causing
disability of 7 days or less for which no compensation is payable under the
North Carolina Workers’ Compensation Act. Any compensation which shall be
made by the insurer shall be deducted from the normal wage or salary which
the town shall pay.



      (3)   Extension and accumulation. Sick leave benefits may be
extended by action of the Manager. When sick leave credits have been
exhausted including any extensions, the employee may elect to use his or her
vacation leave for convalescence purposes. Accumulation of unused sick leave
shall be unlimited.



(1988 Code, § 16-106)



§ 31.078  EDUCATION BONUS.



   (A)   Any employee who earns an associate, baccalaureate, masters or
doctorate degree from an accredited and generally recognized school, college
or university shall receive, in addition to his or her regular salary, a 5%
education bonus for each degree earned, if the earned degree is a greater
degree than the minimum educational requirement for the employee’s position
as specified in the class specifications.



   (B)   This bonus is not applicable to high school diplomas, whether
or not required by a particular class specification.



(1988 Code, § 16-105)



§ 31.079  LEAVE WITHOUT PAY.



   A town employee may be granted a leave of absence without pay for a
period not to exceed 1 year by the Manager upon the recommendation of the
supervising department head for reasons of personal or family considerations,
special work or related reasons. During leave, the individual may not engage
in any employment which is not specifically authorized by the town.



(1988 Code, § 16-106)



§ 31.080  CLOTHING ALLOWANCE.



   Employees required by the Manager, with the approval of the Board, to
wear uniforms while on duty, shall be furnished uniforms by the town.



(1988 Code, § 16-107)



CONFLICT OF INTEREST AND POLITICAL ACTIVITY



§ 31.095  APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.



   All provisions of this subchapter shall be applicable to all town
permanent, temporary and part-time employees and certain provisions shall be
applicable to elected officials. Section 31.096 shall not be applicable to
part-time officials and special employees or appointees of the Town Board.



(1988 Code, § 16-151)



§ 31.096  OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT; POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



   (A)   The work of the town shall have precedence over the other
occupational interests of employees. All outside employment for salary, wages
or commissions and all self-employment must be approved by the Manager.



(1988 Code, § 16-152)



   (B)   All employees of the town have a civil responsibility to
support good government by every available means and in every appropriate
manner. Each employee may join or affiliate himself or herself with civic
organizations of a partisan or political nature, attend political meetings,
advocate and support the principles and policies of civic, social, fraternal
and political organizations in accordance with the constitution and the laws
of the state and the constitution and laws of the United States of America.
However, an employee of the town shall not:



      (1)   Engage in any political activity while on duty;



      (2)   Be required as a duty of his or her office or as a
requisite of tenureship of office to contribute to, solicit for or act as
custodian of funds for political or partisan purposes; or



      (3)   Be coerced into contributions by any town employee or
other persons for funds or favors for a political or partisan nature.



(1988 Code, § 16-153)



§ 31.097  DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   No official or employee, without the approval of the Manager or by
court order, shall disclose confidential information covering the property,
government or affairs of the town.



(1988 Code, § 16-154)



§ 31.098  GIFTS AND FAVORS.



   No official or employee shall accept any gift, service, loan, thing,
money or promise, from any person which to his or her knowledge is interested
directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings within
the town jurisdiction; nor shall an official or employee accept a gift, favor
or thing of value that may tend to influence him or her in the discharge of
his or her duties, or grant in the discharge of his or her duties any
improper favor, service or thing of value.



(1988 Code, § 16-155)



§ 31.099  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.



   Any violation of this subchapter shall be deemed improper conduct and
shall subject the official or employee to disciplinary action by the Manager
or other appropriate authority.



(1988 Code, § 16-156)



OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND DEPARTMENTS



§ 31.110  TOWN MANAGER.



   The Town Manager shall:



   (A)   Be authorized to inspect at any reasonable time all books and
records pertaining to town affairs and kept by any officer or employee of the
town;



   (B)   Settle any dispute as to the respective duties or powers of
any appointed officers of the town; and



   (C)   Have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty
which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to
perform that duty.



(1988 Code, § 2-76)



§ 31.111  DEPARTMENT HEADS AND ORGANIZATIONS.



   The departmental operating organization of the town shall be divided
into the following departments and heads thereof:



   (A)   Department of Finance:  Director of Finance;



   (B)   Department of Public Safety (referred to elsewhere as the
“Police Department” or “Fire Department”):  Director of Public
Safety (referred to elsewhere herein as the “Chief of Police” or “Fire
Chief”);



   (C)   Tax Department:  Tax Collector;



   (D)   Department of Public Works:  Director of Public Works; and



   (E)   Department of Planning, Zoning and Code Enforcement: 
Director of Planning, Zoning and Code Enforcement.



(1988 Code, § 2-101)



§ 31.112  PURCHASING.



   The Town Manager shall serve as purchasing agent and shall:



   (A)   Make all purchases of material, equipment and supplies
authorized by the Board at the most favorable price for the town and shall
see that the material, equipment and supplies delivered are correct in number
or amount and comply with the standards and specifications agreed to at the
time of purchase;



   (B)   Establish sets of standards and specifications to control
purchases by the town;



   (C)   Prepare and publish specifications and notices to bidders;



   (D)   Advise the Board as to anticipated needs for purchases and
make purchases in advance of needs as authorized by the Board;



   (E)   Store material, equipment and supplies in advance of actual
need;



   (F)   Keep records of all purchases made by him or her and of the
destination or ultimate use of material, equipment and supplies; and



   (G)   Cause an inventory to be kept of all municipal property in his
or her custody and of all municipal property in the custody of the other
officers and employees of the town.



(1988 Code, § 2-102)



Statutory references:



   Local government finance, see G.S. Ch. 159



   Special assessments, see G.S. §§ 160A-216 et seq.



   Taxation, see G.S.§§ 160A-206 et seq.



CHAPTER 32:
ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Planning Board




   32.01   Established; members



   32.02   Organization and elections



   32.03   Meetings and records



   32.04   General powers and responsibilities



   32.05   Supplemental powers and responsibilities



   32.06   Appropriations



   32.07   Advisory council and special committees



PLANNING BOARD



§ 32.01  ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS.



   (A)   There is established a Planning Board.



(1988 Code, § 17-26)



   (B)   (1)   (a)   The Planning Board shall consist of 9
members appointed by the Board of Commissioners for terms of 3 years, with
eligibility for reappointment.



         (b)   Extraterritorial representation shall consist of 3
residents from the 1-mile limit, appointed as directed by G.S. § 160A-362.



         (c)   One month prior to the expiration of appointed
terms, notice shall be given to the Town Clerk by the Secretary of the
Planning Board.



         (d)   Vacancies occurring for reasons other than
expiration of terms shall be filled as they occur for the period of the
unexpired term, with immediate notice of vacancies given to the Town Clerk by
the Secretary of the Planning Board.



         (e)   The members of the Planning Board shall serve
without compensation.



      (2)   The members of the Planning Board may, after a public
hearing, be removed by the Board of Commissioners for inefficiency, neglect
of duty or malfeasance in office.



      (3)   If any member shall have a personal interest of any kind
in a matter then before the Planning Board, that member should disclose his
or her interest and be disqualified from voting upon the matter, and the
Secretary shall so record in the minutes that no vote was cast by that member.



(1988 Code, § 17-27)



Statutory reference:



   Planning and development, see G.S. §§ 160A-360 et seq.



   Planning Board, see G.S. §§ 160A-361 et seq.



§ 32.02  ORGANIZATION AND ELECTIONS.



   The Planning Board shall elect a chairperson and create and fill the
offices as it may determine. The term of the chairperson and other officers
shall be 1 year, with eligibility for re-election. Nomination of officers
shall be made from the floor and the elections shall follow immediately
thereafter. A candidate receiving a majority vote of the entire membership of
the Planning Board shall be declared elected. Should any vacancy occur among
the officers of the Planning Board, the vacant office shall be filled in
accordance with this section and, the officer shall serve the unexpired term
of the office in which the vacancy occurred.



(1988 Code, § 17-28)



§ 32.03  MEETINGS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The Planning Board shall hold at least 1 meeting monthly
unless cancelled or rescheduled by the Planning Board at a prior meeting. The
chairperson of the Planning Board shall have the authority to call a special
meeting when requested to do so in writing by a majority of the members of
the Planning Board, or at his or her discretion. At any meeting of the
Planning Board, a quorum shall consist of 5 members of the Planning Board. No
official action shall be taken in the absence of a quorum. All meetings of
which official action is taken shall be open to the general public.



(1988 Code, § 17-29)



   (B)   The Planning Board shall adopt bylaws for transaction of its
business and shall keep a record of its members’ attendance and of its
resolutions, discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be
a public record.



(1988 Code, § 17-30)



§ 32.04  GENERAL POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Board in
general to:



      (1)   Determine objectives to be sought in the development of
the area studied;



      (2)   Prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;



      (3)   Develop and recommend policies, ordinances,
administrative procedures and other means for carrying out plans in a
coordinated and efficient manner;



      (4)   Make studies of the town and surrounding areas;



      (5)   Advise the Board of Commissioners concerning the use and
amendment of means for carrying out plans;



      (6)   Exercise any functions in the administration and
enforcement of various means for carrying out plans that the Town Board may
direct; and



      (7)   Perform any other related duties that the Town Board may
direct.



   (B)   All town officials shall, upon request, furnish to the
Planning Board available records of information as it may require in the
performance of its official responsibilities. The Planning Board or its
agents may, in the performance of its official responsibilities, enter upon
lands and make examinations or surveys and maintain necessary monuments
thereon.



(1988 Code, § 17-31)



§ 32.05  SUPPLEMENTAL POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Hearings. In addition to public hearings required by law, the
Planning Board may at its discretion hold public hearings when it decides
that the hearings will be in the public interest.



   (B)   Publicity and education. The Planning Board shall have power
to promote public interest in and an understanding of its recommendations,
and to that end it may publish and distribute copies of its recommendations
and may employ other means of publicity and education as it may determine.



   (C)   Attendance at conferences. Members or employees of the
Planning Board, when duly authorized by the Planning Board, may attend
planning conferences or meetings of planning institutes or hearings upon
pending planning legislation, and the Planning Board may by formal and
affirmative vote pay, within the Planning Board’s budget, the reasonable
traveling expenses incidental to attendance.



   (D)   Annual report. The Planning Board shall, in May of each year,
submit in writing to the Board of Commissioners a written report of its
activities, an analysis of the expenditures to date for the current fiscal
year, and for review and approval its requested budget of funds needed for
operation during the ensuing fiscal year.



(1988 Code, § 17-32)



§ 32.06  APPROPRIATIONS.



   The Board of Commissioners may appropriate to the Planning Board an
amount as it may deem necessary to carry out the purpose of its creation and
for the improvement of the town.



(1988 Code, § 17-33)



§ 32.07  ADVISORY COUNCIL AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES.



   (A)   The Planning Board may seek the establishment of an unofficial
advisory council and may cooperate with this council to the end that its
investigations and plans may receive fullest consideration, but the Planning
Board may not delegate to the advisory council any of its official
prerogatives.



   (B)   The Planning Board is authorized to appoint committees and
employees and to authorize expenditures as it may see fit, subject to
limitations of funds provided for the Planning Board by the Board of
Commissioners in the town’s annual budget.



(1988 Code, § 17-34)



CHAPTER 33:
POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section




Generally




   33.01   Officers to enforce trespassing regulations



   33.02   Policies and procedures manual



   33.03   Organization; Manager control



   33.04   Appointment, duties of Chief of Police



   33.05   Department policies; assignment of duties



   33.06   Uniforms




Auxiliary Police Division




   33.20   Established



   33.21   Chief of Police to control; appointments and removals



   33.22   Duties



   33.23   Law enforcement powers



   33.24   Identification



   33.25   Carrying and custody of firearms



   33.26   Workers compensation insurance



GENERALLY



§ 33.01  OFFICERS TO ENFORCE TRESPASSING REGULATIONS.



   The present and future members of the Police Department, including
auxiliary police officers, are hereby authorized to act as agents for
property owners and tenants to enforce regulations against trespassing on
private property located within the corporate limits of the town upon
specific request by property owners or tenants, in accordance with the terms
of the agency agreement attached to the ordinance from which this section is
derived. A copy of the agency agreement is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk.



(1988 Code, § 18-1)



§ 33.02  POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL.



   The police manual entitled “Policies and Procedures Manual, Town of
Fairmont Police Department” is adopted. In the event of a conflict between
the manual and this subchapter, this subchapter controls.



(1988 Code, § 18-25)



Statutory reference:



   Law enforcement, see G.S.§§ 160A-281 et seq.



§ 33.03  ORGANIZATION; MANAGER CONTROL.



   (A)   The Police Department of the town shall consist of the Chief
of Police and as many other police officers as the Board shall from time to
time provide.



(1988 Code, § 18-26)



   (B)   The Manager shall have the general control of the Police
Department, and may at any time, for cause, suspend from duty any member of
the police force.



(1988 Code, § 18-27)



Statutory reference:



   Qualifications of police, see G.S. § 17C-10



§ 33.04  APPOINTMENT, DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police shall be appointed and serve at the discretion of
the Manager. The Chief shall have control over the Police Department under
the supervision of the Manager. The Chief shall keep the Manager informed of
the Department’s activities and make reports that the Manager may from time
to time require, and he or she shall perform other duties as may be required
of him or her by the Manager.



(1988 Code, § 18-28)



§ 33.05  DEPARTMENT POLICIES; ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.



   (A)   For all matters pertaining to the government of the Police
Department not provided for by law or by this code, the Chief of Police shall
recommend to the Manager, for the approval of the Board, Police Department
policies. The Chief of Police shall promulgate and enforce policies within
the Police Department.



(1988 Code, § 18-29)



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall assign the duties of police officers
and shall see that they faithfully perform their duties.



(1988 Code, § 18-30)



§ 33.06  UNIFORMS.



   All police officers shall wear uniforms as shall be required by the
town and shall keep uniforms in a neat and clean condition and shall
surrender all uniforms and equipment upon leaving the police service of the
town if uniforms and equipment were furnished by the town.



(1988 Code, § 18-31)



AUXILIARY POLICE DIVISION



§ 33.20  ESTABLISHED.



   There may be established an Auxiliary Police Department to be known as
the Auxiliary Police Division of the Police Department. The Auxiliary Police
Division shall be a volunteer organization, composed of as many members as
may from time to time be determined by the Board.



(1988 Code, § 18-51)



§ 33.21  CHIEF OF POLICE TO CONTROL; APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS.



   (A)   The Auxiliary Police Division shall be under the direct
control of the Chief of Police, acting under the general supervision of the
Manager. All appointments and removals of members of the Auxiliary Police
Division shall be made in the same manner and under the same policies and
procedures as may from time to time be established for appointment and
removal of regular police officers.



   (B)   The Auxiliary Police Division shall have no commanding
officer, nor any other officers. All members shall bear the rank of patrol
officer. Each member of the Auxiliary Police Division shall take the oath of
office of a regular police officer. The Chief of Police shall provide for
adequate training of members of the Auxiliary Police Division and of
candidates for membership.



(1988 Code, § 18-52)



Statutory reference:



   Auxiliary Police Division, see G.S. § 160A-282



§ 33.22  DUTIES.



   (A)   The duties of the Auxiliary Police Division, subject at all
times to the direction, supervision and control of the Chief of Police, shall
be to assist the regular members of the Police Department in the enforcement
of law and the maintenance of peace and order when called to active duty by
the Chief of Police. The Chief shall by order establish rules and regulations
to govern the Auxiliary Police Division, to fix the specific duties of its
members and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. Members of the
Auxiliary Police Division shall obey the instructions of regular police
officers in carrying out their duties.



   (B)   The Chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned in
this section to be performed by the Auxiliary Police Division, with approval
of the Manager.



(1988 Code, § 18-53)



§ 33.23  LAW ENFORCEMENT POWERS.



   No member of the Auxiliary Police Division shall enforce, nor attempt
to enforce any law except when called to active duty, and except when
accompanied by 1 or more regular police officers.



(1988 Code, § 18-54)



§ 33.24  IDENTIFICATION.



   An identification card and other insignia or evidence of identity as
the Chief may prescribe shall be issued to each member of the Auxiliary
Police Division, who must carry the card and other identification at all
times while on duty, and who must surrender them upon the termination of his
or her membership.



(1988 Code, § 18-55)



§ 33.25  CARRYING AND CUSTODY OF FIREARMS.



   No member of the Auxiliary Police Division shall, while on duty, carry
any firearm except upon the express order of the Chief of Police, and all
official firearms shall be kept in custody of the Police Department except
when issued to a member of the auxiliary division for use on active duty
while accompanied by and under the supervision of 1 or more regular police
officers.



(1988 Code, § 18-56)



§ 33.26  WORKERS COMPENSATION INSURANCE.



   While undergoing official training and while performing duties on
behalf of the city, auxiliary law enforcement personnel shall be entitled to
benefits under the North Carolina Worker’s Compensation Act, being G.S.
Chapter 97, and to any fringe benefits for which the volunteer personnel
qualify.



CHAPTER 34:
CIVIL EMERGENCIES; PREPAREDNESS



Section



   34.01   Definitions



   34.02   Proclamation



   34.03   Authorization of Mayor to end



   34.04   Town Manager and declared disaster



§ 34.01  DEFINITIONS.



   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public
emergency, municipal public safety authorities are unable for any reason to
maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property.



(1988 Code, § 5-16)



§ 34.02  PROCLAMATION.



   (A)   Authorization of Mayor to issue. In the event of an existing
or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives, safety, health and
welfare of the people within the town, or threatening damage to or
destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to
issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of a state
of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives and
property of people within the town, to place in effect any or all of the
restrictions authorized in this section.



   (B)   Application of restrictions; persons exempted. The Mayor is
hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the proclamation the application
of all or any part of the restrictions to any area specifically designated or
described within the corporate limits of the town and to specific hours of
the day or night and to exempt from all or any part of the restrictions law
enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, doctors,
nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military
personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities,
public transportation companies and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting
and television broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and other
classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order
and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of
the people within the town.



   (C)   Restrictions enumerated. During the existence of a proclaimed
state of emergency, the Mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the
following restrictions:



      (1)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one’s own
premises of explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any
kind, and prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;



      (2)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine
or intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption
off one’s own premises;



      (3)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march,
vigil or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or
upon any public property;



      (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha or any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;



      (5)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street,
alley or roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search
of medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to
sustain the well-being of themselves or their families or some member
thereof; and/or



      (6)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on
of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places
of business, places of entertainment and any other places of public assembly.



   (D)   Extension, alteration, repeal. Any proclamation may be
extended, altered or repealed in any particular during the continued or
threatened existence of a state of emergency by the issuance of a subsequent
proclamation.



   (E)   Violation of restrictions. During the existence of a
proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate
any provision of any restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by
this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 5-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory references:



   Municipal emergency management, see G.S. § 166A-7



   North Carolina Emergency Management Act, see G.S. §§ 166A-1 et seq.



§ 34.03  AUTHORIZATION OF MAYOR TO END.



   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of a state of emergency or all or any
part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the Board.



(1988 Code, § 5-18)



§ 34.04  TOWN MANAGER AND DECLARED DISASTER.



   (A)   For the purposes of this amendment, DECLARED DISASTER shall
mean declarations provided for in the Stafford Act: An Emergency Declaration
or a Major Disaster Declaration, being U.S.C. §§ 5121 et seq., which
authorizes the President of the United States of America to provide federal
disaster assistance.



   (B)   For the purposes of this amendment, EMERGENCY DECLARATION
shall mean, any occasion or instance when the President determines federal
assistance is needed usually as a supplement to state and local efforts in
providing emergency services.



   (C)   For the purposes of this amendment, MAJOR DISASTER DECLARATION
shall mean any natural catastrophe, including hurricanes, tornadoes, floods,
earthquakes, wildfires, ice storms, snowstorms or explosions that the
president believes has caused damage of severity that it is beyond the
combined capabilities of state and local governments to respond.



   (D)   The Town Manager shall be paid overtime pay at the rate
specified by the salary plan for each hour worked in excess of a regular
workweek of 40 hours, when excess is in conjunction with or response to a
declared disaster.



(Ord. passed 8-15-2000)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   WATER AND SEWERS



      51.   WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS



      52.   SOLID WASTE



      53.   WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 50:
WATER AND SEWERS



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Confidential information



   50.03   Administrative remedies



   50.04   Civil penalties



   50.05   Other available remedies



   50.06   Annual publication of significant noncompliance



   50.07   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations




Utility Rates, Billings and Collection




   50.20   Utility rates



   50.21   Billing



   50.22   Collection



   50.23   Meter accuracy and test rates



   50.24   Liens for sewer service fees




Municipal Water System




   50.35   General provisions



   50.36   Water system use requirements



   50.37   Water connection




Collection and Wastewater System




   50.50   General provisions



   50.51   Definitions and abbreviations



   50.52   General sewer use requirements



   50.53   Fees



   50.54   Wastewater discharge permit; application and issuance



   50.55   Reporting requirements



   50.56   Compliance monitoring



   50.57   Confidential information



   50.58   Enforcement



   50.59   Annual publication of significant noncompliance



   50.60   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations




Fats, Oils, Greases, Sand and Gas Control




   50.70   Scope, purpose and policy



   50.71   Definitions



   50.72   Pretreatment of wastewater



   50.73   Enforcement



   50.74   Record keeping for all permit holders




Cross Connection Controls




   50.80   Unregulated cross connections prohibited; backflow
prevention program established



   50.81   Definitions



   50.82   Elimination of cross connections



   50.83   Installation, testing and maintenance of backflow prevention
assemblies



   50.84   Facilities requiring protection



   50.85   Responsibility of customer



   50.86   Unapproved source of water supply



   50.87   Enforcement



 



   50.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   UTILITY. The town’s water supply service, sewage disposal service and
sanitation (solid waste collection and disposal) service, or any combination
of those services.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



§ 50.02  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections and sampling activities shall be available to the public or other
governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the
release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Any request
must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions
of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not
be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this
chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit,
non-discharge permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however,
that portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and
other “effluent data” as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302 will not be
recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.



   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards
shall be made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon
request.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



§ 50.03  ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW Director finds
that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter,
wastewater permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve
upon a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Notice
shall be by U.S. mail first class postage prepaid addressed to the user’s
permit address. Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation
for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be
submitted to the town by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve
the discharger of liability for any violations occurring before or after the
notice of violation.



   (B)   Consent orders. The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter
into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar
documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the
noncompliance. Orders will include specific action to be taken by the
discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified
by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an
administrative order issued pursuant to division (D) below.



   (C)   Show cause hearing. The POTW Director may order any industrial
user who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated
this chapter or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to
show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the
event the POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be issued,
a notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and a
request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation. The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the
hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate.
A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the
assessment of a civil penalty under § 50.04 nor is any action or inaction
taken by the POTW Director under this section subject to an administrative
appeal under § 50.54(H).



   (D)   Administrative orders. When the POTW Director finds that an
industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or
orders issued hereunder or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW
Director may issue an order to cease and desist all violations and direct
those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



      (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set
forth in the order;



      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the
event of a continuing or threatened violation; and/or



      (4)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices
or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a
specified time period.



   (E)   Emergency suspensions. The POTW Director may suspend the
wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit when suspension is
necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents
or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the
POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit. Any user
notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the
wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. A
hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension to determine
whether the suspension may be lifted or the user’s waste discharge permit
terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the POTW Director shall take steps as deemed necessary
including immediate severance of the sewer connection to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW
Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment
service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The
industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date of the
above-described hearing.



   (F)   Termination of permit.



      (1)   Any user who violates the following conditions of this
chapter or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having its
permit terminated:



         (a)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge;



         (b)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



      (2)   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause under § 50.03 of this chapter why the proposed
action should not be taken.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



§ 50.04  CIVIL PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be fined up to $25,000 per day per violation.



   (B)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
Director shall consider the following:



      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health or to public or private property resulting
from the violation;



      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing
to comply with the pretreatment program; and



      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the town.



   (C)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this
section shall be as provided in § 50.54.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



§ 50.05  OTHER AVAILABLE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this
chapter, are available to the POTW Director who may use any single 1 or
combination against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies
include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Criminal violations. The District Attorney for Robeson
County may, at the request of the town, prosecute noncompliant users who
violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B.



      (2)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the
POTW Director, through the Town Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and
permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question.



      (3)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service
will only recommence at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated ability to comply.



      (4)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the town’s regulations
governing those nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs
incurred in removing, abating or remedying the nuisance.



   (B)   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive.
The POTW Director may take any, all or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will
generally be in accordance with town’s enforcement response plan. However,
the POTW Director may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more
than 1 enforcement action against any noncompliant user.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



§ 50.06  ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in the largest daily
newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those industrial users
which were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as
reportable noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H.0903(b)(10), with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



§ 50.07  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upset.



      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of division (A)(2) below are met.



      (2)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user has submitted the following information
to the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
5 days:



            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (3)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (4)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (5)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.



   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards defense. A user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 50.52(H) or the specific
prohibitions in § 50.52(H)(2)(b), (c), (e) through (g), (I) through (w) if
it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know, that its discharge,
alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass
through or interference and that either:



      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of
this section.



      (2)   (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least 10 days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.



         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW
Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within 5 days of this time the user becomes
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of
the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates
and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it
is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.



      (3)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C)(2) of this section.



      (4)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that
it will meet the 3 conditions listed in division (C)(3) of this section.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



UTILITY RATES, BILLINGS AND COLLECTION



§ 50.20  UTILITY RATES.



   (A)   Water rates, deposits, connection and reconnection charges
shall be determined from time to time by the Board and shall be kept on file
in the office of the Clerk.



   (B)   A sewer charge of a percentage of the monthly water
consumption, fixed by the Board, shall be made to cover the cost of
maintaining the POTW.



   (C)   Any person who can show proof that the monthly water meter
reading is not indicative of the quantity of waste being discharged to the
town sewer system may present this proof to the Board at a regularly
scheduled meeting. If, after examination of the evidence, the Board is
satisfied as to its validity, suitable adjustment may be made in computing
the sewer charge and/or surcharge. The burden of proof shall rest on the
person receiving the bill.



   (D)   As to those applicants for utility services who have had
delinquent accounts in the past, the deposit amount shall be twice the amount
that would otherwise be required.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 18-179, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 50.21  BILLING.



   (A)   Person responsible for payment.



      (1)   Utility charges, rents, fees, rates and penalties
connected therewith shall be the legal obligation of the property owner only
when:



         (a)   The owner is also the tenant;



         (b)   The property or premises is leased or rented to
more than 1 tenant and services rendered to more than 1 tenant are measured
by the same meter.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (A)(1) above, water,
sewer and/or sanitation charges, rents, fees, rates and penalties shall be
the legal obligation of the person contracting for services.



   (B)   Multiple meter users.



      (1)   Two or more commercial or industrial units or
residential dwelling units, including but not limited to multifamily houses,
apartments, duplexes and mobile homes, receiving water through the same water
meter shall pay, if separate meters are not installed, the minimum utility
bill for water, sewer and sanitation service, as applicable, for each unit
being served through the meter. Any water usage exceeding the total minimum
usage for the number of units served by 1 meter shall be charged in
accordance with approved water and sewer rate schedules.



      (2)   Once established, the number of utility minimums to be
paid for any water meter shall not be reduced until the property owner
notifies the Director of Finance in writing for the reduction.



      (3)   The property owner is hereby responsible for immediately
notifying the Director of Finance of any increase in the number of units
being served by any water meter.



      (4)   The town water meter reader shall report each month the
number of mobile homes connected to or in position to be connected to the
town water system or to a private system which obtains its water from the
town. The number reported by the meter reader if greater than the number
established in this section shall be the number of minimums charged to the
applicable meter.



      (5)   The town cannot determine whether or not a dwelling,
commercial or industrial unit has been vacant for some or all of any utility
billing period. Therefore, the number of minimum charged for each billing
period will be equal to the number of active or potential commercial,
industrial or dwelling units served by the water meter in accordance with
this section.



   (C)   Penalties for late payment and nonpayment.



      (1)   Due date. Utility bills mailed on or about the first
workday of any month shall be past due and delinquent if not paid by or on
the tenth day of the month. All customers or user accounts past due and
delinquent shall be placed on a list which shall be continually modified to
reflect late payments. Any utility account paid after the tenth day of the
month shall have added to the month’s total due a late payment fee, in the
amount established from time to time by the Board, to cover the
administrative costs of processing the late payment.



      (2)   Disconnection for late payment.



         (a)   It is the policy of the town to discontinue
utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after
notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The
town’s form for application for utility service and all bills shall contain
clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect that:



            1.   All bills are due and payable on or before
the tenth day of each month;



            2.   If any bill is not paid by or before the
tenth, a notice of nonpayment, disclosing the town’s intent to disconnect
service, will be mailed; and



            3.   Any customer disputing the correctness of his
or her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the town official in charge of utility billing, who shall make
a final determination of the customer’s complaint.



      (3)   Late payment and cut-on fees.



         (a)   Any bill paid after the tenth day of the month
shall cause a late payment penalty to be assessed.



         (b)   No service shall be restored after the proper
disconnection under the previous section until all bills for service and late
payment fees then due have been paid and the following cut-on fee has been
paid:



            1.   Thirty-five dollars if:



               a.   The request for service is made before
3:30 p.m. on a workday for town employees (in which case service will be
restored for that day); or



               b.   The party requesting service is willing
to wait for service for as long as the end of the next workday for town
employees;



            2.   Fifty dollar fee if the request is for
service to be restored in the day of the request and the request is made
after 3:30 p.m. on a workday for town employees; or



            3.   Seventy-five dollar fee if the request is for
service to be restored on a non-workday for town employees (a town holiday or
a Saturday or Sunday).



      (4)   Extensions of due date. The Board may establish policies
and procedures for granting short term, temporary extensions of the utility
bill due date for users to pay the current month’s utility bill because of
temporary unexpected circumstances.



      (5)   Removal and reinstallation of meters. If any utility
user or customer, after having his or her water meter cut off by the town
cuts-on, has his or her meter cut-on or allows his or her meter to be cut-on,
the water meter shall be immediately removed. A removed meter shall not be
reinstalled at the location or address at which the meter was removed until
all due utility bills, late payment fees, cut-on fees and meter
reinstallation fees are paid in full by the customer or property owner. The
meter installation fee shall be an amount established from time to time by
the Board.



      (6)   Severing sewer connections. Failure to pay utility bills
in accordance with this subchapter may result in the disconnection of the
individual sewer collection line or building sewer. If disconnected or
severed, the line or sewer will not be reconnected until the total bill due,
fees and penalties are paid in full. In addition, the cost of reconnection
including material and labor will be paid in full by the user. Disconnection
or severance of lines shall automatically make the user in violation hereof.



   (D)   Protesting unusually high bills.



      (1)   A citizen protesting an unusually high water and sewer
bill may claim a hardship if the charges are significantly higher than their
normal average bill for that season, upon providing evidence that major
repairs have been made and the system is up to standard.



      (2)   The sewer bill may be adjusted to the citizen’s
seasonally average charge for that season. Seasonal average is to be computed
on at least 3 months’ charges. A citizen protesting an unusually high water
and sewer bill may claim a hardship when that charge is significantly higher
than their seasonal average and if the meter is inoperative or defective, the
bill shall be adjusted to the normal average for that season.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 16-167, passed 6-21-2016)



§ 50.22  COLLECTION.



   (A)   No employee of the town except those employees assigned to the
Finance Department shall accept any money, check or other negotiable
instrument as payment of any utility bill or utility fee.



   (B)   All fees shall be submitted as directed on the utility bill.



   (C)   Application of partial payments. Partial payments shall be
applied to the oldest debt first, and thereafter, shall be applied in the
order that the debt was incurred. Partial payment for a consolidated billing
account will be applied in the following order as applicable: wastewater
usage not associated with water usage; wastewater associated with water
meter; then water usage as metered.



   (D)   Metering and billing practices for multiple structures on
property. A property owner may request service to multiple structures on a
single property. The property owner may request separate billing statements
for each structure for record keeping purposes, however, the sum of these
individual statements will be considered a single consolidated account for
payment purposes. A payment made against any charges of the consolidated
account will follow the city’s partial payment order.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 18-179, passed 2-20-2018)



§ 50.23  METER ACCURACY AND TEST RATES.



   The town shall test or cause to be tested and make a thorough
examination of water meters and all fixtures where so desired by the customer
under the following conditions:



   (A)   Should the test of meter and inspection prove an excessive
bill to be caused by negligence of the town or inaccuracy of the meter, then
the expense of the investigation shall be borne by the town.



   (B)   Should the test and inspection prove to be the fault of the
consumer or any person not connected with or in the employ of the town, then
the actual cost of the investigation is to be borne by the customer making
the protest and asking for the inspection. The actual cost shall be fixed by
the Board.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



§ 50.24  LIENS FOR SEWER SERVICE FEES.



   (A)   Any fee imposed under this chapter may be billed with property
taxes, may be payable in the same manner as property taxes, and, in the case
of nonpayment, may be collected in any manner by which delinquent personal or
real property taxes can be collected.



      (1)   A fee charged by the town for sewer services and
remaining unpaid for a period of 90 days shall become a lien on the real
property owned by the person contracting with the town for the service.



      (2)   Any lien placed on real property as described in
division (A)(1) shall be valid from the time of filing in the office of the
Clerk of Superior Court of the county in which the service was provided and
shall include a statement containing the name and address of the person
against whom the lien is claimed, the name of the town claiming the lien, the
specific service that was provided, the amount of the unpaid charge for that
service, and the date and place of furnishing that service.



      (3)   The county tax office, once notified of the town's lien,
shall include the lien amount on any tax bills printed subsequent to the
notification.



      (4)   A lien on real property as described in divisions (A)(1)
and (A)(2) is not effective against an interest in real property conveyed
after the fees become delinquent if the interest is recorded in the office of
the register of deeds prior to the filing of the lien for delinquent water or
sewer services.



      (5)   No lien under this section shall be valid unless filed
in accordance with this section after 90 days of the date of the failure to
pay for the service or availability fees, and within 180 days of the date of
the failure to pay for the service or fees.



      (6)   The lien may be discharged as provided in G.S. § 44-48.



   (B)   A notice of the lien on the real property must be mailed by
first class mail at the time the lien is filed to the property owner
according to the tax records of Robeson County. Pursuant to the notification
of a lien filed, the owner(s) of the property may appeal the lien as follows.



      (1)   Administrative review.



         (a)   A request to appeal the application of the lien
must be received within 21 days of the date of filing.



         (b)   The request shall be filed on the appropriate
appeal form available from the town and shall include:



            1.   A description of the real property including
the tax identification number and physical address of the property;



            2.   The name, address, and telephone number of
the property owner making the appeal;



            3.   A copy of the lien; and



            4.   A statement of the grounds for appeal.



         (c)   The appeal form shall be hand delivered or mailed
via certified mail to the Town Clerk. No appeals sent by fax, email, or
regular mail will be accepted.



         (d)   Once received, an appeal shall be reviewed by the
Town Manager.



         (e)   The property owner(s) will be advised of the
decision of the Manager by certified mail through an administrative review
disposition notice.



         (f)   The town will not accept the following as grounds
for appeal:



            1.   Lack of knowledge of the town's sewer billing
process; and/or



            2.   Claim of failure to receive a billing for
sewer services.



      (2)   Adjudication hearing.



         (a)   A request for an adjudication hearing before the
Utilities Lien Appeal Board must be received within 21 days from the date of
the administrative review disposition notice.



         (b)   In order to file the request for an adjudication
hearing with the town, the property owner is required to pay the outstanding
balance of sewer charges due as a deposit.



         (c)   Should the decision of the Utilities Lien Appeal
Board be in favor of the property owner, said fees shall be refunded.



         (d)   The property owner shall be notified of the date
and time of the adjudication hearing.



         (e)   The property owner's personal appearance at the
hearing is mandatory.



         (f)   During the hearing, the property owner is provided
an opportunity to state the circumstances of the appeal and present any
supporting evidence.



         (g)   The property owner shall be informed of the
Utilities Lien Appeal Board's decision within 72 hours of the hearing via
certified mail.



         (h)   Should the adjudication hearing be in favor of the
property owner(s), the county tax office shall be notified by the town of a
decision to cancel the lien.



   (C)   A Utilities Lien Appeal Board shall be maintained by the town
for the purpose of deciding the appeals made under this section. The
Utilities Lien Appeal Board shall be made up of one member of the Board of
Commissioners, selected by the Board of Commissioners; one member of the
Police Department, selected by the Police Chief; the Assistant Fire Chief or
the Administrative Fire Chief, selected by the Fire Chief; and one member of
the Public Works Department, selected by the Public Works Director. These
persons may be selected for service at any time, on a case-by-case basis.



(Ord. 18-178, passed 2-20-2018)



MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM



§ 50.35  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   The water system of the town shall be under the control of the Board
and the duty of prescribing and enforcing full compliance with all rules and
regulations governing all connections with the water system shall be vested
in the Board or its authorized agent. The water system of the town shall be
under the supervision of the Department of Public Works.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



§ 50.36  WATER SYSTEM USE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Use of town water. No person shall take or carry away water
from any fire hydrant, public fountain, plug, street washer or other public
place, except for firefighting purposes, without prior approval of the Town
Manager or his or her designee. Any person receiving water in any manner as
described above shall receive the water through a water meter provided by the
town and shall pay for the water received in accordance with the water rates
in effect at the time.



   (B)   Private water supplies.



      (1)   Prohibited use. It shall be unlawful for any person to
furnish, supply or provide any water from a private well or pumps in or to
any dwelling house, boardinghouse, inn, hotel, café or other commercial
establishment, or any room of the same when the dwelling house or any room
therein, is rented or offered for rent to the public, or when the
boardinghouse, inn, hotel, café or other commercial establishment is open
to, or used by, the public.



      (2)   Permitted use. Private wells, ponds or other water
sources shall be allowed for irrigation of lawns, yards, gardens and the
like. However, no private water system shall be in any way connected to any
water or sewer system constituting a part of the town water or sewer system,
nor to any private systems connected in any way to the town systems.



      (3)   Providing water to others. No owner, occupant or agent
having access to or control of a private water system shall sell, give,
lease, rent or in any other manner furnish, supply or provide any water from
a private source to any other person for the purpose of, or when used for,
human consumption.



   (C)   Access to property. The Director of Public Works or his or her
assistant shall at all reasonable hours have free access to all premises,
public or private, for the purpose of examining hydrants, fixtures or
connections or for reading or repairing water meters on which town water
pressure is maintained.



   (D)   Performance of work. All work on the water system and all
connections or disconnections thereto shall be performed by the authorized
employees of the town or its authorized contractors. All work shall be
performed in accordance with the Plumbing Code of the state and the town and
amendments thereto that the Board may from time to time adopt.



   (E)   Unauthorized tampering prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall touch, tamper with or in any manner
manipulate or turn the cut-offs on the waterlines, mains or appurtenances
forming a part of the water system of the town, nor shall any person tamper
with or harm in any manner whatsoever any water line, main or any
appurtenance thereto. No person other than authorized town employees shall
throw or deposit any material or substance into any waterline, main or
appurtenance thereto. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a person
authorized by town officials to cut off or cut on the town supply of water.



      (2)   Penalty. The penalty for meter tampering shall be $200.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 16-167, passed 6-21-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 50.37  WATER CONNECTION.



   (A)   Connection requirement. All owners of improved property
located within the corporate limits and upon or within a reasonable distance
of any waterline owned and operated by the town shall connect their premises
with the town water system.



   (B)   Water permit. No person shall be connected with the water
system of the town until they shall have made application for permission to
be so connected in writing to the Clerk. This application shall not be
approved until the plans and specifications for the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance or modification of the house,
building or structure have been approved by the Building Inspector and a
building permit has been issued. When a building permit is not required, the
application shall not be issued until approved by the Director of Public
Works or the town Plumbing Inspector.



   (C)   Separate connection and meter required for each unit. Each
residential dwelling unit whether of single or multiple occupancy, commercial
establishment or unit and industrial activity or unit that receives water
from the town system shall have installed a separate water connection and
water meter.



   (D)   Inspection. The Director of Public Works or Plumbing Inspector
shall not approve the application as specified in division (B) above until he
or she has entered upon the property to be served by the requested connection
and has made sure by physical inspection that the connection will not
contaminate the town’s water system or any part thereof, that the property
has an adequate sewerage disposal system which will not create a nuisance or
health hazard to any person, and that the property owner or occupant is aware
of any improvements in the water or sewer system of the house, building or
structure that should be made before connecting the town water system. Upon
the exercise of reasonable effort and diligence by the Director of Public
Works or Plumbing Inspector in performing those duties required of him or her
under this section, neither the Director of Public Works, the Plumbing
Inspector nor the town shall have or assume any liability for any
inconvenience, damage or other occurrence after connection is made to the
town’s water system.



   (E)   Specifications. The town shall extend any individual water
service connection pipe from the applicable water main or line to a water
meter enclosed in an acceptable meter box or container located within the
public right-of-way but near the boundary of the right-of-way. The property
owner or his or her authorized and licensed plumber shall construct, extend,
maintain, repair or modify the water service connection pipe from the out
flow end of the meter across private property and into the dwelling unit,
building or structure in accordance with town specifications, requirements,
codes and designs therefor. Existing water meters located on private property
shall be removed from the private property and reinstalled on the public
right-of-way as opportunity permits.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002)



COLLECTION AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM



§ 50.50  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose and policy. This subchapter sets forth uniform
requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater
collection and treatment system for the Town of Fairmont, hereafter referred
to as the town, and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 403). The objectives of
this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the
operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the
system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;



      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludges from the municipal system;



      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public;



      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES
or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject.



   (B)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the
issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.



   (C)   This subchapter shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system, as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. The
town shall designate an administrator of the publicly owned treatment works
or POTW and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the POTW Director.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted
to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to
other town personnel. By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater
system, industrial users located inside or outside the town limits agree to
comply with the terms and conditions established in this subchapter, as well
as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. This
includes all industrial users discharging in the wastewater collection system
owned by any satellite POTW.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150,
passed 12-18-2012)



§ 50.51  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (A)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated.



      ACT or “THE ACT”. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act,
also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director of the Division of Water
Quality of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources
or his or her designee.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation,
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:



            1.   The president, secretary, or a vice-president
of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
corporation; or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to
make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated
facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major
capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control
mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or
local government facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (a) through
(c) above may designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
town.



         (e)   If the designation of an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE
is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the POTW
Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD).  The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for 5 days at 20°C, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g. mg/l).



      BUILDING SEWER.  A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.



      BYPASS.  The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility.



      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Standard.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY.  Refers to the town if the town’s
pretreatment program approval has not been withdrawn.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the
agency.



      GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks, including but
not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE Or DISCHARGE.  The discharge or the
introduction from any nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c), or
(d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank
waste discharged into the system).



      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER.  Any person which is a source of
indirect discharge.



      INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW
collection system, treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process,
use, or disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the Control Authority’s (and/or POTW’s, if different from
the Control Authority) NPDES, collection system or Non-discharge permit or
prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified
applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The term
includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with § 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA)(42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.), the
Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) (33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et
seq.) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD.  Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated
by EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears
in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM, or NPDES,
PERMIT. A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), or
pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.



      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 50.52(C) and are developed under
the authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation
from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307(c),
provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of (a)(2) or (3) above but otherwise
alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.



         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a
NEW SOURCE has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:



               a.   Any placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this definition.



      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



      NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by the state pursuant to
G.S. § 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface
waters of the state or for a wastewater treatment works which does not
discharge directly to surface waters of the state.



      PASS THROUGH.  A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges
from other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation, of the Control Authority’s (and/or
POTW’s, if different from the Control Authority) NPDES, collection system,
or non-discharge permit or a downstream water quality standard even if not
included in the permit.



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local government entities.



      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter
of solution.



      POLLUTANT.  Any “waste” as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18)
and dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color,
metals, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor).



      POTW.  The town’s publicly owned treatment works, more
commonly known as the town’s sewage treatment plant.



      POTW DIRECTOR.  The Town of Fairmont Director of Public
Utilities.



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT.  That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.



      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollution into a POTW collection system and/or
treatment plant. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except
by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.  The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the
town in compliance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8 and approved by the approval
authority as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.11.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.  Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical standards, or local limit which applies to an industrial user.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM.  A treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. §
1292) which is owned in this instance by the town. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling,
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, or
in any other way, users of the POTW of the town.



      SATELLITE POTW.  A city, town or other entity for which the Town
of Fairmont has agreed to receive and treat wastewater.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE.  Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE
PROPERTY DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU.  An industrial user that
discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters);



         (b)   Contributes process wastewater which makes up 5%
or more of the NPDES or non-discharge permitted flow limit or 5% of more of
the maximum allowable headworks loading of the POTW treatment plant for any
POTW pollutant of concern;



         (c)   Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 C.F.R. Part 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471;



         (d)   Is designated as such by the Control Authority,
the Division Of Water Quality or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industrial users, for
adversely affecting the POTW’s operation, or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW’s
effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or
for contributing to violations of the POTW’s receiving stream standard, or
for limiting the POTW’s sludge disposal options;



         (e)   Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting
the criteria in divisions (a) and (b) above has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment
standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW’s
effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or
for contributing to violations of the POTW’s receiving stream standard, or
for limiting the POTW’s sludge disposal options, and thus is not a
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER;



         (f)   Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting
the criteria in division (b) of this definition meets the requirements of 40
C.F.R. Part 403.3(v)(2) and thus is a non-significant categorical industrial
user; or



         (g)   Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting
the criteria in division (b) of this definition meets the requirements of 40
C.F.R. Part 403.12(e)(3) and thus is a middle tier significant industrial
user. Sampling and inspection requirements may be cut in half as per 40
C.F.R. Parts 403.8 (f)(2)(v)(C).and 403.12 (e)(3).



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC).  Occurs when: (a) significant
industrial user meets any one or more of the following criteria; or (b) any
industrial user meets the criteria in divisions (c), (d), or (h) of this
definition.



         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a 6 month period
exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.3(l).



         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here as those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a 6-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.3(l) multiplied by the
applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all
other pollutants (except flow and pH).



         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or
requirement as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Control
Authority and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public).



         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that
has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in either the Control Authority’s or the
POTW’s, if different from the Control Authority, exercise of its emergency
authority under 40 C.F.R. Part 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and this chapter to halt or
prevent such a discharge.



         (e)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones,
contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the schedule date.



         (f)   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the
due date.



         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.



         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations that
the control authority and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.



      SLUG LOAD or DISCHARGE.  Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or
pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local
limits, or industrial user permit conditions. This can include but is not
limited to spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a
non-routine, episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other
discharges that can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards
in § 50.52(C).



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



      STORM WATER.  Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



      UPSET.  An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      WASTEWATER.  The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile
sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.



      WASTEWATER PERMIT.  As set forth in § 50.54(B).



      WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps,
sounds, tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all
other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the State or any portion thereof.



   (B)   This subchapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender
shall include the feminine and vice-versa.



   (C)   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive or discretionary.



   (D)   The use of the singular shall be construed to include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context
of its use.



   (E)   The following abbreviations when used in this chapter, shall
have the designated meanings:



      (1)   BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand.



      (2)   CFR   Code of Federal Regulations.



      (3)   COD   Chemical oxygen demand.



      (4)   EPA   Environmental Protection Agency.



      (5)   gpd   Gallons per day.



      (6)   G.S.   North Carolina General Statutes.



      (7)   l   Liter.



      (8)   mg   Milligrams.



      (9)   mg/l   Milligrams per liter.



      (10)   NPDES   National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System.



      (11)   O & M   Operation and maintenance.



      (12)   POTW   Publicly-owned treatment works.



      (13)   RCRA   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



      (14)   SIC   Standard industrial classification.



      (15)   SWDA   Solid Waste Disposal Act.



      (16)   TSS   Total suspended solids.



      (17)   U.S.C.   United States Code.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150,
passed 12-18-2012; Am. Ord. 13-151, passed 2-19-2013)



§ 50.52  GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Use of public sewers required.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit,
or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town
any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet
within the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with this subchapter and with regulations of the
Division of Water Quality.



      (3)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.



      (4)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used
for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated
within the town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer
of the town, is hereby required at the owner’s expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance,
within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the
public sewer is within 150 feet of the property line or the owner or tenant
will be assessed a monthly access fee equal to the minimum monthly sewer
charge.



   (B)   Use of private sewage disposal systems.



      (1)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with applicable state stands. Before commencement o construction of
a private water disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written
approval of the state acting through the county health department. The type,
capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health and
Division of Water Quality. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to
discharge to any natural outlet. The owner shall operate and maintain the
private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times; at
no expense to the town.



      (2)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by a private wastewater disposal system a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days. Under unusual and/or
special circumstances the town may extend the time of compliance or waive the
requirement.



   (C)   Protection from damages.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, tamper
with or otherwise do harm to the mains, pipes, manholes, apparatus or other
parts of the sanitary sewer system, or to place or cause to be placed any
object of any nature whatsoever into the system that blocks or obstructs or
impedes the normal flow in the sewer system.



      (2)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or
negligently breaks, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
equipment or materials, belonging to the town, used for the purpose of making
tests or examinations and left upon the premises of a person discharging
wastes into the sewers.



   (D)   Connection specifications and restrictions.



      (1)   All connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be
made by authorized employees of the town in accordance with specifications
for such connection that may be adopted by the town. If  authorized by the
Board of Commissioners, connections may be made by plumbers licensed to
perform plumbing work in the town. All construction shall be in conformity
with the state plumbing and building codes, as amended. Any sewer connection
made by an authorized licensed plumber shall be inspected by the approving
authority after such work has been completed and prior to the time such
connection is covered.



      (2)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts,
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of infiltration/inflow to
a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (E)   Separate connections required. Each separate dwelling,
structure, business or other building shall have a separate connection to the
system; provided, however, that apartments or other multi-use or occupancy
buildings may have 1 confined connection within the discretion of the town.



   (F)   Connections outside town. Any person owning or controlling
premises beyond the corporate limits of the town and desiring to install a
plumbing system for the purpose of discharging domestic and/or industrial
waste into the sanitary sewers of the town may do so by complying with the
requirements of the town shall be the responsibility of the property owner
and shall be done under the general supervision of the public works director
of the town.



   (G)   Maintenance and repair of connections. Whenever any service to
any building or premise becomes clogged, broken, out of order, or in any
condition detrimental to the use of the sewer service, the owner, agent or
occupant having charge of such building or premises shall be held responsible
for the immediate renewal or repair of the sewer service necessary to
maintain an uninterrupted sanitary disposal system. Renewal or repair of
sewer service from the main to the property line shall be made at the expense
of the town by authorized personnel only; renewal or repair of sewer service
from the property line to the source of discharge shall be the responsibility
of the property owner.



   (H)   Prohibited discharge standards.



      (1)   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause
to be contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass through. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a
significant industrial user or subject to any national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



      (2)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause
to be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater.



         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard
in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
C.F.R. § 261.21.



         (b)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will
cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no
case solids greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.



         (c)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through.



         (d)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more
than 9.5 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage to the POTW or equipment.



         (e)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants, (BOD and the like) in sufficient quantity, (flow
or concentration) either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
cause interference with the POTW.



         (f)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than
150°F (66°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
treatment plant resulting in Interference, but in no case wastewater which
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104°F (40°C).



         (g)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of
toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems.



         (h)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at
discharge points designated by the POTW Director in accordance with division
(P) of this section.



         (i)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or
solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.



         (j)   1.   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s
effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or
scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process.



            2.   In no case, shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
regulations or permits issued under § 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state
criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.



         (k)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color
to the treatment plant’s effluent to render the waters injurious to public
health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to
adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the
receiving waters for any designated uses or which causes a violation of the
town’s state or federal wastewater permits.



         (l)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes
or isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.



         (m)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian
well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted
industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director.



         (n)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable
origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l unless authorized by the POTW
Director.



         (o)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.



         (p)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically
authorized by the POTW Director in a wastewater discharge permit.



         (q)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or
other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere
with the municipal wastewater system.



         (r)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous
waste according to 40 C.F.R. Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as
may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director.



         (s)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant
effluent to violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as
described in 15A NCAC 2B .0200.



         (t)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with
other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test.



         (u)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal
anatomy.



         (v)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
municipal wastewater system.



         (w)   Any wastes causing two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system), to be more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10%, of
the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.



      (3)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes
prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner
that they could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system.



All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge
to the industrial user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the
system.



      (4)   When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such
amounts which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or
pass through, the POTW Director shall:



         (a)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the
contribution on the POTW in accordance with § 50.58(A); and



         (b)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §
50.54 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.



   (I)   National categorical pretreatment standards. Users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable
standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and
incorporated herein.



      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed
only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass
limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).



      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
POTW Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream
formula in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical
pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.



      (4)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.15.



   (J)   Local limits.



      (1)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user
discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following average
discharge limits.



 



BOD
 
250 mg/l


TSS
 
250 mg/l


NH3
 
25 mg/l


Arsenic
 
0.003 mg/l


Cadmium
 
0.003 mg/l


Chromium
 
0.05 mg/l (total chromium)


Copper
 
0.061 mg/l


Cyanide
 
0.015 mg/l


Lead
 
0.049 mg/l


Mercury
 
0.0003 mg/l


Nickel
 
0.021 mg/l


Silver
 
0.005 mg/l


Zinc
 
0.175 mg/l




 



      (2)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to
develop user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW’s
maximum allowable headworks loading are not exceeded for particular
pollutants of concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants
of concern shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may
impose mass based limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based
limits.



   (K)   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on
discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.



   (L)   Right of revision. The town reserves the right to establish
limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those required by
either state or federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in § 50.50(A) or the general and specific prohibitions
in division (H) of this section, as is allowed by 40 C.F.R. § 403.4.



   (M)   Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water
or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the National categorical pretreatment standards, unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the town or state.



   (N)   Pretreatment of wastewater.



      (1)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits
issued under § 50.54(B) and shall achieve compliance with all national
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set
out in division (H) of this section within the time limitations as specified
by EPA, the State, or the POTW Director, whichever is more stringent. Any
facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for
review, and shall be approved by the POTW Director before construction of the
facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Town under the provisions
of this subchapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director
prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.



      (2)   Additional pretreatment measures.



         (a)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may
require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate
that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate
and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from
industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.



         (b)   The POTW Director may require any person
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at
their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.



         (c)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for
the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and
oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the POTW Director and shall be so located to be easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned,
and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.



         (d)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



   (O)   Accidental discharge/slug control plans.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each
significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and
prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in § 50.51(A).
All SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being designated an SIU. The
POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan or other specific action. Alternatively, the POTW
Director may develop such a plan for any user.



      (2)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW Director
immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills
and other accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see § 50.55(E) and (F).



      (3)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address,
at a minimum, the following:



         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;



         (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW
Director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 50.56; and



         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any
accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



   (P)   Hauled wastewater.



      (1)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only
at locations designated by the POTW Director, and at such times as are
established by the POTW Director. Such waste shall not violate division (B)
of this section or any other requirements established by the town. The POTW
Director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge
permits.



      (2)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial
waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
The POTW Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste
if he adopts a uniform rule for determining which wastes are prohibited. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.



      (3)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at
locations designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without
prior consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of
each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW
Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis
of any load prior to discharge.



      (4)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking
form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and
address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification,
names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150,
passed 12-18-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.53  FEES.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for
the recovery of costs from users of the wastewater disposal system of the
town for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and
fees proposed by the POTW Director and approved by the Town Board. A copy of
these charges and fees will be made available from the POTW Director.



   (B)   User charges. A user charge shall be levied on all users
including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental
entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the
POTW.



      (1)   The user charge shall reflect, at least, the cost of
debt service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.



      (2)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on
volume of flow.



      (3)   The Manager of the Town shall review annually the sewage
contributions of users, the total costs of debt service, operation and
maintenance of the POTW and will make recommendations to the Council or Board
serving the town for adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as
necessary.



      (4)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable
to the users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the
volume of flow of the users.



   (C)   Surcharges. Surcharges based upon the volume of flow and the
character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater shall be
calculated as follows:



      (1)   The volume of flow used in determining the total
discharge of wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be
based on the following:



         (a)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records
of meter readings maintained by the town; or



         (b)   If required by the town or at the individual
dischargers option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual
volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be
accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in
accordance with plans approved by the town. The metering system shall be
installed and maintained at the users expense according to arrangements that
may be made with the town.



         (c)   Where any user procures all or part of his water
supply from sources other than the town, the user shall install and maintain
at his own expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the town.



      (2)   The character and concentration of the constituents of
the wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the town. Samples shall be collected in such a
manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed
using procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.



      (3)   The determination of the character and concentration of
the constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his duly
appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.



   (D)   Pretreatment program administration charges. The schedule of
charges and fees adopted by the town may include charges and fees for:



      (1)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
pretreatment program;



      (2)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;



      (3)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental
and/or slug load discharge procedures and construction plans and
specifications;



      (4)   Permitting; and



      (5)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out
the requirements of the pretreatment program.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150,
passed 12-18-2012)



§ 50.54  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT; APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful for any person to
connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of
the town. When requested by the POTW Director, a user must submit information
on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the
request. The POTW Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose
and may periodically require users to update this information.



   (B)   Wastewater permits. All significant industrial users shall
obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of
discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the
POTW Director to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant
industrial user permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW
Director’s determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant
industrial user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW Director be
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-significant
industrial users.



      (1)   Significant industrial user determination. All persons
proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the
volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater
shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user
determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed
discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that
a significant industrial user permit application be filed.



      (2)   Significant industrial user permit application. Users
required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and
file with the town, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW
Director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in
the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply
for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of
the POTW Director’s determination in division (B)(1) of this section. The
application shall include at a minimum:



         (a)   Name of industrial user;



         (b)   Address of industrial user;



         (c)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s)
or expected classification and industrial user category;



         (d)   Wastewater flow;



         (e)   Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants
contained in the discharge;



         (f)   Major products manufactured or services supplied;



         (g)   Description of existing on-site pretreatment
facilities and practices;



         (h)   Locations of discharge points;



         (i)   Raw materials used or stored at the site;



         (j)   Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user;



         (k)   Number of employees;



         (l)   Operation and production schedules; and



         (m)   Description of current and projected waste
reduction activities in accordance with G.S. § 143-215.1(g).



      (3)   Application signatories and certification. All
wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by
the current authorized representative of the user on file with the town as
defined in § 50.51(A) and contain the following certification statement:



         “I certify under penalty of law that this document and
all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”



      (4)   Application review and evaluation. The POTW Director
will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.



         (a)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept
applications for the town and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff
for review and evaluation.



         (b)   Within 30 days of receipt the POTW Director shall
acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional
information is required.



      (5)   Tentative determination and draft permit.



         (a)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the
application and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user,
including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation
and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user
permit.



         (b)   If the staff’s tentative determination in
division (B)(5)(a) of this section is to issue the permit, the following
additional determinations shall be made in writing:



            1.   Proposed discharge limitations for those
pollutants proposed to be limited;



            2.   A proposed schedule of compliance, including
interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and



            3.   A brief description of any other proposed
special conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge
described in the application.



         (c)   The staff shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to divisions (B)(5)(a) and (b) of this section and the general
permit conditions of the town into a significant industrial user permit.



      (6)   Permit supporting documentation.  The Control Authority
staff shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial
user permits.



         (a)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit
information for all significant industrial users,



including but not limited to permit limits, permit effective and expiration
dates, and a comparison of total permitted flows and loads with Division
approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or
in a format approved by the Division. The AT shall be updated as permits are
issued or renewed, and as permits are modified where the permitted limits or
other AT information is revised.



         (b)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment
limitations, including the following:



            1.   Documentation of categorical determination,
including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical
pretreatment standards; and



            2.   Documentation of the rationale of any
parameters for which monitoring has been waived under 40 CFR Part
403.12(e)(2).



      (7)   Final action on significant industrial user permit
applications.



         (a)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all
applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.



         (b)   The POTW Director is authorized to:



            1.   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this subchapter and G.S. § 143-215.1;



            2.   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements;



            3.   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days
notice and pursuant to division (B)(9) of this section;



            4.   Revoke any permit pursuant to § 50.58(A);



            5.   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 50.58(A);



            6.   Deny a permit application when in the opinion
of the POTW Director such discharge may cause or contribute to pass-through
or interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to
effectuate the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.



      (8)   Hearings. The local government may conduct hearings in
accordance with its regular hearing procedure.



         (a)   Initial adjudicatory hearing. An applicant whose
permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he deems unacceptable,
a permittee/user assessed a civil penalty under § 50.58 (B), or one issued
an administrative order under § 50.58 (A) shall have the right to an
adjudicatory hearing before a hearing officer designated by the POTW Director
upon making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested,
to the POTW Director within 30 days following receipt of the significant
industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative order.
Unless such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the
action shall be final and binding. The hearing officer shall make a final
decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within 45 days of the
receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall transmit
a copy of the hearing officer’s decision by registered or certified mail.



            1.   New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a
newly issued permit, the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed
and the permit is not in effect until either the conclusion of judicial
review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.



            2.   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including
judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions
of a renewed permit, the terms and conditions of the existing permit remain
in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.



            3.   Terminated permits. Upon appeal, including
judicial review in the General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no
permit is in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until
the parties reach a mutual resolution.



         (b)   Final appeal hearing. Any decision of a hearing
officer made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division
(B)(8)(a) of this section may be appealed, to the council or board serving
the town upon filing a written demand within 10 days of receipt of notice of
the decision. Hearings held under this division shall be conducted in
accordance with local hearing procedures. Failure to make written demand
within the time specified herein shall bar further appeal. The Town Board
shall make a final decision on the appeal within 90 days of the date the
appeal was filed and shall transmit a written copy of its decision by
registered or certified mail.



         (c)   Official record. When a final decision is issued
under division (B)(8)(b) of this section, the council or board serving the
town shall prepare an official record of the case that includes:



            1.   All notices, motions, and other like
pleadings;



            2.   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;



            3.   A certified transcript of all testimony
taken, if testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not
transcribed, then a narrative summary of any testimony taken; and



            4.   A copy of the final decision of the council
or board serving the town.



         (d)   Judicial review. Any person against whom a final
order or decision of the council or board serving the town is entered,
pursuant to the hearing conducted under division (B)(8)(b) of this section,
may seek judicial review of the order or decision by filing a written
petition within 30 days after receipt of notice by registered or certified
mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter, with the Superior Court of
Robeson County along with a copy to the town. Within 30 days after receipt of
the copy of the petition of judicial review, the Town Board shall transmit to
the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the official record.



      (9)   Permit modification.



         (a)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the
same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed
below. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance.



            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge
when no other change in the permit is indicated.



            2.   A single modification of any compliance
schedule not in excess of 4 months.



            3.   Modification of compliance schedules
(construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will
not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational.



         (b)   Within 9 months of the promulgation of a national
categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a National categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by
division (B)(2) of this section, the user shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable
national categorical pretreatment standard.



         (c)   A request for a modification by the permittee
shall constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. §
143-215.1(b) for modifications.



      (10)   Permit conditions.



         (a)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to
grant a permit with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to
achieve the purpose of this subchapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater
permits shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:



            1.   A statement of duration (in no case more than
5 years);



            2.   A statement of non-transferability;



            3.   Applicable effluent limits based on
categorical standards or local limits or both;



            4.   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law;



            5.   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the
event of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in § 50.51(A);



            6.   Requirements to implement a plan or other
controls for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined
in § 50.51(A), if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for the
user;



            7.   Requirements for immediately notifying the
POTW of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and
other accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in § 50.51(A). Also see
§ 50.55(E) and(F); and



            8.   A statement of applicable civil and/or
criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements
and any applicable compliance schedule.



         (b)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not
limited to, the following:



            1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



            2.   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or
monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of
identified wastewater pollutants or properties;



            3.   Requirements for the installation of
pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices
and the like, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



            4.   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the
municipal wastewater system;



            5.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges
and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system;



            6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance
of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;



            7.   Specifications for monitoring programs which
may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and
standards for tests, and reporting schedules;



            8.   Requirements for immediate reporting of any
instance of noncompliance and for automatic re-sampling and reporting within
30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s);



            9.   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment
standards and requirements;



            10.   Requirements for submission of periodic
self-monitoring or special notification reports;



            11.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining
plans and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in §
50.55(M) and affording the POTW Director, or his or her representatives,
access thereto;



            12.   Requirements for prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any new introduction of wastewater
pollutants or of any significant change in the volume or character of the
wastewater prior to introduction in the system;



            13.   Requirements for the prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee;



            14.   A statement that compliance with the permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the terms of the permit; and



            15.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by
the POTW Director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and State and
Federal laws, rules, and regulations.



      (11)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed 5 years. A permit may be issued for a
period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



      (12)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation.



      (13)   Permit Reissuance. A significant industrial user shall
apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with division (B) of this section a minimum of 180 days prior to
the expiration of the existing permit.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150,
passed 12-18-2012)



§ 50.55  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports.



      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (A)(2) of this section. At least 90 days prior
to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (A)(2) of this section. A new source shall
report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



      (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set
forth below.



         (a)   Identifying information. The name and address of
the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



         (b)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



         (c)   Description of operations. A brief description of
the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.



         (d)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.



            1.   The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.



            2.   The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the POTW Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The
sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in division (J) of this section.



            3.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in division (K) of this section and 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)
and (g), including 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g)(4).



         (f)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the
user’s current authorized representative as defined in § 50.51(A) and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.



         (g)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in division (B) of this section.



         (h)   Signature and certification. All baseline
monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
50.54(B)(3).



   (B)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by division (A)(2)(g) of this
section:



      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed 9 months;



      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW
Director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and



      (4)   In no event shall more than 9 months elapse between such
progress reports to the POTW Director.



   (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard,
deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the POTW Director a report containing the information described in divisions
(A)(2)(d) through (f) of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass
or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report
shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period.  All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 50.54(B)(3).



   (D)   Periodic compliance reports. Municipalities may sample and
analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring the users to conduct sampling
and analysis.



      (1)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the POTW Director but in no case less than once every six
months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
applicable flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be
performed in accordance with procedures set out in divisions (J) and (K) of
this section. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 50.54(B)(3).



      (2)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this
section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW
Director, using the procedures prescribed in divisions (J) and (K) of this
section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.



   (E)   Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the POTW
Director of any planned significant changes to the user’s operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at
least 30 days before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes
until receiving written approval from the Control Authority. See division
(F)(4) of this section for other reporting requirements.



      (1)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 50.54(B).



      (2)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under § 50.54(B) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under § 50.54(B) in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.



      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes
include, but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of 20% or
greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, increases
or decreases to production; increases in discharge of previously reported
pollutants; discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the Control
Authority and/or municipality; new or changed product lines; new or changed
manufacturing processes and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers.



   (F)   Reports of potential problems.



      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited
to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 50.51(A), that
may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the POTW Director of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



      (2)   Within 5 days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.



      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in
the event of a discharge described in division (F)(1) of this section.
Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to
occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.



      (4)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of
any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 50.51(A).



   (G)   Reports from unpermitted users.



      (1)   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW
Director may require.



      (2)   All users classified as non-significant categorical
industrial users under § 50.51(A) shall provide appropriate reports to the
POTW Director as the POTW Director may require. At a minimum, this shall
include the annual certification of continuing to meet the non-significant
categorical industrial user criteria as required under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(q).



   (H)   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.



      (1) If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit
the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director, the user is
not required to resample:



         (a)   If the POTW monitors at the user’s facility at
least once a month; or



         (b)   If the POTW samples between the user’s initial
sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.



      (2)   If the POTW has performed the sampling and analysis in
lieu of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a
violation, the POTW shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the
repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violations, unless
one of the following occurs:



         (a)   The POTW monitors at the user’s facility at
least once a month;



         (b)   The POTW samples the user between their initial
sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or



         (c)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform
sampling and submit the results to the POTW Director within the 30 day
deadline of the POTW becoming aware of the violation.



   (I)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. The town
prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without notification to and
approval by the POTW Director.



      (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director,
and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must include the name of
the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA hazardous
waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the
user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to
the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to
the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place
no later than 180 days before the discharge commences. The user shall not
begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the town. Any
notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must
be submitted under division (E) of this section. The notification requirement
in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of divisions (A), (C), and (D) of this section.



      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division
(I)(1) of this section, during a calendar month in which they discharge no
more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specific in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 361.33(e).
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a
calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities
of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.



      (3)   In the case of any new regulation under § 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section,
the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to
be economically practical.



      (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



   (J)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the
state to perform the wastewater analyses in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard or unless otherwise performed in accordance
with procedures approved by EPA or town. If 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by EPA and town. Analyses must be performed by a state certified lab
for each parameter analyzed, if such certification exists for that parameter.



   (K)   Grab and composite sample collection.



      (1)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.



      (2)   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other
pollutants as required by 40 C.F.R. § 136. The POTW shall determine the
number of grabs necessary to be representative of the user’s discharge. See
40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for
a baseline monitoring report (BMR) and 90 day compliance reports.
Additionally, the POTW Director may allow collection of multiple grabs during
a 24 hour period which are composited prior to analysis as allowed under 40
C.F.R. § 136.



      (3)   Composite samples. All wastewater composite samples
shall be collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour
that there is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be
collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
POTW Director. When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the
samples must be representative and the decision to allow the alternative
sampling must be documented.



   (L)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted
on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
of receipt of the report shall govern.



   (M)   Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of
this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained
pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least 3 years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the POTW Director.



   (N)   Electronic reporting. The POTW Director may develop procedures
for receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this
subchapter. Such procedures shall comply with 40 C.F.R. Part 3. These
procedures shall be enforceable under § 50.58.



   (O)   Special reporting requirements for use in satellite POTWs. In
the case of industrial user located in a satellite POTW organization’s
jurisdiction, all information required to be reported to the industrial
user’s pretreatment program control authority by this subchapter shall also
be reported to the POTW treatment plant organization.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150,
passed 12-18-2012)



§ 50.56  COMPLIANCE MONITORING.



   (A)   Monitoring facilities.



      (1)   The town requires the user to provide and operate at the
user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling,
and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems.
The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises,
but the town may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.



      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.



      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the town and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the town.



   (B)   Inspection and sampling. The town will inspect the facilities
of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this subchapter is being met
and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of
premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the town,
approval authority and EPA or their representative ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying or in the performance of any of
their duties. The town, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to
set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where
a user has security measures in force which would require proper
identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the town, approval
authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes
of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the POTW’s,
approval authority’s, or EPA’s access to the user’s premises shall be a
violation of this chapter. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of
access.



   (C)   Search warrants. If the POTW, approval authority, or EPA has
been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part
thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may
be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the town
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the POTW , approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the court having jurisdiction within the town.



(Ord. passed 3-12-2002; Am. Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150,
passed 12-18-2012)



§ 50.57  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data provided by an industrial user to the
POTW Director pursuant to this subchapter identifying the nature and
frequency of a discharge, shall be available to the public without
restriction. All other information which may be so submitted by an industrial
user to the POTW Director in connection with any required reports shall also
be available to the public unless the industrial user or other interested
person specifically identifies the information as confidential upon
submission and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW
Director that the disclosure of such information or a particular part thereof
to the general public would divulge methods or processes entitled to
protection as trade secrets.



   (B)   Information provided by an industrial user to the POTW
Director that is determined to be entitled to confidential treatment shall be
made available upon written request to the Division of Water Quality or any
state agency for uses related to the pretreatment program, the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, collection system
permit, stormwater permit, and/or non-discharge permit, and for uses related
to judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing
the report.



   (C)   Information and data received by the Division or other state
agency under division (B) of this section shall be subject to the processes
set forth in G.S. § 143-215.3C.



(Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 50.58  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Administrative remedies.



      (1)   Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW Director
finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this subchapter,
wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve
upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the
town by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



      (2)   Consent orders. The POTW Director is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as an administrative order issued pursuant to division (A)(4) of this section.



      (3)   Show cause hearing.



         (a)   The POTW Director may order any industrial user
who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this
chapter or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the
POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request
that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the
hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.



         (b)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence
presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement
action is appropriate.



         (c)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a
prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under division (B) of this
section nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this
section subject to an administrative appeal under § 50.54(B)(8).



      (4)   Administrative orders. When the POTW Director finds that
an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this subchapter,
permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the
POTW Director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and
direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



         (b)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time
schedule set forth in the order;



         (c)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in
the event of a continuing or threatened violation; or



         (d)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated
within a specified time period.



      (5)   Emergency suspensions.



         (a)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary
in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to
violate any condition of its NPDES or Non-discharge permit.



         (b)   Any user notified of a suspension of the
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of
the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or
the user’s waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take
such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit
and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date
of the above-described hearing.



      (6)   Termination of permit or permission to discharge. The
POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to
discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:



         (a)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;



         (b)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit or
permission to discharge, conditions of this subchapter, or any applicable
state and federal regulations.



      (7)   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause under division (A) of this section why the proposed
action should not be taken.



   (B)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty up to $25,000 per day per
violation. Penalties of up to $25,000 per day per violation may be assessed
against a violator:



         (a)   For any class of violation, only if a civil
penalty has been imposed against the violator with in the five years
preceding the violation; or



         (b)   In the case of failure to file, submit, or make
available, as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by
this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was intentional and a
civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the five years
preceding the violation.



      (2)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
Director shall consider the following:



         (a)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health, or to



   public or private property resulting from the violation;



         (b)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



         (c)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



         (d)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



         (e)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



         (f)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



         (g)   The prior record of the violator in complying or
failing to comply with the pretreatment program; and



         (h)   The costs of enforcement to the town.



      (3)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with
this section shall be as provided in § 50.54(B)(8).



   (C)   Other available remedies. Remedies, in addition to those
previously mentioned in this chapter, are available to the POTW Director who
may use any single one or combination against a noncompliant user. Additional
available remedies include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Criminal violations. The district attorney for the
applicable judicial district may, at the request of the town, prosecute
noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B. Note:
Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term,
condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to
apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. §
143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or
requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to
apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. §
143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a
pretreatment permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply
for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in
imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. § 143-215.6B(h)),
and to falsify information required under Article 21 of Chapter 143 of the
General Statutes (G.S. § 143-215.6B(i)).



      (2)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of
the provisions of this subchapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the
POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order and/or a preliminary and
permanent injunction which restrain or compel the activities in question.



      (3)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is
in violation of the provisions of this subchapter or an order or permit
issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and
service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated ability to comply.



      (4)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this subchapter or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the appropriate chapters of
the town governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any
costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying the nuisance.



   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this
chapter are not exclusive. The POTW Director may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Town’s
enforcement response plan. However, the POTW Director may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director
is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user.



(Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 50.59  ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of those industrial users which
were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable
noncompliance, in 15A NCAC 02H .0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150, passed 12-18-2012)



§ 50.60  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upset.



      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of division (A)(2) of this section are met.



      (2)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user has submitted the following information
to the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
5 days:



            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (3)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (4)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (5)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards defense. A user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 50.52(H)(1) or the specific
prohibitions in § 50.52(H)(2)(b), (c), (e) through (g) and (i) through (w)
if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass through or interference and that either:



      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of divisions (C)(2) and (3) of this
section.



      (2)   Reporting required.



         (a)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least 10 days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.



         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW
Director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within 5 days of this time the user
becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned
to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW
Director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.



      (3)   POTW Director responses.



         (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may
take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;



            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent
a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



            3.   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C)(2) of this section.



         (b)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated
bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in division
(C)(3)(a) of this section.



(Ord. 10-130, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 12-150, passed 12-18-2012)



FATS, OILS, GREASES, SAND AND GAS CONTROL



§ 50.70  SCOPE, PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the town and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws, including the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and the
general pretreatment regulations, being 40 C.F.R. part 403. It is intended to
aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from
contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases into the sewer
system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food
preparation and serving facilities.



   (B)   The objectives of this subchapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;



      (3)   To ensure the capability for reuse and recycling of
industrial wastewater and sludge from the municipal system;



      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public;



      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system;



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES
or nondischarge permit conditions, sludge use, disposal requirements and
other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject; and



      (7)   To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and
obstructions from contributions end accumulations of fats, oils, and greases
into the wastewater system from industrial or commercial establishments,
particularly food preparation and serving facilities.



   (C)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the
issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.



   (D)   This subchapter shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system as authorized by G.S. 160A-312. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the Public Works Director shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted to or imposed
upon the Public Works Director may be delegated by the Public Works Director
to other town personnel. By discharging wastewater into the municipal
wastewater system, industrial users located outside the town limits agree to
comply with the terms and conditions established in this subchapter, as well
as any permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder.



(Ord. 06-101, passed 4-18-2006)



§ 50.71  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FATS, OILS, GREASE.  Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or system sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules. GREASE is defined to include the accumulation of oils, fats,
cellulose, starch, proteins, wax, or grease, whether emulsified or not, in
the sewer system of the town. These are substances that may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0° - 65° C). These
substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in 40 C.F.R. 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are
sometimes referred to herein as GREASE or GREASES.



   FOOD SERVICE, COOKING OR FOOD GENERATING ESTABLISHMENTS.  Includes any
commercial facility discharging kitchen or food preparation wastewater
including restaurants, motels. hotels, cafeterias, catering, hospitals,
extended care facilities, schools, bars, daycare facilities where meals for
more than 6 children are prepared, delicatessen, meat cutting-preparation,
bakeries, commercial food preparation facilities, meat processing facilities,
and the like, any establishments that may be capable of accumulating and
discharging grease in to the wastewater system, and any other facility which,
in the opinion of the Public Works Director, would require a grease trap
installation by virtue of its operation. Those establishments engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs and that use 1 or more of the following preparation
activities: cooking by frying (all methods); baking (all methods); grilling;
sauteing; rotisserie cooking; broiling (all methods); boiling; blanching;
roasting; toasting; or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing,
barbecuing, and any other food preparation that produces a hot, non-drinkable
food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.



   GREASE INTERCEPTOR or GREASE TRAP.  An approved device for separating
and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes from a food service
establishment prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system.  These devices also serve to
collect settable solids, generated by arid from food preparation activities,
prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer
collection and treatment system.  Grease traps and interceptors are
sometimes referred to herein as GREASE INTERCEPTORS.  These traps or
interceptors may be of the “outdoor” or underground type normally of a
1,000 gallon capacity or more, or the “under-the-counter” package: units
which are typically less than 100 gallon capacity. For the purpose of this
definition, the words TRAP and INTERCEPTOR are used interchangeably.



   INTERFERENCE.  A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits and/or disrupts the
wastewater treatment system in its treatment processes and/or disrupts the
wastewater treatment system, its treatment processes and/or operations,
and/or its sludge processes. use and/or disposal. Interference shall include,
but is not limited to, a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources causes, in whole or in part, a
violation(s) of 1 or more of the town’s NPDES permits and/or non-compliance
with any or the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulation(s): § 405 of the
Act (33 U.S.C. 1345), or any criteria, guideline or regulations developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SEDA), being 42 U.S.C.§§ 6901 et
seq., the Clean Air Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., the Toxic
Substances Control Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.,the Marine
Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA), being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et
seq. or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
wastewater treatment system.



   MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY.  The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public
sanitary sewer.



   NON-COOKING ESTABLISHMENTS.  Those establishments primarily engaged in
the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not include any form of
cooking. These include, but are not limited to, food processing, cold dairy
and frozen foodstuffs preparation and serving establishments.



   OIL/WATER SEPARATOR.  An automatic or manual device designed to
separate and retain oils and other light density volatile liquids from normal
waste for proper disposal, rendering or recycling, and also permits normal
sewage and liquid wastes to discharge into the disposal terminal by gravity.



   OWNER.  Owner shall mean individual, person, firm, company,
association, society, corporation, or group upon whose property the building
or structure serving as a food service, cooking or food generating
establishment is located or will be constructed.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  The Public Works Director, or his or her
designee.



   USER, GENERATOR or CONTRIBUTOR.  Any person, including those located
outside the jurisdictional limits of the town, who contributes, causes or
permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the publicly owned
wastewater treatment system, including persons who contribute such wastewater
from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.



(Ord. 06-101, passed 4-18-2006)



§ 50.72  PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.



   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Public Works Director may
require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate
that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate
and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from
industrial wastestreams, and any other conditions as may he or she necessary
to protect the wastewater treatment system and determine the user’s
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Public Works Director may require any person discharging
into the wastewater treatment system to install and maintain, on their
property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility
to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.



   (C)   Sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the
Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of sand; except that those
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of the type and capacity approved by the Public Works
Director, and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. These interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.



   (D)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter. In the event gas is detected, user must take appropriate steps to
eliminate the presence of gas in the system,



   (E)   Grease interceptors shall be installed by all grease
generating establishments as required by the Public Works Director.  Grease
interceptors shall be installed at  the grease generating establishment’s
expense.  No grease generating establishment shall allow wastewater
discharge concentration from subject grease interceptor to exceed 200
milligrams per liter, as identified by method EPA Method 1664.  All grease
interceptors shall be of a type, design, and capacity approved by the Public
Works Director, his or her designee, and shall be readily and easily
accessible for user cleaning and town inspection.  All grease interceptors
shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in
order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease
interceptor, but not less often than every 30 days or at a different
intervals as authorized by the Public Works Director.  Users who are
required to pass water through a grease interceptor shall:



      (1)   Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24
minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak
flow rate as predicted by the Uniform Plumbing Code fixture criteria, between
the influent and effluent baffles with 20% of the total volume of the grease
interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified
hereafter as a “sludge pocket.”



      (2)   Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as
required, but at intervals of not longer than 30 days, or at a different
interval as authorized by Public Works Director, or the Public Works
Director’s designee, at the users expense. Grease interceptors shall be
kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand,
eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, and the like, which could
settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the grease
interceptor.



      (3)   Accept the following conditions: if any skimmed or
pumped wastes or other materials removed from grease interceptor are treated
in any fashion onsite and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an
activity of and after the onsite treatment, the grease generating
establishment shall be responsible for the attainment of established grease
numerical limit consistent with and contained in division (E) above on all
discharges of wastewater from the grease interceptor into the town’s
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system.



      (4)   Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to
maintain the device so that attainment  of the grease limit is consistently
achieved. “Consistent” shall mean any wastewater sample taken from the
grease interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment
described in division (E) above. If an establishment desires, because of
documented space constraints, an alternate to an out-of-building grease
interceptor, the request for an alternative location shall contain the
following information:



         (a)   Location of town sewer main and easement in
relation to available exterior space outside building; or



         (b)   Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common
plumbing for all services it that site.



      (5)   Understand and agree that the use of biological
additives as a grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon
prior written approval by the Director. Any establishment using this method
of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in a manner that
attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the
trap’s outlet, is consistently achieved.



      (6)   Understand and agree that the use of automatic grease
removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval by
the Public Works Director, the Inspection Superintendent of the Town of
Fairmont, and the Robeson County Department of Health. Any establishment
using this equipment shall operate the system in such a manner that
attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the
unit’s outlet, is consistently achieved.



      (7)   Understand and agree that the Public Works Director
reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and
need, based on review of all relevant information regarding grease
interceptor performance, facility site and building plan review and to
require repairs to or modification or replacement of the traps.



      (8)   Upon the prior written approval of the Public Work
Director, non-cooking establishments may be exempted from the requirements of
this subchapter after an inspection of the subject premises and submission of
adequate supporting documentation, as deemed necessary in the sole and
absolute discretion of the Public Works Director. At a minimum, the
supporting documentation shall include: blue prints at the subject premises;
and a full and detailed list of all potential sources of grease at the
subject premises.



      (9)   Grease traps and interceptors may also be required in
other facilities, as deemed necessary by the town’s Public Works Director.



      (10)   In the event an overflow, spill, leak, or other event
causes an environmental impact that may be attributed in part or in whole to
a particular user, the town will seek enforcement action under the sewer use
ordinance, and/or the pretreatment enforcement plan. For purposes of this
section an overflow, spill, leak or other event shall be deemed to have all
environmental impact when:



         (a)   The overflow or other event reaches an amount of
wastewater equal to or in excess of 1,000 gallons; or



         (b)   Any amount of wastewater reaches any body or
surface water.



      (11)   (a)   Users shall supply:



            1.   An adequate sampling point down stream of
grease trap or interceptor, prior to mixing with other sanitary flows; and



            2.   An accessible entry into each chamber of the
grease trap or interceptor.



         (b)   The minimum requirement for the sampling point
shall be a 4-inch vertical clean out.



      (12)   Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches,
shall be provided over each chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes
shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to
prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily
removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater
sampling activities. All manhole construction shall conform to the Town of
Fairmont’s specifications.



      (13)   Users shall empty and service grease traps and
interceptors to comply with the performances criteria in §  50.72 as often
as necessary, but in any event no longer than every 30 days.
Under-the-counter types of grease traps and interceptors shall be cleaned at
least daily, and shall comply with the performance criteria of § 50.72. 
There shall be no reintroduction of wastewater back into the grease trap or
interceptor unless and until the wastewater has been proven to contain 200
mg/l or less of grease.  Under no circumstances shall the sludge or scum
layer be reintroduced or discharged into the town’s wastewater collection
system or POTW.



   (F)   The user shall maintain a written record of trap maintenance
for 3 years. All records will be available for inspection by town officials
or the Public Works Director, at all times.



   (G)   No non-grease laden sources are allowed to be connected to
sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service.



   (H)   Users shall design and build the grease interceptors for new
construction and new food service establishments in existing buildings to the
construction standards for new facilities or new food service establishments
in existing buildings found In the North Carolina State Building Code, for
Plumbing.



(Ord. passed 06-101, 4-18-2006)



§ 50.73  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   No later than 1 year after adoption of this subchapter, all
users shall install grease traps or interceptors designed to limit the
introduction, contribution and discharge of greases into the town’s
wastewater collection system.  Grease traps and interceptors with
appropriate sampling or inspection points shall be installed at the user’s
expense whenever any user operates a commercial establishment, industrial
establishment, or a cooking establishment, or when required by the Director
of Public Works. Grease traps and interceptors of the “outdoor” or
underground type must be a capacity of 1,000 gallons or more and
“under-the-counter” package units must have a minimum capacity of not
less than 100 gallons as required to effect a grease concentration maximum of
200 mg/l.



   (B)   Except as provided herein, for a period of 1 year following
adoption of this subchapter, although installation of grease interceptors
will be required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under
this subchapter for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from
grease interceptors. If during this 1 year period an obstruction of a town
sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that any
impact on the environment is realized and that overflow or failure of the
sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part
or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the town’s sewer main(s), the
town will take appropriate enforcement actions as stipulated herein against
the generator or contributor of that grease.



   (C)   If an obstruction of a town sewer main(s) occurs that causes a
sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the environment is realized
and that the overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer collection system to
convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of
grease in the town’s sewer main(s), the town will take appropriate
enforcement actions, as stipulated in the this section, against the generator
or contributor of that grease.



(Ord. 06-101, passed 4-18-2006)



§ 50.74  RECORD KEEPING FOR ALL PERMIT HOLDERS.



   All holders of a pre-treatment permit for fats, oils or greases shall
submit the record of maintenance of the grease interceptors/traps to the
Pre-treatment Coordinator as required by the permit. Failure to comply with
the reporting requirements is a violation of this subchapter which may result
in, but is not limited to, increased inspections and fines.



(Ord. passed 06-101, 4-18-2006)  Penalty, see § 50.99



CROSS CONNECTION CONTROLS



§ 50.80  UNREGULATED CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED; BACKFLOW PREVENTION
PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.



   No cross connection shall be made between the public water system of
the town and any other source of water, private water system or plumbing
located on private property except in conformity with the requirements of
this subchapter and the currently adopted Plumbing Code of the town. The
Board of Commissioners of the town hereby creates a "backflow prevention
program" to protect the potable water supply of the town. Appropriate
backflow protection methods are adopted in this subchapter. The goal of this
subchapter is to minimize the possibility of contamination by confining
within the customer's private water system those contaminants or pollutants,
which could, under adverse conditions, backflow through uncontrolled cross
connections into the public water system. No service connection shall be made
to the public water system except in conformity with this subchapter.



(Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.81  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR GAP SEPARATION.  The unobstructed vertical distance through the
atmosphere between the lowest point opening from any pipe or faucet supplying
water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of
the receptacle. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap separation be less
than 2 inches.



   APPROVED.  As herein used in reference to a water supply shall mean a
water supply that has been approved by the North Carolina Department of
Environment, Health, and Natural Resource (Division of Health Service), or as
used in reference to air gap separation, a pressure vacuum breaker, a double
check valve assembly, a double check detector assembly, a reduced pressure
principle, backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall mean approval of
Public Works Director.



   BACKFLOW.  Any flow of water, liquid, gas or other substance, or any
combination thereof, into the distribution piping of a potable water supply
from any source or sources.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.  An approved assembly or method used to
prevent backflow from occurring in the potable water supply.



   BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW.  Backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank,
boiler or other means that could create pressure within the consumer's water
system greater than the supply pressure of the public water system.



   CERTIFIED TESTER.  A person trained and certified in the installation
and testing of backflow prevention assemblies. Testers shall provide a
current certificate from an approved school before being allowed to test
assemblies.



   CROSS CONNECTION.  Any physical connection between a potable water
supply system and any other piping system, sewer fixture, container or
device, whereby water or other liquids, mixtures or substances may flow into
or enter the potable water supply system and any potable water supply outlet
which is submerged or is designed or intended to be submerged in non-potable
water or in any source of contamination or an air gap, providing a space
between the potable water pipe outlet and the flood level rim of a receiving
vessel of less than twice the diameter of the potable water pipe or less than
2 inches.



   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY.  An assembly composed of 2 independently
acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves
attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test
cocks.



   DOUBLE CHECK-DETECTOR ASSEMBLY.  A specially designed assembly
composed of a line-size approved double check valve assembly with a specific
bypass water meter and a meter-sized approved double check valve assembly.
The meter shall register in U.S. gallons accurately for only very low rates
of flow and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly
shall only be used to protect against contamination from non-health hazard
facilities.



   HEALTH HAZARD FACILITIES.  Include, but are not limited to: Any
private water system used or designed for use with a booster pump or which
may become pressurized for any reason to the extent that back pressure may
occur; any private water system which contains water which has been or is
being re-circulated; a building with 5 or more stories above ground level;
brewery; car wash facilities; bottling plant; chemical plant; dentist's
office; dry cleaning plant; fertilizer plant; film laboratory; fire sprinkler
or standpipe system with chemical additives; hospital, clinic, medical
building; irrigation system with chemical additives; laboratory; commercial
laundry (except self-service laundry); concrete/asphalt plants; metal
processing plant; morgue or mortuary; nursing home; pharmaceutical plant;
power plant; swimming pool; sewage treatment plant; tire manufacturer;
veterinary hospital or clinic; restaurants; battery manufacturers;
exterminators; lawn care companies; dairies; canneries; and dye works.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  A customer that is classified as a manufacturing
industry by the North American Industrial Classification Standard (NAICS),
published by the U.S. Government Census Bureau. More than 50% of the
customer's utility usage must be for its manufacturing purposes.



   NON-HEALTH HAZARD FACILITIES.  Include, but are not limited to: Fire
sprinkler systems without booster pump facilities or chemical additives;
connections to tanks, lines and vessels that handle nontoxic substances; lawn
sprinkler systems without chemical injection or booster pumps; all industrial
and most commercial facilities not identified as high hazard facilities.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL.



      (1)   Office buildings, stores, shops, restaurants, service
stations, and other similar non-residential establishments;



      (2)   Hospitals, nursing homes, and institutional care
facilities;



      (3)   Schools, dormitories, churches, and other
non-residential institutions;



      (4)   Utility service(s) used in a multi-family residential
structure (other than the individual residential units), laundry facilities,
recreational facilities, and the like.



   POTABLE WATER.  Water from any source, which has been approved for
human consumption by the appropriate agency of the state.



   PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM.  A system of pipes or other associated
facilities that is not part of the town's public water system and is used to
move or receive water, regardless of the source of water in such system.



   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM.  A system for the provision to the public of
water for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances
which serves 15 or more service connections or which regularly serves 25 or
more individuals. This term includes any collection, treatment, storage or
distribution facility under control of the operator of the system and used
primarily in connection with the system and any collection or pretreatment
storage facility not under the control of the operator of the system that is
used primarily in connection with the system.



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY.  An assembly containing within
its structure a minimum of 2 independently acting, approved check valves,
together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve
located between the check valves. The first check valve reduces the supply
pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation
of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply
pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the pressure differential
relief valve, by discharge to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the
pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The assembly must
include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at
each end of the assembly.



   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE-DETECTOR ASSEMBLY.  An assembly composed of
an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a
bypass water meter and a meter-sized approved reduced pressure principle
assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low flow rates and
shall register in U.S. gallons at all flow rates.



   RESIDENTIAL.  An individual residence, defined as a single dwelling
unit which provides permanent or independent facilities complete for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. An individual residence may be a
house, condominium, modular home, mobile home, or individually metered
apartment.



   SERVICE CONNECTION.  A piped connection from a water main for the
purpose of conveying water to a building or onto any premises for human use.



   WATER SUPPLY (APPROVED).  Any public potable water supply, which has
been investigated and approved by the appropriate agency of the state. The
system must be operating under a valid health permit.



(Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)



Statutory reference:



   Distribution systems, see 15A N.C. Admin. Code 18C.0406



   Public water system, see G.S. § 130A-313(10)



   Service connection, see 15A N.C. Admin. Code 18C.0102(15)



§ 50.82  ELIMINATION OF CROSS CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   When cross connections are found to exist, the owner, his or
her agent, occupant, or tenant will be notified in writing to disconnect the
cross connection within the time limit established by the Public Works
Director. Degree of protection required and maximum time allowed for
compliance will be based upon the potential degree of hazard to the public
water supply system as follows:



      (1)   Cross connection with private wells or other auxiliary
water supplies -immediate disconnection.



      (2)   All facilities which pose a health hazard to the potable
water system must have a containment assembly in the form of a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly within 60 days.



      (3)   All industrial and non-residential facilities not
identified as a health hazard shall be considered non-health hazard
facilities. All non-health hazard facilities must install, as a minimum
containment assembly, a double check valve assembly within 90 days unless
otherwise approved by the Public Works Director or his or her authorized
designee.



      (4)   If, in the judgment of the Public Works Director, an
imminent health hazard exists, water service to the building or premises
where a cross connection exits may be terminated unless an air gap is
immediately provided, or the cross connection is immediately eliminated.



      (5)   All lawn irrigation systems must have a double check
valve assembly as a minimum containment facility.



      (6)   Based upon recommendation from the Public Works
Director, the consumer is responsible for installing sufficient internal
isolation backflow prevention assemblies and/or methods (such as air gap,
pressure vacuum breakers, reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly, double check vale assembly).



      (7)   Water mains served by the town but not maintained by the
town should be considered cross connections, with degree of hazard to be
determined by the Public Works Director. Degree of protection shall be based
upon the degree of hazard, as determined by the Public Works Director.



      (8)   In the event that a town cross connection control
inspector does not have sufficient access to every portion of a private water
system (such as classified research and development facilities; federal
government property) to allow a complete evaluation of the degree of hazard
associated with such private water systems, an approved reduced pressure
principle assembly shall be required as a minimum of protection.



      (9)   Customers shall not modify their private water system in
a manner that would affect the degree of hazard of such system until the town
has been provided with information showing that the appropriate backflow
prevention assembly is installed. If such modification or change is
determined by the Public Works Director to require the installation of a
different backflow prevention assembly, the required backflow prevention
assembly must be installed in accordance with provision of this subchapter
prior to making the proposed modification or change.



   (B)   No person shall fill special use tanks or tankers containing
pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals or their residues from the
public water system except at a location equipped with an air gap or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly properly
installed on the public water supply.



(Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.83  INSTALLATION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION
ASSEMBLIES.



   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Only backflow preventers
approved by the Public Works Director, American Society of Sanitary Engineers
(ASSE) or the American Water Works Association (AWWA), or USC shall be used.



   (B)   All backflow prevention assemblies required by this section
must be installed and maintained on the customer's premises as part of the
customer's water system.



   (C)   Ownership, testing, and maintenance of the backflow prevention
section assembly will be the responsibility of the customer. Each assembly
required in this subchapter must be functioning properly at all times.



   (D)   A certified tester shall conduct testing of backflow
prevention assemblies at the customer's expense. Tests shall be conducted
upon installation and annually thereafter with a record of all testing and
repairs retained by the customer. Each customer must send a copy of the
certified record for each test or repair to the town within 30 days after the
completion of each test or repair. Such records must be maintained on forms
provided by the town.



   (E)   Each backflow prevention assembly required under this section
must be accessible to the town.



   (F)   When it is not possible to interrupt water service, the
customer shall provide for the parallel installation of an approved backflow
prevention assembly. A bypass around a backflow preventer when the assembly
is in need of testing, repair or replacement is not allowed.



   (G)   Double check valve assemblies must be installed in drainable
pits whenever below-ground installation is necessary.



   (H)   Reduced pressure principle assemblies must be installed in a
horizontal position and in a location in which no portion of the assembly can
become submerged in any substance under any circumstances (pit and/or below
grade installations are prohibited).



   (I)   Any time that repairs to backflow assemblies are deemed
necessary, whether through annual testing or routine inspection by the owner
or by the town, these repairs must be completed within a time specified below
in accordance with the degree of hazard. Repairs must be made to
health-hazard facilities in 14 days. Repairs must be made to
non-health-hazard facilities in 21 days. Failure to comply can result in
termination of a customer's water service.



   (J)   If the town determines that a backflow prevention assembly is
required to be installed on a customer's private water system, the customer
will be notified in writing of the approved backflow prevention assembly
which is required. On existing systems, the customer will have the following
time periods within which to install the specified backflow prevention
assembly:



      (1)   Health hazard facility - 60 days;



      (2)   Non-health hazard facility - 90 days.



   (K)   All new construction plans and specifications shall be made
available to the town for approval and to determine the degree of hazard.



   (L)   The customer shall notify the town when the nature of the use
of property changes so as to change the hazard classification of the property.



(Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.84  FACILITIES REQUIRING PROTECTION.



   (A)   Approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on
the service line to any premises that the Public Works Director has
identified as having a potential for backflow.



   (B)   The following types of facilities or services have been
identified by the town as having a potential for backflow of non-potable
water into the public water supply system. Therefore, an approved backflow
prevention assembly will be required on all such services according to the
degree of hazard present. Other types of facilities or services not listed
below may also be required to install approved backflow prevention assemblies
if determined necessary by the Public Works Director. As a minimum
requirement, all non-residential services will be required to install a
double check valve assembly, unless otherwise listed in this section. The
installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly or method other than
those specified by this subchapter can be allowed only by the approval of the
Public Works Director or his or her authorized representative.



 


ABBREVIATION

 

MEANING



DCVA
 
Double check valve assembly


RP
 
Reduced pressure principle assembly


DCDA
 
Double check detector assembly


AG
 
Air gap


PVB
 
Pressure vacuum breaker



 



      (1)   Aircraft and missile plants: RP.



      (2)   Automotive services stations, dealerships, and the like:



         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   Health hazard: RP.



      (3)   Automotive plants: RP.



      (4)   Auxiliary water systems:



         (a)   Approved public/private water supply: DCVA;



         (b)   Unapproved public/private water supply: AG;



         (c)   Used water and industrial fluids: RP Bakeries.



      (5)   Bakeries:



         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   Health hazard: RP.



      (6)   Beauty shops/barber shops:



         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   Health hazard: RP.



      (7)   Beverage bottling plants: RP.



      (8)   Breweries: RP.



      (9)   Miscellaneous buildings - Hotels, apartment houses,
public and private buildings, or other structures having unprotected cross
connections:



         (a)   (Under 5 stories) no health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   (Under 5 stories) health hazard: RP;



         (c)   (Over 5 stories) all: RP.



      (10)   Canneries, packing houses, and rendering plants: RP.



      (11)   Chemical plants - Manufacturing, processing,
compounding or treatment: RP.



      (12)   Chemically contaminated water systems: RP.



      (13)   Commercial carwash facilities: RP.



      (14)   Commercial greenhouses: RP.



      (15)   Commercial sales establishments (department stores,
malls, and the like):



         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   Health hazard: RP.



      (16)   Concrete/asphalt plants: RP.



      (17)   Dairies and cold storage plants: RP.



      (18)   Dye works: RP.



      (19)   Film laboratories: RP.



      (20)   Fire systems:



         (a)   Systems 3/4 inch to 2 inches:



            1.   No health hazard: DCDA;



            2.   Health hazard: (booster pumps, foam,
antifreeze solution, and the like): RP.



         (b)   Systems 1-1/2 inches to 10 inches or larger:



            1.   No health hazard: DCDA;



            2.   Health hazard: (booster pumps, foam,
antifreeze solution, and the like): RPDA;



      (21)   Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues,
mortuaries, autopsy facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, medical
clinics, and veterinary hospitals: RP.



      (22)   Industrial facilities:



         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   Health hazard: RP.



      (23)   Laundries:



         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   Health hazard: (such as dry cleaners): RP.



      (24)   Lawn irrigation systems: DCVA.



      (25)   Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, and
fabricating plants: RP.



      (26)   Mobile home parks:



         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   Health hazard: RP.



      (27)   Oil and gas production, storage or transmission
properties: RP.



      (28)   Paper and paper products plants: RP.



      (29)   Pest control (exterminating and fumigating): RP.



      (30)   Plating plants: RP.



      (31)   Power plants: RP.



      (32)   Radioactive materials or substances plants or
facilities handling: RP.



      (33)   Restaurants:



         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA;



         (b)   Health hazard: RP.



      (34)   Restricted, classified, or other closed facilities: RP.



      (35)   Rubber plants (natural or synthetic): RP.



      (36)   Sand and gravel plants: RP.



      (37)   Schools and colleges: RP.



      (38)   Sewage and storm drain facilities: RP.



      (39)   Swimming pools: RP.



      (40)   Waterfront facilities and industries: RP.



   (C)   All assemblies and installations shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Public Works Director.



(Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.85  RESPONSIBILITY OF CUSTOMER.



   (A)   The customer shall be responsible for the elimination of or
protection against all cross connections on his or her premises.



   (B)   The customer shall maintain any backflow prevention assembly
within his or her premises in good operating condition. The customer shall
correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer which is revealed by
periodic testing.



   (C)   The customer shall be responsible for payment of all fees for
annual testing, retesting in the case that the assembly fails to operate
correctly, and repairs.



   (D)   A customer must immediately notify the town if the customer
has reason to believe that backflow has occurred from the customer's private
water system.



(Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.86  UNAPPROVED SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of
water not approved by the town and the state to the public water supply
system.



   (B)   Where a service connection or other connection to a town water
line is made, and the property owner continues to have a well or other source
of water, it shall be unlawful for the plumbing servicing any building upon
such property to be so connected that any water outlet within the building
may be served with water from any source other than the town connection, and
it shall also be unlawful to have plumbing cross-connected or so installed
that water from the town water system or the private water system may in any
way become intermingled.



(Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.87  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Requests for extension of time shall be made in writing to the
Public Works Director or his or her authorized representative. All other
appeals shall be made in accordance with the following procedures:



      (1)   Adjudicatory hearings.  A customer assessed a civil
penalty under this section shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing
before a hearing officer designated by the Public Works Director upon making
written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the
Public Works Director, within 30 days following notice of final decision to
assess a civil penalty. Unless such demand is made within the time specified
in this section, the decision on the civil penalty assessment shall be final
and binding.



      (2)   Appeal hearings.  Any decision of the Public Works
Director made as a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division (1)
of this section may be appealed by any party to the Board of Commissioners
upon filing a written demand within 10 days of receipt of notice of the
decision. Failure to make written demand within the time specified in this
section shall bar further appeal. The Board of Commissioners shall make a
decision on the appeal within 90 days of the date the appeal was filed and
shall transmit a written copy of its decision by registered or certified mail.



      (3)   Official record.  When a final decision is issued under
this section, the Board of Commissioners shall prepare an official record of
the case that includes:



         (a)   All notices, motions, and other like pleadings;



         (b)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;



         (c)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if
testimony is transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a
narrative summary of any testimony taken;



         (d)   A copy of the final decision of the Board of
Commissioners.



      (4)   Judicial review.  Any customer against whom a final
decision of the Board of Commissioners is entered, pursuant to the hearing
procedure under this section, may appeal the order or decision by filing a
written petition for judicial review within 30 days after receipt of notice
by certified mail of the order or decision to the general court of justice of
Robeson County or the county where the order or decision is effective, along
with a copy to the Board of Commissioners. Within 30 days after receipt of
the copy of the petition of judicial review, the Board of Commissioners shall
transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the
official record, as outlined in this section.



(Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.



   (B)   Fats, oils, greases, sand and gas control.



      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions
of §§ 50.70et seq. shall be subject to the loss of public water until the
wastewater been proven to contain 200 mg/l or less of grease; less than full
compliance for more than 30 days after written notice of violation shall
result in loss of public water until the user is fully compliant.  If the
user remains in violation a any provision of §§ 50.70et seq. in excess of
30 days after written notice of violation, a civil penalty of $l00 per day
plus costs required to correct the contamination shall be levied.  If not
corrected within 45 days from the receipt of the notice of violation, the
privilege license of the user will be automatically revoked. Operation after
revocation of the privilege license shall constitute a criminal offense
punishable by a fine of $100 per day.



         (a)   A notification of violation and loss of public
water use shall be issued by the Town Manager.



         (b)   A citation for the civil penalty shall be issued
by the Fairmont Police Department.



         (c)   Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid
within a 30 day period.



         (d)   Each and every day that the violation of any
provision of this subchapter continues shall be a separate and distinct
offense.



      (2)   A violator shall be responsible for reimbursement to the
Town of Fairmont of all expenses



the town incurs due to the violation. These expenses include, but are not
limited to, equipment, material, and labor costs for site remediation and
cost recovery of a sanitary sewer overflow and all legal costs associated
with the enforcement of §§ 50.70et seq.



      (3)   The violator shall also be responsible for all costs
associated with a public or private penalty against the town due to any
violation of §§ 50.70et seq.



   (C)   Cross connection controls.



      (1)   A written notice of violation shall be given to any
person who is determined to be in violation of any provision of §§ 50.80et
seq.



      (2)   Such notice shall set forth the violation and the time
period within which the violation must be corrected. The violation must be
corrected within a reasonable time, as specified in the notice, not to exceed
30 days from receipt of the notice. If the town determines that the violation
is occurring on a customer's private water system and that such violation has
created or contributed to the existence of an imminent hazard, the customer
may be required to correct the violation immediately.



      (3)   Water service may be terminated to a customer if the
customer fails to correct a violation or to pay any civil penalty or expense
assessed under this division. Termination of water service will be without
prejudice to the town's ability to assert any other remedy available to the
town against the customer or any other person responsible for the violation.



      (4)   The violation of any provision of this division shall
subject the violator to a civil penalty. Each subsequent day that a violation
listed in this division continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense according to the following schedule:



         (a)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private
water system which is a health hazard, per day...$1,000, or the amount
written in the annual town budget ordinance.



         (b)   Falsifying records that are required to be
submitted by this section - certified tester may be removed from the approved
certified tester list...$500, or the amount written in the annual town budget
ordinance.



         (c)   Failing to test backflow prevention assemblies as
required...$200, or the amount written in the annual town budget ordinance.



         (d)   Failing to maintain backflow prevention assemblies
as required...$200, or the amount written in the annual town budget ordinance.



         (e)   Any other violation of the provision of this
division...$200, or the amount written in the town budget ordinance.



      (5)   The town may increase any civil penalty assessed under
this division by $100 or 50% of a maximum civil penalty associated with the
violation, whichever is greater, for a second violation of the same provision
within a 2-year period. Water service may be terminated after a third
violation of the same provision within a 2-year period.



      (6)   Any person violating any provision of this division
shall pay to the town all expenses incurred by the town in repairing any
damage to the public water system caused in whole or in part by such
violation and any expense incurred by the town in investigating such
violation. All such expenses are deemed to be a part of the civil penalty
assessed with the violation.



(Ord. 06-101, passed 4-18-2006; Am. Ord. 09-120, passed 7-21-2009)



CHAPTER 51:
WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS




Section




Generally




   51.01   Definitions




Inside Town Limits




   51.15   Scope



   51.16   Laying of pipeline; by property owner and by town



   51.17   Cost of repaving paid by town




Outside Town Limits




   51.30   Scope



   51.31   Authority and indemnification of town



   51.32   Application for connection



   51.33   Prior approval of subdivision and map required



   51.34   Approval of fixtures and equipment



   51.35   Map of fixtures, equipment approved by town



   51.36   Sewer lines and connections required



   51.37   Recommendations by approving authority



   51.38   Action by Board



   51.39   Deed of dedication and contract required



   51.40   Laying of utility lines



   51.41   Easements and rights-of-way



   51.42   Connection of private lines with town lines



   51.43   Connections to be made under town supervision



   51.44   Effect of unauthorized connections



   51.45   Discontinuing or reducing service



   51.46   Agreement with other governmental jurisdictions



GENERALLY



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  A person as may be designated by the Board.



   DEDICATOR.  The person owning or constructing any private utility
system being dedicated to the town.



   UTILITY SYSTEM and UTILITY LINES.  Include water pipelines and sewer
pipelines, either or both as determined by the context, and shall include all
pipes, valves, valve boxes, hydrants and other fixtures, equipment and
systems, or both. The utility lines dedicated to the town pursuant to this
chapter shall include only main distribution lines, valves, hydrants and
other apparatus, fixtures and equipment forming a part of the lines laid in
streets, roads, highways and alleys or across private property, and shall not
include lateral lines leading from mains to building connections, and shall
not include the water or sewer lines within any residence or other privately
owned building.



(1988 Code, § 22-181)



INSIDE TOWN LIMITS



§ 51.15  SCOPE.



   This subchapter applies to water or sewer extensions within the
corporate limits of the town.



(1988 Code, § 22-191)



§ 51.16  LAYING OF PIPELINE; BY PROPERTY OWNER AND BY TOWN.



   (A)   When water or sewer connections shall be desired for any
property situated upon a street or alley where no water or sewer pipe has
been laid, and the town shall be unwilling or unable to extend its water or
sewer mains to the property, the owner of the property may make application
to the approving authority for permission to lay a line of pipe from the
town’s water or sewer mains to the property. The permit issued to a person
shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and shall be subject to the
following conditions, which shall be expressed therein:



      (1)   The person to whom the permit shall be granted shall
bear all the expense of laying the pipeline and of connecting the same with
the water or sewerage system of the town.



      (2)   The pipeline shall be laid in accordance with the
specifications furnished by the approving authority and the work shall be
done under the supervision and control of the authority.



      (3)   The town shall be saved harmless from all loss, cost,
damage or expense by reason of any injury to any person or property as a
result of laying the pipeline. The pipeline, when completed, shall become the
property of the town and be subject to its control.



(1988 Code, § 22-192)



   (B)   When water or sewer connections shall be desired for any
property upon which a residence or business building or an apartment building
exists or is under construction, if the property is situated upon a street
where adjacent to the property no water or sewer mains have been laid, the
town may construct and extend its water or sewer mains or both from the
nearest existing mains to a point suitable for the desired connection,
subject to the existence of funds appropriated by the Board for that purpose,
to the ability to construct the applicable line from a sound engineering
viewpoint and to an adequate cost-benefit ratio being anticipated from the
extension.



(1988 Code, § 22-193)



§ 51.17  COST OF REPAVING PAID BY TOWN.



   Where it becomes necessary to cut the street paving to lay and
construct a water or sewer main, the town will pay the entire cost of the
repaving of the street for the main lines.



(1988 Code, § 22-194)



OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS



§ 51.30  SCOPE.



   This subchapter applies to water or sewer extensions outside the
corporate limits of the town.



(1988 Code, § 22-206)



§ 51.31  AUTHORITY AND INDEMNIFICATION OF TOWN.



   (A)   (1)   All connections by consumers with the utility lines
constructed and dedicated pursuant to this subchapter and all services
through those lines and apparatus shall be in accordance with the laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations of and applicable to the town, as now in
force or as may be enacted, adopted and amended from time to time.



      (2)   The town shall have complete supervision and control
over the lines, taps, connections and all other parts of the utility lines
and system so constructed for the purpose of making any and all necessary
inspections, and turning the water on and off and for other purposes.



      (3)   The charges, rents and fees charged by the town for
connections, inspections and services to consumers through utility lines
shall be upon the same basis and schedules as those charged other consumers
of like status residing outside of the corporate limits of the town from time
to time, and the town shall collect all rents, fees and charges from
consumers connected with the utility lines, for its sole use and benefit
without compensation to the dedicators.



(1988 Code, § 22-207)



   (B)   The dedicators shall have and assume all risk in the laying,
installation and construction of the utility lines and system constructed
pursuant to this division, and the dedicators shall agree that the town shall
not be responsible or liable for, and that the dedicators will indemnify and
save harmless the town against any and all injuries and damages to persons or
property by reason of or in any way growing out of the construction,
installation and laying of utility lines. The dedicators shall furnish the
town with an adequate and satisfactory bond and/or public liability insurance
policy, or a certificate or other evidence from the insurance company that
insurance is in force, fully protecting the town as provided by this section.
The bond and/or insurance policy shall be executed by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state.



(1988 Code, § 22-208)



§ 51.32  APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION.



   Any person owning or proposing to construct any private utility line or
system outside the corporate limits of the town and desiring to have the line
connected with the public utility lines and systems of the town for the
purpose of making water or sewer service available to consumers, shall make
written application to the Board for permission to make connections.
Applications will be received and acted upon by the Board only in accordance
with and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this section. The
application must be accompanied by a map made by a registered engineer or
registered land surveyor authorized to practice in the state, which map shall
show accurately the property to be served with water or sewer service, and if
within any real estate development or subdivision, the lots and the layout of
streets therein.



(1988 Code, § 22-209)



§ 51.33  PRIOR APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION AND MAP REQUIRED.



   When the private utility lines or systems are to be laid and
constructed within any residential development or subdivision, the
subdivision and the map thereof showing the property lines and subdivision of
lots and the layout of streets must have been duly approved by the approving
authority before the Board will approve any application for permission to
make connections with the water and/or sewer systems of the town.



(1988 Code, § 22-210)



§ 51.34  APPROVAL OF FIXTURES AND EQUIPMENT.



   No application for connection to the town’s utility system will be
considered by the Board under the provisions of this section until the
approving authority of the town shall have approved the sizes, location,
character and quality of all pipes, valves, valve boxes, hydrants and other
fixtures, equipment and apparatus to be laid and constructed and to be
connected with the utility systems of the town.



(1988 Code, § 22-211)



§ 51.35  MAP OF FIXTURES, EQUIPMENT APPROVED BY TOWN.



   The dedicators shall furnish the town with an accurate map showing in
detail the location of all mains, pipelines, laterals, stubs, valves, valve
boxes, hydrants and other fixtures, apparatus and equipment forming a part of
the utility lines constructed and dedicated pursuant to this subchapter, and
showing the depth of all pipes and apparatus below the ground level, which
map shall be subject to the approval of the approving authority or other
proper official of the town designated by the Board. After the map is so
approved there shall be no changes to the map made without the written
consent of the approving authority of the town or other officials of the town
authorized to make consent.



(1988 Code, § 22-212)



§ 51.36  SEWER LINES AND CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.



   No private waterline, lines or system within any residential
development or subdivision outside the corporate limits shall be connected
with the water system of the town, nor will the town accept any dedication of
the same and agree to furnish water service to consumers within any
residential development or subdivision, unless, at the same time, there is
connected with the town sewerage system and dedicated within the residential
development or subdivision sufficient to make available adequate sewerage
services for each of the residential lots within the subdivision, provided
the development or subdivision is, and a sewerage system therein would be,
physically accessible, from a sound engineering standpoint, to an existing
sewer main or sewer outfall line of the town as determined by the Board.
However, if there is no currently existing sewer main or sewer outfall line
to which the development or subdivision is, and a sewerage system therein
would be, physically inaccessible, from a sound engineering standpoint as
determined by the Board, then the Board may in its discretion grant
permission for a water system installed within the development or subdivision
to be connected to and with the town’s water system and dedicated to the
town, if the dedicators at the same time install and dedicate to the town an
adequate system of sewer pipes and lines exclusively within the development
or subdivision with lateral or subpipes to the property lines to make
possible eventual sewerage service for all lots in the development or
subdivision as required by the Board of Commissioners, without immediately
running and constructing any sewerage line beyond the development or
subdivision and without immediately connecting the sewerage system installed
within the development or subdivision with the sewerage system of the town.
The intent and purpose of this provision is to have a sewerage system
installed within the development or subdivision which would be available for
future connection with the town’s sewerage system if any accessible sewer
line or sewer outfall should in the future be constructed.



(1988 Code, § 22-213)



§ 51.37  RECOMMENDATIONS BY APPROVING AUTHORITY.



   When application is made by the owner or promoters of any addition,
subdivision or development outside the town limits for connection with the
town’s water and/or sewer system, the application, with plans, maps and all
other papers and documents relating thereto, shall be referred to the
approving authority. The approving authority shall have authority to
recommend the approval or disapproval of the application and to indicate
reasonable conditions and requirements for approval, and to recommend any
measures that may be requisite or necessary to protect the interest of the
town or to prevent improper connections being made with its water or sewer
systems.



(1988 Code, § 22-214)



§ 51.38  ACTION BY BOARD.



   After action has been taken by the approving authority pursuant to §
51.37 and recommendations have been made to the Board, the Board shall
consider and act upon the question of approving or disapproving the
application, and the action of the Board shall be final; provided, however,
that the Board may indicate to the owners or promoters of any addition,
subdivision or development the requirements which must be met as a
prerequisite for approving the application. In prescribing prerequisite
requirements for approval of the application for utility connections, the
Board shall, in approving the subdivision or development, determine the width
of streets, the adequacy of drainage, the type of paving, the size and type
of pipes and other equipment, the location of streets, particularly with
respect to their coordination with the street plan of the town and other
matters with respect to the development or subdivision as the Board in its
discretion may deem proper.



(1988 Code, § 22-215)



§ 51.39  DEED OF DEDICATION AND CONTRACT REQUIRED.



   Upon the approval of an application for connection to the town’s
utility system by the Board and before any person shall connect in any manner
any privately owned utility line or system with the public utility lines or
systems of the town, the person shall properly execute a written deed of
dedication and contract in a form approved by the Town Attorney, by which, in
consideration of making the connection and the benefits to be derived
therefrom, the person shall dedicate, give, grant and convey the privately
owned utility line or system to the town, and automatically upon its
completion, inspection and connection with the system of the town, the same
shall become the sole and absolute property of the town and a part of the
public utility system of the town without any cost or expense to the town and
without any obligation whatsoever on the part of the town to compensate or
reimburse the dedicators or their successors or assigns in any amount. The
dedication to the town of any privately owned utility lines and the
connection of any lines with the public utility lines of the town shall be
upon and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 22-216)



§ 51.40  LAYING OF UTILITY LINES.



   After the Board shall have approved the application for the connection
of any proposed privately owned utility line or system with the public
utility lines or systems of the town, the applicant at his or her own cost
and expense and without unnecessary delay shall furnish, construct and lay
the utility lines as approved by the Board without cost or expense to the
town. Utility lines shall be laid and constructed according to the standards
and specifications, and shall be of the character, size, quality and
durability as prescribed by the town through and by its proper officials and
employees, and shall be subject to the approval of the town through its
proper officers or employees.



(1988 Code, § 22-217)



§ 51.41  EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   If the private utility lines intended for connection to the town’s
utility system are to be constructed and laid in and along any public highway
or the right-of-way thereof, or in and across lands now owned and possessed
by the dedicators, the dedicators, without cost or expense to the town, shall
procure the necessary and proper written easement or right-of-way contracts
or deeds from the proper officials and agencies having control of public
highways and from the owners of lands, granting the right and authority to
construct, lay, maintain, inspect and repair utility lines, with appropriate
rights of ingress and egress over private lands, when necessary. The town
will join in the execution of contracts and deeds, when required, subject to
approval of the legal instruments by the Town Attorney.



(1988 Code, § 22-218)



§ 51.42  CONNECTION OF PRIVATE LINES WITH TOWN LINES.



   Upon the completion of the construction and laying of the private
utility lines as authorized by the Board for connection to the town’s
utility system, and upon inspection and approval thereof by the town, the
dedicators shall be permitted to connect private utility lines with the
utility lines and system of the town upon the terms and conditions prescribed
by this subchapter and the deed of dedication and contract executed by the
dedicators.



(1988 Code, § 22-219)



§ 51.43  CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE UNDER TOWN SUPERVISION.



   No connection of any private utility line shall be made with the public
utility lines or system of the town or any part thereof except by employees
or agents of the town under the supervision of the Director of Public Works
or persons as may be designated by the Manager to supervise the connection.



(1988 Code, § 22-220)



§ 51.44  EFFECT OF UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS.



   Should any person connect any privately owned water or sewer line or
system with any town water or sewer line without first dedicating, giving,
granting and conveying same to the town, the act of connecting water or sewer
line to the water or sewer line of the town shall be deemed a dedication,
gift, grant and conveyance of water or sewer line to the town and in the
event, all of the terms and conditions of this subchapter shall be applicable
to any lines so connected without authority.



(1988 Code, § 22-221)



§ 51.45  DISCONTINUING OR REDUCING SERVICE.



   The town shall have the right to cut off the water and to discontinue
the furnishing of water and/or sewer services through the utility lines
constructed and dedicated pursuant to this subchapter at any time without
notice, whenever it shall appear to the town in the sole and absolute
discretion of the Board that to continue to furnish water and/or sewer
services to the consumers along any of the lines would render the town unable
to properly furnish an adequate water supply or adequate sewer service for
the use of its consumers and citizens living within the corporate limits of
the town, but in the event, the town shall give the dedicators and the
consumers an ample notice of the intention to discontinue the water supply or
sewer service, or both, as the circumstances of the situation render
practicable. The town specifically does not, and shall not, agree or
undertake or be required to furnish to the dedicators, or to any consumer
along any of the utility lines constructed and dedicated pursuant to this
subchapter, any stated or particular pressure of water, and the town
specifically does not and shall not agree to furnish fire protection, nor
shall there be any responsibility. The town shall not be liable to the
dedicators or to any consumer or to any person for any failure to supply
water for the character or quality of the water supplied or for any failure
or inadequacy of sewer service.



(1988 Code, § 22-222)



§ 51.46  AGREEMENT WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTAL JURISDICTIONS.



   In lieu of the provisions of this subchapter, the town may enter into a
formal agreement with another governmental jurisdiction in which the
conditions, guidelines, procedures, requirements and criteria may be
specified for the connection to and operation of any other governmental
jurisdiction’s utility system or part thereof as part of the town utility
system.



(1988 Code, § 22-223)



CHAPTER 52:
SOLID WASTE



Section




In General




   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Littering generally prohibited



   52.03   Littering from vehicles prohibited



   52.04   Refuse required to be deposited in approved containers



   52.05   Damaging, displacing and interfering with containers



   52.06   Accumulation of garbage and refuse prohibited



   52.07   Burning or burying garbage and refuse prohibited



   52.08   Transportation of garbage and refuse by private citizens



   52.09   Use of landfill



   52.10   Collection and disposal of building material scraps




Municipal Collection and Disposal System




   52.20   Responsibility for administration, supervision and
enforcement



   52.21   Containers required; specifications



   52.22   Number of containers required



   52.23   Location of residential containers



   52.24   Nonresidential containers



   52.25   Preparation of garbage and refuse for pickup



   52.26   Nonresidential collection



   52.27   Adjustment of nonresidential service



   52.28   Tree limbs, cuttings, shrubbery, leaves and grass clippings



   52.29   Materials not to be placed in containers



   52.30   Removal of dead animals



   52.31   Sanitation fee established



   52.32   Multifamily residence



 



   52.99   Penalty



IN GENERAL



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING MATERIAL SCRAPS. Scrap building material from the
construction, reconstruction, remodeling or repair of a building, walkway,
driveway, sign or other structure including but not limited to excavated
earth, tree stumps, rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete, lumber or any
other similar material used in construction or the containers or wrappings
therefor.



   GARBAGE.  All putrescible wastes, including animal and vegetable
matter, animal offal and carcasses and recognizable industrial by-products,
but excluding sewage and human wastes.



   REFUSE.  All nonputrescible wastes.



   SOLID WASTE.  Garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash and other discarded
solid materials, including solid waste materials resulting from homes,
businesses, industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from
community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved materials in
domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as
silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial wastewater effluents,
dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or other common water
pollutants.



   TREE TRIMMINGS.  Tree limbs, leaves, shrubbery, weeds, plants or grass.



(1988 Code, § 19-1)



Statutory references:



   Municipal authority to regulate and provide for solid waste disposal
and the like, see G.S. § 160A-317



   Solid waste management, see G.S. §§ 130A-290 et seq.



§ 52.02  LITTERING GENERALLY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place any
melons or the rinds thereof, grapes, grape skins, orange or banana peels,
decayed fruit or vegetables on the streets or public square, or any paper or
other litter on the streets or public square or back lots unless the same is
immediately placed in closed receptacles, placed and of a design as approved
by the Director of Public Works so that they may be removed with as little
inconvenience as possible.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully break
any glass bottle or other article made of glass on a street or sidewalk of
the town.



      (2)   Further, it shall be unlawful for any person
accidentally breaking any glass object upon a street or sidewalk of the town
to fail to immediately remove broken glass from a street or sidewalk.



(1988 Code, § 19-2)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.03  LITTERING FROM VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person while a driver or a passenger in a
vehicle to throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place
within the town, or upon any private property.



(1988 Code, § 19-3)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.04  REFUSE REQUIRED TO BE DEPOSITED IN APPROVED CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any
garbage or refuse of any kind on any public or private property except in
approved containers or as otherwise provided in this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 19-4)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.05  DAMAGING, DISPLACING AND INTERFERING WITH CONTAINERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, displace or otherwise
interfere with garbage containers or their contents except the owner or upon
permission or at the request of the owner.



(1988 Code, § 19-5)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.06  ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE PROHIBITED.



   All garbage and refuse shall be collected and placed in containers as
required by this chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit
garbage or refuse to accumulate or remain on any premises longer than is
reasonably necessary to remove and deposit same in approved containers as
required in this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 19-6)  Penalty, see § 52.99



§ 52.07  BURNING OR BURYING GARBAGE AND REFUSE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to burn or set fire to or bury any garbage or
refuse for the purpose of disposal. (1988 Code, § 19-7)  Penalty, see §
52.99



§ 52.08  TRANSPORTATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE BY PRIVATE CITIZENS.



   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, handling or
transporting over or along any of the streets, alleys or other public ways in
the town any garbage or refuse without first having obtained a permit
therefor from the Board.



(1988 Code, § 19-8)



§ 52.09  USE OF LANDFILL.



   (A)   Contractors, commercially-hired laborers and similar persons
who desire to use the town’s landfill shall pay a nominal fee in the amount
established by the Town Manager. Those persons shall not be allowed on the
landfill until the fee is paid.



   (B)   Contractors, commercially-hired laborers and similar persons
shall not be allowed on the landfill unless they possess a current privilege
license.



(1988 Code, § 19-9)



§ 52.10  COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF BUILDING MATERIAL SCRAPS.



   Building material scraps shall not be collected by nor disposed of by
the town, since the removal and disposal of the material is the
responsibility of the property owner and his or her contractor, builder or
agent. If building material scraps are not removed from any property within
the corporate limits of the town for a period of more than 2 weeks, the
accumulation of the scraps shall constitute a nuisance. This nuisance shall
be treated in the same manner as any other violation of § 91.04.



MUNICIPAL COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM



§ 52.20  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION, SUPERVISION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Responsibility for administration of solid waste removal shall
lie with the Public Works Department and may be delegated to a private
contractor (hereinafter referred to as “the contractor”) pursuant to G.S.
§ 160A-20.1.



   (B)   The supervision of solid waste removal and the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Public
Works Director.



   (C)   The Public Works Director shall have the authority to make
regulations concerning the days of collection, type and location of waste
containers, and any other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance
and disposal as he or she shall find necessary, and to change and modify the
regulations after notice to the public provided that the regulations are not
contrary to this chapter or any contract with the contractor.



   (D)   Any person aggrieved by a regulation of the Public Works
Director shall have the right of appeal to the Town Board.



§ 52.21  CONTAINERS REQUIRED; SPECIFICATIONS.



   The occupant of every building or premises, unless specified otherwise
in this chapter, where garbage and refuse does or may exist shall provide
containers made of substantial galvanized iron, plastic, rubber or other
nonrusting material in which shall be deposited all garbage and refuse
existing at a building or premises. Each container shall be provided with
handles or bails and with a tight-fitting cover made of the same material as
the container. All containers shall be watertight and they shall be of a size
that can be conveniently handled by the collectors, and no container shall be
more than 30 gallons in capacity and measure not over 22 inches in diameter
nor 30 inches in height. The occupant shall keep all containers in a
reasonably clean manner. Containers which fail to have a cover or which
become rusted or broken and therefore are unable to contain garbage and
refuse in a satisfactory manner shall not be used.



(1988 Code, § 19-31)



Statutory reference:



   Collection and disposal by municipalities, see G.S. §§ 160A-311 et
seq.



§ 52.22  NUMBER OF CONTAINERS REQUIRED.



   A sufficient number of containers shall be provided by any residential
or nonresidential property owner, occupant or agent, to hold all garbage and
refuse generated between scheduled pick-ups of the Department of Public
Works. It is the expressed intent of the Board that the garbage and refuse
generator shall not allow any garbage and refuse material to spill out of the
container onto the ground nor shall the material be stored inside the
premises or building to be brought out when the garbage crew arrives.



(1988 Code, § 19-32)



§ 52.23  LOCATION OF RESIDENTIAL CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Containers may be kept in any readily accessible place within
the occupant’s residential lot that is visible to any reasonably diligent
person. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate his or her garbage
containers on property that is not occupied by him or her or in a manner as
to constitute a nuisance to a neighbor. Containers are to be located in a
reasonable manner to enable the collector to place his or her pushcart in the
immediate area of the containers so that the containers will not have to be
carried before dumping into the pushcart.



   (B)   The town shall not assume any liability for damage incurred or
for failure to pick up garbage or refuse when containers are located within
an enclosed building or structure, within a fenced yard occupied by a dog or
other animal which might endanger the life and safety of a collector, or
within a flower or vegetable garden in a manner that even with due care by
the collector damage to plants in the garden could result.



(1988 Code, § 19-33)



§ 52.24  NONRESIDENTIAL CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Each business required to procure a container. Every business,
company, office, industry or other nonresidential generator of garbage or
refuse shall obtain access to a container approved by the Town Manager or his
or her designee. This requirement shall apply regardless of whether the
nonresidential generator is a seasonal, part-time or temporary activity or
operation.



   (B)   Joint use of a container. In accordance with established
procedures, 2 or more nonresidential entities may, on a form furnished by the
town, agree to jointly use a single container. The town will bill each user.
The town will in no manner assume any role, responsibility or liability in
the agreement between users.



   (C)   Unauthorized use of a joint container. No person or business
entity shall use any container unless the user is a sole user or a joint user
of the container as shown by the applicable joint user agreement. The Clerk
shall maintain a file of joint user agreements and update the file as
modified joint user agreements are submitted by the prime users. Unauthorized
use of a container as specified in this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



(1988 Code, § 19-34)



§ 52.25  PREPARATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE FOR PICKUP.



   All garbage and refuse shall have the liquid drained therefrom and
shall be wrapped in paper or other like material before it is placed in the
container for collection.



(1988 Code, § 19-37)



§ 52.26  NONRESIDENTIAL COLLECTION.



   (A)   The Board hereby establishes the policy that all
nonresidential garbage and refuse collections shall be accomplished by means
of a mechanized system utilizing specially designed and constructed
containers which are dumped by mechanical power into garbage trucks designed
to accommodate containers.



   (B)   Specific exemptions may be granted on the basis of each
individual request for exemption. The nonresidential occupant or owner shall
bear the entire burden for justifying his or her request. The justification
must clearly show that the policy exemption will increase collection
efficiency and/or result in financial savings to the Department of Public
Works.



   (C)   Town employees shall not pick up garbage or trash on the
ground, or wait for the user to put trash into the container or collect from
parking lot or other similar containers unless specifically authorized to do
so by the Town Manager. Nonresidential users requesting extra service shall
pay an extra fee for the service as determined by the Board.



(1988 Code, § 19-36)



§ 52.27  ADJUSTMENT OF NONRESIDENTIAL SERVICE.



   (A)   Effective date of adjustments. All changes or adjustments
affecting garbage and refuse service delivery or rents or fees charged in
connection with the nonresidential sanitation activity shall be made
effective on the first day of the next utility billing period.



   (B)   Nonresidential dump order form. The town shall provide a
nonresidential dump order form on which the sole or prime container user
shall specify the number of containers and the number of days per week, not
to exceed once per day, his or her containers are to be scheduled for dumping
and any changes thereto. The town shall attempt to comply with the desires of
the container user but shall base the monthly nonresidential sanitation fee
on the actual number of dumps made during the billing period.



   (C)   Container partially filled. Neither the rate per dump nor the
monthly nonresidential sanitation fee shall be adjusted because of user
claims that the container was not full when dumped.



(1988 Code, § 19-37)



§ 52.28  TREE LIMBS, CUTTINGS, SHRUBBERY, LEAVES AND GRASS CLIPPINGS.



   (A)   Tree limbs, cuttings, shrubbery and the like, of more than 1/2
load will be hauled at a time as trucks are available, provided that limbs,
cuttings, shrubbery and the like, are cut in lengths not to exceed 48 inches
long and 6 inches in diameter. Lengths of limbs or cuttings that are larger
in diameter than 6 inches shall be cut in convenient lengths so that they may
be handled easily by 1 person and placed on the front corner of the owner’s
or tenant’s property nearest the street or public alley. Lawn trimmings and
leaves shall be placed in the gutter. Leaves and grass clippings should be
piled separately from limbs and other larger materials. Materials listed in
this section shall be collected and removed by the Department of Public Works
only where an individual citizen within the town is individually doing
improvement work, without employing an independent builder, contractor or
laborers, to properties located within the town. A fee in the amount
established by ordinance shall be paid to the town for collection of these
materials.



   (B)   Tree limbs in excess of the length or diameter set forth in
division (A) above and stumps will be hauled at times as trucks are
available. A fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be paid to the
town for the collection of these materials.



(1988 Code, § 19-38)



§ 52.29  MATERIALS NOT TO BE PLACED IN CONTAINERS.



   (A)   Building material scraps, metal or other heavy objects or bulk
materials shall not be placed in garbage or refuse containers but shall be
prepared for collection in accordance with §§ 52.10 and 52.27.



   (B)   The town shall not collect ashes or cinders.



(1988 Code, § 19-40)



§ 52.30  REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.



   Dead animals killed upon any public property or right-of-way will be
removed by the town upon notice to the Clerk of the existence of dead animals.



(1988 Code, § 19-41)



§ 52.31  SANITATION FEE ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Board shall establish and include within the annual budget
ordinance a residential sanitation fee. This fee shall cover the collection
and disposal of all residential solid waste excluding building material
scraps.



   (B)   The Board shall establish and include within the annual budget
ordinance a nonresidential sanitation fee. The fee shall be stated as an
amount per dump of a nonresidential container.



   (C)   Any residential or nonresidential property owner, occupant or
agent residing or located within the town shall pay the appropriate
sanitation fee for sanitation services received. Failure to pay the fee
constitutes a misdemeanor.



   (D)   No paid sanitation fee shall be refunded in whole or in part.



   (E)   Sanitation fees shall be billed, due and payable as a part of
the monthly town utility bill in accordance with Chapter 50.



(1988 Code, § 19-51)



§ 52.32  MULTIFAMILY RESIDENCE.



   A residential sanitation fee shall be paid by the owner of any
multifamily residence or multi-dwelling unit for each household, occupied or
vacant, in existence on the property.



(1988 Code, § 19-52)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   The intentional killing of animals or the dumping or placing
of dead animals on public property or public rights-of-way shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



(1988 Code, § 19-41)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT



Section



   53.01   Determination of need



   53.02   Purpose



   53.03   Water emergency



   53.04   Notification



   53.05   Water use restriction levels



   53.06   Triggers



   53.07   Termination of water shortage emergency



   53.08   Variance protocols



   53.09   Effectiveness



   53.10   Revision



 



   53.99   Enforcement and penalty



§ 53.01  DETERMINATION OF NEED.



   The Fairmont Board of Commissioners hereby declares it in the public
interest to manage water usage during conditions of water shortage within the
region.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the declaration of
official phases of water supply shortage situations, and the subsequent
implementation of voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures within
the town in the event a water emergency is declared.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.03  WATER EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Declaration of emergency.



      (1)   Subject to review by the Board of Commissioners at any
regular or special meeting of the Board, a water emergency may be declared to
exist by the Town Manager, or his or her designee, when any condition or
situation exists that may threaten the availability and/or safety of either
treated or potable water from the water supply, treatment, and distribution
system operated and maintained by the town.



      (2)   A water emergency shall be declared to exist by the Town
Manager or his or her designee when production, treatment, transmission and
storage facilities are incapable of meeting all daily water demands or when
projections of available water show that the available supply of water will
not meet the daily water demands.



      (3)   Such conditions shall include but not be limited to
distribution line failure, well or pump failure, drought conditions, or any
declaration of water emergency by an appropriate Robeson County, State of
North Carolina, or federal authority which affects the town.



   (B)   (1)   The declaration of the existence of a water emergency
by the Town Manager or his or her designee shall specify the level of the
severity of the emergency and be in the form of a signed Manager’s
Directive that shall be provided to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners in
the most expeditious manner available; and upon such distribution, the
Manager or his or her designee shall then notify the public via a press
announcement of said water emergency.



      (2)   Any regulatory provisions authorized by this chapter
will become effective 24 hours after the issuance of the public press
announcement.



   (C)   The severity of the water emergency shall be classified and
expressed by the Town Manager or his or her designee in terms of the level of
staged water use restrictions imposed on the town’s water customers.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.04  NOTIFICATION.



   The following notification methods will be used to inform water system
employees and customers of a water shortage declaration: employee e-mail
announcements, notices at municipal buildings, and notices in water bills.
Required water shortage response measures will be communicated through The
Robesonian, the town’s website at http://www.fairmontnc.com, and PSA
announcements on local radio and cable stations. Communication of a
declaration of emergency water restrictions or water rationing will be
attempted for all customers by telephone.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.05  WATER USE RESTRICTION LEVELS.



   Five levels of water shortage response are outlined in the table below.
The five levels of water shortage response are: voluntary reductions,
mandatory reductions I and II, emergency reductions and water rationing. A
detailed description of each response level and corresponding water reduction
measures follow below.



 


Stage

 

Response

 

Description




1

 

Voluntary reductions

 
Water users are encouraged to reduce their water use and improve water use
efficiency; however, no penalties apply for noncompliance. Water supply
conditions indicate a potential for shortage.



2

 

Mandatory reductions I

 
Water users must abide required water use reduction and efficiency measures;
penalties apply for noncompliance. Water supply conditions are significantly
lower than the seasonal norm and water shortage conditions are expected to
persist.



3

 

Mandatory reductions II

 
Same as in Stage 2.



4

 

Emergency reductions

 
Water supply conditions are substantially diminished and pose an imminent
threat to human health or environmental integrity.



5

 

Water rationing

 
Water supply is substantially diminished and remaining supplies must be
allocated to preserve human health and environmental integrity.



 



   (A)   In Stage 1, Voluntary Reductions, all water users will be
asked to reduce their normal water use by 5%. Customer education and outreach
programs will encourage water conservation and efficiency measures including:
irrigating landscapes a maximum of one inch per week; preventing water waste,
runoff and watering impervious surfaces; watering plants deeply to encourage
root growth; washing only full loads in clothes and dishwashers; using
spring-loaded nozzles on garden hoses; and identifying and repairing all
water leaks.



   (B)   In Stage 2, Mandatory Reductions I, all customers are expected
to reduce their water use by 10% in comparison to their previous month’s
water bill. In addition to continuing to encourage all voluntary reduction
actions, the following restrictions apply: irrigation is limited to a half
inch per week between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; outdoor use of drinking water
for washing impervious surfaces is prohibited; and all testing and training
purposes requiring drinking water (e.g. fire protection) will be limited.



   (C)   In Stage 3, Mandatory Reductions II, customers must continue
actions from all previous stages and further reduce water use by 20% compared
to their previous month’s water bill. All non-essential uses of drinking
water are banned and garden and landscape irrigation must be reduced to the
minimum amount necessary for survival. Additionally, in Stage 3, a drought
surcharge of 1.5 times the normal water rate applies.



   (D)   In Stage 4, Emergency Reductions, customers must continue all
actions from previous stages and further reduce their water use by 25%
compared to their previous month’s water bill. A ban on all use of drinking
water except to protect public health and safety is implemented and drought
surcharges increase to 2 times the normal water rate.



   (E)   The goal of Stage 5, Water Rationing, is to provide drinking
water to protect public health (e.g. residences, residential health care
facilities and correctional facilities). In Stage 5, all customers are only
permitted to use water at the minimum required for public health protection.
Firefighting is the only allowable outdoor water use and pickup locations for
distributing potable water will be announced according to Fairmont’s
Emergency Response Plan. Drought surcharges increase to 5 times the normal
water rate.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.06  TRIGGERS.



   Fairmont’s water source is groundwater. The following measurements of
well pumping times and well levels in relationship to pump intake levels
trigger entry into corresponding water restriction stages.



 


Stage

 

Well Operating Conditions




1

 
Pumping Time >10 hrs:

20% reduction in seasonal normal distance from static water level and pump
intake, and 20% increase pumping time for same output



2

 
Pumping Time >12 hrs:

40% reduction in distance from static water level and pump intake, and 40%
increase pumping time for same output



3

 
Pumping Time >14 hrs:

60% reduction in distance from static water level and pump intake, and 60%
increase pumping time for same output



4

 
Pumping Time >20 hrs:

80% reduction in distance from static water level and pump intake



5

 
Water level at pump intake elevation



 



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.07  TERMINATION OF WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY.



   (A)   Termination of any level of declared water emergency shall be
ordered by the Town Manager or his or her designee when he or she, in direct
consultation with the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee,
determines that the water supply available for use by the town water system
is no longer so low as to constitute a water emergency under the terms of
this chapter.



   (B)   All penalties incurred by any consumer of water from the
town’s water system shall remain in effect until paid, regardless of any
termination of an emergency. Upon termination of an emergency, discontinued
users may have their service restored upon payment of the regular fees
charged to customers who have their water service disconnected.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.08  VARIANCE PROTOCOLS.



   Applications for water use variance requests are available from the
Town Hall. All applications must be submitted to the Town Hall for review by
the Town Public Works Director or his or her designee. A decision to approve
or deny individual variance requests will be determined within two weeks of
submittal after careful consideration of the following criteria: impact on
water demand, expected duration, alternative source options, social and
economic importance, purpose (i.e. necessary use of drinking water) and the
prevention of structural damage.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.09  EFFECTIVENESS.



   The effectiveness of the Fairmont water shortage response plan will be
determined by comparing the stated water conservation goals with observed
water use reduction data. Other factors to be considered include frequency of
plan activation, any problem periods without activation, total number of
violation citations, desired reductions attained and evaluation of demand
reductions compared to the previous year’s seasonal data



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.10  REVISION.



   The water shortage response plan will be reviewed and revised as needed
to adapt to new circumstances affecting water supply and demand, following
implementation of emergency restrictions, and at a minimum of every 5 years
in conjunction with the updating of the town’s local water supply plan.
Further, a water shortage response planning work group selected by the Board
of Commissioners will review procedures following each emergency or rationing
stage to recommend any necessary improvements to the plan to Fairmont’s
Town Commissioners. The Town of Fairmont Public Works Director is responsible
for initiating all subsequent revisions.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



§ 53.99  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.



   (A)   The provisions of the water shortage response plan will be
enforced by Town of Fairmont personnel and local law enforcement. Violators
may be reported to the Town Manager. Citations are assessed according to the
following schedule depending on the number of prior violations and current
level of water shortage.



 


Water Shortage Level

 

First Violation

 

Second Violation

 

Third Violation



Voluntary reductions
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A



Mandatory reductions (Stages 2 and 3)
 

Warning

 

$250

 

Discontinuation of service



Emergency reductions
 

$250

 

Discontinuation of service

 

Discontinuation of service



Water rationing
 

$500

 

Discontinuation of service

 

Discontinuation of service




 



   (B)   Discontinuation of services shall last for the earlier of the
water shortage emergency or 30 days. Drought surcharge rates are effective in
Stages 3, 4 and 5.



(Ord. 10-138, passed 8-17-2010)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



      72.   VEHICLE OPERATION GENERALLY



      73.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



      74.   PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLES



      75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      76.   PARKING SCHEDULES



      77.   GOLF CARTS



CHAPTER 70:
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Public employees to obey traffic regulations



   70.03   Pushcarts; riding animals



   70.04   Licensing of motor vehicles



   70.05   Coasters, roller skates and the like



   70.06   Clinging to vehicles



   70.07   Authority of Police and Fire Department officials



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A thoroughfare through the middle of a block.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE .   A vehicle of the Fire Department, a
police vehicle, an ambulance or an emergency vehicle of a municipal
department or public service corporation as designated or authorized by the
Chief of Police.



   BICYCLE .   Every device propelled by human power upon which any
person may ride, having 2 tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in
diameter.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE .   Every vehicle designed, maintained or used
primarily for the transportation of property.



   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.  Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other
persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at points
only and in a manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over the highway, street or roadway.



   CROSSWALK.  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the
edges of the traversable roadway. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection
or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.



   CURB LOADING ZONE .   A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.



   DRIVER .   The operator of a vehicle.



   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE .   A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or
passengers.



   INTERSECTION.  The area embraced within the prolongation of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral edge of roadway lines of 2
or more highways which join one another at any angle whether or not 1 highway
crosses the other. Where a highway includes 2 roadways 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of a divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If the intersecting
highway also includes 2 roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing
of 2 roadways of the highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.



   LANED ROADWAY .   A roadway which is divided into 2 or more clearly
marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   MOPED.  A vehicle having 2 or 3 wheels and operable pedals and
equipped with a motor which does not exceed 50 cubic centimeters piston
displacement and cannot propel the vehicle at a speed greater than 20 mph on
a level surface.



   MOTORCYCLE.  Every vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider
and designed to travel on not more than 3 wheels in contact with the ground,
including motor scooters and motor-driven bicycles but excluding tractors and
utility vehicles equipped with an additional form of device designed to
transport property, 3-wheeled vehicles while being used by law enforcement
agencies and mopeds.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every
vehicle designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled
vehicle. The term MOTOR VEHICLE does not include “moped.”



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.  All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.



   PARK.  When prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle whether
occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading.



   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.  A place adjacent to a curb reserved for
the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.



   PEDESTRIANS.  Any person afoot.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.  Every road or driveway not open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic. The
terms HIGHWAY or STREET or a combination of the 2 terms shall be used
synonymously.



   RAILROAD.  A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon
stationary rails.



   RAILROAD TRAIN.  A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. If a highway includes 2
or more separate roadways the term ROADWAYS shall refer to any roadway
separately but not to all roadways collectively.



   SAFETY ZONE.  A traffic island or other space officially set aside
within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is so plainly
marked or indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a SAFETY ZONE.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STOP.  When required, means complete cessation of movement.



   STOP, STOPPING or STANDING.  When prohibited, means any stopping or
standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control sign or signal.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between property or right-of-way
lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open
to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular
traffic. The terms HIGHWAY and STREET and a combination of the 2 terms shall
be used synonymously.



   THROUGH HIGHWAY.  Every street or highway or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same when stop signs
are erected as provided in this chapter.



   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of
travel.



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL.  Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed.



   TRAFFIC DIVISION.  The Traffic Division of the Police Department of
the town, or if a traffic division is not established, then the term shall be
deemed to refer to the Police Department of the town.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided, that
for the purpose of this chapter bicycles shall be deemed vehicles and every
rider of a bicycle upon a highway shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle except those which by their
nature can have no application.



(1988 Code, § 14-1)



Statutory references:



   General authority to regulate traffic, see G.S. §§ 20-169, 160A-300
et seq.



   Motor vehicles and traffic generally, see G.S. Ch. 20



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-4.01



§ 70.02  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state,
county or town, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or
by state statute.



(1988 Code, § 14-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-168



§ 70.03  PUSHCARTS; RIDING ANIMALS.



   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.



(1988 Code, § 14-3)



Statutory reference:



   Application of traffic laws to animals and animal-drawn vehicles, see
G.S. § 20-171



§ 70.04  LICENSING OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Issuance. The Clerk shall serve as registrar of motor vehicles
for the purposes of this chapter. The registrar of motor vehicles shall issue
town motor vehicle license decals in his or her office each year, beginning
the first business day in January.



   (B)   Fee. An annual license fee in the amount established by the
Board of Commissioners is hereby imposed on each and every motor vehicle in
the town. The fee shall be payable at the town office with the town tax bill.



   (C)   Decal or plate. Upon the payment of the fee, the Clerk shall
issue a license decal or metal license plate bearing the word “Fairmont,”
the year and a number. The decal or metal license plate shall be displayed by
the owner thereof on the vehicle in the following appropriate manner: in the
lower right-hand corner of the windshield not more than 1 inch from the
bottom and not more than 1 inch from the right edge; or on the front of the
automobile properly and securely attached to the license plate bracket
provided by the automobile manufacturer or in some manner approved by the
Chief of Police. The decal or metal license plate shall be displayed on all
vehicles in the town not later than February 15 of each and every year. A
different number shall be imprinted upon all town motor vehicle license
decals or metal plates issued each year. Decals shall be kept in position
until replaced by the following year’s decal.



(1988 Code, § 14-4)



Statutory reference:



   Vehicle licenses authorized, see G.S. §§ 20-97, 160A-213



§ 70.05  COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE.



   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any
skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway
except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing the person
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while
set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance.



(1988 Code, § 14-5)



§ 70.06  CLINGING TO VEHICLES.



   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the bicycle, motorcycle, coaster,
sled, roller skates or toy vehicle or himself or herself to any public
conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.



(1988 Code, § 14-6)



§ 70.07  AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department,
or officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, to enforce all street
traffic laws and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic.



   (B)   Officers of the Police Department or officers as are assigned
by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice,
hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided, that in the event
of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



   (C)   Members of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.



   (D)   Town rescue personnel, while engaged in their official duties,
may direct or assist the police in directing traffic.



(1988 Code, § 14-21)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to direct traffic, see G.S. § 20-114.1



CHAPTER 71:
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



Section



   71.01   Authority to install and maintain



   71.02   Specifications generally



   71.03   Obedience to official traffic-control devices



   71.04   Signs required for enforcement of certain sections



   71.05   Prohibited signs, signals and markings



   71.06   Interference with official traffic-control devices



   71.07   Through streets designated



   71.08   Authority to sign 1-way streets and alleys



   71.09   Authority to erect stop signs



   71.10   Specifications for stop signs



§ 71.01  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL AND MAINTAIN.



   The town shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and
devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances to make effective
the provisions of ordinances and may place and maintain additional
traffic-control devices to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of
the town or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic.



(1988 Code, § 14-51)



§ 71.02  SPECIFICATIONS GENERALLY.



   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to state
regulations. All signs and signals required by this chapter for a particular
purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location. All
traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions
of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices.



(1988 Code, § 14-52)



§ 71.03  OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with the
traffic ordinances of the town, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle.



(1988 Code, § 14-53)



§ 71.04  SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN SECTIONS.



   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, that section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.



(1988 Code, § 14-54)



Statutory reference:



   Traffic-control signs and the like, see G.S. §§ 20-158 et seq.



§ 71.05  PROHIBITED SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS.



   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports
to be or is in imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device
or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.



   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public
authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon
any commercial advertising.



   (C)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon
private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional
information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.



   (D)   Every prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway
is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without
notice.



(1988 Code, § 14-55)



§ 71.06  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or
any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon or
any other part thereof.



(1988 Code, § 14-56)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  THROUGH STREETS DESIGNATED.



   Those streets and parts of streets described in Chapter 75, Sch. II are
declared to be through streets for the purpose of this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 14-57)



§ 71.08  AUTHORITY TO SIGN 1-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   Whenever any ordinance designates any 1-way street or alley there shall
be signs giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement
shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited.



(1988 Code, § 14-58)



§ 71.09  AUTHORITY TO ERECT STOP SIGNS.



   Whenever any ordinance designates and describes a through street, there
shall be a stop sign on each and every street intersecting that through
street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated by any
ordinance unless traffic at any intersection is controlled at all times by
traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of 2
through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy
traffic street not so designated, stop signs shall be erected at the
approaches of both of the streets.



(1988 Code, § 14-59)



§ 71.10  SPECIFICATIONS FOR STOP SIGNS.



   Every sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the word STOP in
letters not less than 8 inches in height and the sign shall at nighttime be
rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, or by a fixed
floodlight projected on the face of the sign, or by efficient reflecting
elements on the face of the sign. Every stop sign shall be located as near as
practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.



(1988 Code, § 15-60)



CHAPTER 72:
VEHICLE OPERATION GENERALLY




Section



   72.01   Speed limits



   72.02   Limitations on turning around



   72.03   Driving on play streets



   72.04   Obedience to no-turn signs



   72.05   Processions



   72.06   Limitations on backing



   72.07   Authorized emergency vehicles



   72.08   Gasoline and oil trucks



§ 72.01  SPEED LIMITS.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the speeds
indicated in Chapter 75, Sch. II on the streets listed in that schedule.



(1988 Code, § 14-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Speed limits, G.S. §§ 20-141 et seq.



§ 72.02  LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.



   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district and shall
not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless the movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic. In this section, the
term BUSINESS DISTRICT means Main Street from Church Street to the railroad
tracks.



(1988 Code, § 14-77)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.03  DRIVING ON PLAY STREETS.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon that street or
portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose
residences are within the closed area, and then any driver shall exercise the
greatest care in driving upon any like street or portion thereof.



(1988 Code, § 14-78)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions
of that sign.



(1988 Code, § 14-79)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  PROCESSIONS.



   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles of a
funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when
those vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This
provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals or police officers.



(1988 Code, § 14-80)



   (B)   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as
near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the
vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe.



(1988 Code, § 14-81)



   (C)   A funeral procession composed of a series of vehicles shall be
identified by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or
other identifying insignia or by another method as may be determined and
designated by the Traffic Division.



(1988 Code, § 14-81) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection
or over a crosswalk, and shall not in any event or at any place back a
vehicle unless the movement can be made in safety and he or she shall have
given ample warning to those who may be behind by hand and horn or other
signal.



(1988 Code, § 14-83)



§ 72.07  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation,
parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency
vehicles, as defined in this chapter, except that a driver when operating a
vehicle in any emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer,
may:



      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign but only
after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he or she
does not endanger life or property; or



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property.



   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the
driver of any vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard
of the safety of others.



(1988 Code, § 14-86)



§ 72.08  GASOLINE AND OIL TRUCKS.



   (A)   Number allowed within block at same time. It is declared
unlawful for any person to drive a gasoline or oil truck as described in this
section within any block in the town while another gasoline or oil truck is
within that block, provided that this provision shall not prevent 2 trucks
meeting each other within a block and going in opposite directions provided
the trucks allow a reasonable distance between them while so meeting.



   (B)   Parking. It is declared unlawful for any person to park a
gasoline or oil truck within the corporate limits of the town; provided that
nothing in this section shall prevent a truck from loading or unloading
within the corporate limits of the town at a regularly established place of
business.



   (C)   Speed limit. It is declared unlawful for the driver of any
gasoline or oil truck to operate the same within the corporate limits of the
town at a speed in excess of 20 mph.



(1988 Code, § 14-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 73:
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section




Generally




   73.01   Application of chapter



   73.02   Regulations not exclusive



   73.03   Parking signs required



   73.04   Lights on parked vehicles



   73.05   Prohibited in certain places



   73.06   Near hazardous or congested places



   73.07   Standing or parking on 1-way roads



   73.08   Standing or parking close to curb



   73.09   Standing or parking for certain purposes prohibited



   73.10   Angle parking



   73.11   Parking in alleys



   73.12   Parking adjacent to schools



   73.13   Parking so as to obstruct traffic prohibited



   73.14   Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets



   73.15   Parking time limited on certain streets



   73.16   Parking oversize vehicles on public streets



   73.17   Parking citation fees




Loading Zones, Cab Stands and the Like




   73.30   Loading and unloading zones



   73.31   Buses and taxicabs



   73.32   Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted



   73.33   Unloading commodities on streets



 



   73.99   Penalty



GENERALLY



§ 73.01  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter prohibiting the standing or parking
of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this
chapter or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop
a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.



(1988 Code, § 14-101)



§ 73.02  REGULATIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall
not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified places or at specified times.



(1988 Code, § 14-102)



Statutory reference:



   Stopping, standing and parking generally, see G.S. §§ 20-161 et seq.



§ 73.03  PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED.



   Whenever by this chapter or any other ordinance any parking time limit
is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets there shall be
appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no regulations shall be effective
unless signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.



(1988 Code, § 14-103)



§ 73.04  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street
within a business or residence district no lights need be displayed upon the
parked vehicle when there is sufficient light to reveal any person within 200
feet upon the street.



(1988 Code, § 14-104)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to so provide, see G.S. § 20-134



§ 73.05  PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk;



   (B)   In front of a public driveway;



   (C)   Within an intersection;



   (D)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



   (E)   On a crosswalk;



   (F)   Within 30 feet of the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;



   (G)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet
of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless
signs or markings indicate a different length;



   (H)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;



   (I)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of the entrance when properly signposted;



   (J)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



   (K)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;



   (L)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel; or



   (M)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.



(1988 Code, § 14-105)



§ 73.06  NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES.



   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any designated place.



(1988 Code, § 14-106)



§ 73.07  STANDING OR PARKING ON 1-WAY ROADS.



   If a highway includes 2 or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to 1 direction upon any roadway, no person shall stand or park a
vehicle upon the left-hand side of a 1-way roadway unless signs are erected
to permit standing or parking.



(1988 Code, § 14-107)



§ 73.08  STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 14-108)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.09  STANDING OR PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purposes of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale;



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing a vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;



   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of an automobile
or other vehicles; or



   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit
has been disconnected, or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or
freight from 1 vehicle to another.



(1988 Code, § 14-109)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.10  ANGLE PARKING.



   (A)   The Board shall determine upon what streets angle parking
shall be permitted and shall mark or sign those streets.



   (B)   Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place
where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the
left side of the street.



   (C)   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle
parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to
the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by signs or markings.



(1988 Code, § 14-110)



§ 73.11  PARKING IN ALLEYS.



   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a manner or under
conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley, in a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property.



(1988 Code, § 14-111)



§ 73.12  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side
of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized in this chapter, no
person shall park a vehicle in any like designated place.



(1988 Code, § 14-112)



§ 73.13  PARKING SO AS TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.



   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in a manner or under
conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.



(1988 Code, § 14-113)



§ 73.14  PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are placed, erected or installed, giving notice thereof, or
the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of signs, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time except on Sundays upon any of the streets described in
Chapter 75, Sch. IV.



(1988 Code, § 14-114)



§ 73.15  PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person
shall park a vehicle for longer than the times specified within the district
or upon any of the streets described in Chapter 75, Sch. IV.



(1988 Code, § 14-115)



§ 73.16  PARKING OVERSIZE VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to park a commercial, industrial
or construction truck or vehicle on any town-maintained streets within the
Town of Fairmont except for the sole purpose of loading or unloading
commodities at a destination upon those streets.



      (2)   This section shall not be applicable to a vehicle
temporarily rendered inoperable by mechanical difficulty for a time necessary
to effect necessary repairs, but in no event to exceed 3 hours.



   (B)   A COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION TRUCKOR VEHICLE as
used herein is defined as any self-propelled motor vehicle which has a gross
weight in excess of 10,000 pounds, 3 or more axles or which has a length in
excess of 270 inches overall or a width in excess of 96 inches. For purposes
of clarification, but without limitation, this definition includes a truck,
tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, dump truck, tanker truck, bus, large panel
van and construction equipment.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.17  PARKING CITATION FEES.



   (A)    The following are citation fees for parking violations:



 

Citation
 
Fee




Parking at fire hydrant
 
$25


Parking left side of curb
 
$10


Parking on sidewalk
 
$10


Parking out of line
 
$10


Parking in alley
 
$10


Parking in private drive
 
$10


Improper parking
 
$10


Parking too near intersection
 
$10


Double parking
 
$10


Overtime parking
 
$10


Parking in restricted area
 
$10


Handicapped parking
 
$100


Parking in fire lane
 
$25


Other violation
 
$10




 



   (B)   If any person shall violate any provision regulating the
operation or parking of vehicles, he or she shall be responsible for an
infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than $50.



(Ord. passed 1-17-2006)



Statutory reference:



   Violation of local ordinances misdemeanor, see G.S. § 14-4(b)



LOADING ZONES, CAB STANDS AND THE LIKE



§ 73.30  LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.



   Whenever vehicle loading and unloading zones are designated and
described by this chapter and when signs are placed, erected or installed,
giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or
park any vehicle for any purpose or period of time except in accordance with
the requirements of this subchapter and as described herein.



(1988 Code, § 14-126)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.31  BUSES AND TAXICABS.



   (A)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park the vehicle upon
any street at any place other than at a bus stand.



   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop the vehicle upon any
street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone
except in case of an emergency.



   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or
passenger loading zone on a public street in a manner that the bus when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with
the right front wheel of the vehicle not farther than 18 inches from the curb
and the bus approximately parallel to the curb, so as not to unduly impede
the movement of other vehicle traffic.



   (D)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle
upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand. This provision
shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in
accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading
of passengers.



(1988 Code, § 14-127)



§ 73.32  USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS RESTRICTED.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any stop has been
officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when stopping does not
interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.



(1988 Code, § 14-128)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.33  UNLOADING COMMODITIES ON STREETS.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person operating a delivery vehicle of any kind to make a stop on any of
the paved streets or alleys of the town for the purpose of unloading any
commodity. All vehicles shall unload at the rear of stores or places of
business which they propose to serve and at places other than on paved
streets or alleys, except that unloading may be made from a paved street to a
business house or establishment which has no accessible rear entrance.



(1988 Code, § 14-129)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Violation of § 73.16 shall result in a $50 fine. The Police
Department shall place a notice on the vehicle notifying the owner or
operator of the vehicle that the vehicle has been parked in violation of the
provisions of § 73.16.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



CHAPTER 74:
PEDESTRIANS AND BICYCLES



Section




Pedestrians




   74.01   Drivers of vehicles to exercise due care



   74.02   Use of crosswalks



   74.03   Crossing at right angles




Bicycles




   74.15   Applicability



   74.16   Responsibility of parents and guardians



   74.17   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles



   74.18   Obedience to traffic-control devices



   74.19   Riding astride seat



   74.20   Number of persons permitted



   74.21   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths



   74.22   Speed



   74.23   Emerging from alley or driveway



   74.24   Carrying articles



   74.25   Parking



   74.26   Riding on sidewalks



   74.27   Audible signal devices



   74.28   Brakes



PEDESTRIANS



§ 74.01  DRIVERS OF VEHICLES TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon
any roadway, shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.



(1988 Code, § 14-151)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 20-174(e)



§ 74.02  USE OF CROSSWALKS.



   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.



(1988 Code, § 14-152)



§ 74.03  CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route
at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb
except in a crosswalk.



(1988 Code, § 14-153)



Statutory reference:



   Pedestrians, see G.S. §§ 20-172 et seq., 20-175.1 et seq.



BICYCLES



§ 74.15  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply whenever a bicycle is
operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated in this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 14-176)



§ 74.16  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND GUARDIANS.



   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 14-177)



§ 74.17  TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except
as to special regulations in this subchapter and except as to those
provisions of laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no
application.



(1988 Code, § 14-178)



§ 74.18  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right
or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey
the direction of any like sign, except where the person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any like turn, in which event the person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(1988 Code, § 14-179)



Statutory references:



   Bicycles, see G.S. §§ 20-171.1 et seq.



   Lights on bicycles, see G.S. § 20-129



§ 74.19  RIDING ASTRIDE SEAT.



   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.



(1988 Code, § 14-180)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.20  NUMBER OF PERSONS PERMITTED.



   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at 1 time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.



(1988 Code, § 14-181)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.21  RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle or 1 proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than 2 abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent
to a roadway bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.



(1988 Code, § 14-182)



§ 74.22  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(1988 Code, § 14-183)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.23  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the
sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.



(1988 Code, § 14-184)



§ 74.24  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least 1 hand upon the
handlebars.



(1988 Code, § 14-185)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.25  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in a manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(1988 Code, § 14-186)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.26  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalks of the town. The Chief
of Police is authorized to erect signs on any roadway prohibiting the riding
of bicycles thereon by any person and when signs are in place no person shall
disobey the signs.



(1988 Code, § 14-187)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.27  AUDIBLE SIGNAL DEVICES.



   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least
100 feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any
persons use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.



(1988 Code, § 14-188)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.28  BRAKES.



   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.



(1988 Code, § 14-189)



CHAPTER 75:
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Speed limits



   II.   Through streets



   III.   No U-turns



   IV.   One-way traffic adjacent to middle school



   V.   School zone established; 25 mph 30 minutes before school opens
and 30 minutes after school closes



   VI.   Tractor-trailer trucks



   VII.   Truck lanes



SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



 



Street
 
Location
 
Speed Limit


Gertrude Street
 
Between Walnut and Brown Streets
 
20 mph


Griffin Street
 
-
 
20 mph


Main Street (NC 41) and New Street (NC41)
 
From Red Cross Street to Walnut Street
 
20 mph


Martin Luther King Drive
 
From Main Street to Cole Street
 
25 mph


McMillian Drive
 
-
 
20 mph


NC 130
 
From SR 2298 to SR 2238
 
45 mph


NC 130
 
From SR 2298 to SR 2238, to a point 0.19 miles north of SR 2298. (Fairmont
High School - school speed zone in effect from 30 minutes before until 30
minutes after school begins and ends on school days only)
 
35 mph


Webster Street
 
-
 
20 mph


Golf Course Road/NC Hwy 130 Bypass
 
From Walnut Street to Old Stage Road
 
35 mph




 



(1988 Code, § 14-2001)  (Ord. passed 12-4-1999; Am. Ord. passed 3-21-2006;
Am. Ord. 07-109, passed 5-15-2007)



SCHEDULE II.  THROUGH STREETS



 

Street
 
Location


Main Street
 
-



 



(1988 Code, § 14-2002)



SCHEDULE III.  NO U-TURNS.



 

Street
 
Location


Center Street
 
Between Main and Walnut Streets


Iona Street
 
Between Main and Trinity Streets


Main Street
 
Between the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad and Cottage Street


Thompson Street
 
Between Main and Trinity Streets



 



(1988 Code, § 14-2003)



SCHEDULE IV.  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC ADJACENT TO MIDDLE SCHOOL.



 

Street
 
Direction of Traffic
 
Location
 
Time of Restriction


Bowers Street
 
West
 
Entire Block
 
7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 3:15 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. on days when school is in
operation


Ivey Street
 
South
 
From Bowers Street to Iona Street
 
7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 3:15 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. on days when school is in
operation


Pittman Street
 
North
 
From Iona Street to Bowers Street
 
7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and 3:15 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. on days when school is in
operation



 



(1988 Code, § 14-2011)



SCHEDULE V.  SCHOOL ZONE ESTABLISHED; 25 MPH 30 MINUTES BEFORE SCHOOL OPENS
AND 30 MINUTES AFTER SCHOOL CLOSES.



 

Street
 
Location


Iona Street
 
From 500 feet east of Trinity Street to 500 feet west of Pittman Street


Iona Street
 
Between Trinity and Pittman Streets


Linden Avenue
 
From Martin Luther King Drive south to the A.C.L. Railroad


Martin Luther King Drive
 
From Linden Avenue west to that portion of Martin Luther King Drive formerly
named Cole Street


NC 130 Business
 
From a point 500 feet west of SR 2442 (Pittman St.) eastward to a point
approximately 1,000 feet east of SR 2442 (Pittman St.)


Trinity Street
 
Extending from Iona Street northwardly to the northeastern corner of the
school property



 



(1988 Code, §§ 14-2001, 14-2012)



SCHEDULE VI.  TRACTOR-TRAILER TRUCKS.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Restriction


Church Street
 
From South Main Street to Pittman Street
 
Tractor trailer trucks (hauling vehicles - semi-trailers) are prohibited from
entering



 



(Ord. passed 4-13-1999)



SCHEDULE VII.  TRUCK LANES.



   It is declared unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle truck
and/or trailer having a capacity for transportation of 2,000 gallons or more
of gasoline or other petroleum products over any street within the town
except those streets which have heretofore been designated as “truck
lanes” and which truck lanes have been clearly marked with appropriate
signs, and are as follows; provided, however, that trucks may travel upon
other streets of the town if necessary to make deliveries of gasoline or
other petroleum products to places of business in the town; however, the
travel of any like truck over Main Street between Thompson and Iona Streets
and the travel of any like truck over Center Street between Main and Walnut
Streets is hereby expressly prohibited and made unlawful.



 

Street
 
Location


Cottage Street
 
From the eastern corporate limits to Main Street


Iona Street
 
From Main Street west to the western corporate limits


Main Street
 
From the southern corporate limits north to Iona Street


Walnut Street
 
From Cottage Street to Main Street



 



(1988 Code, § 14-85)



CHAPTER 76:
PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Parking restrictions



   II.   Fairmont Middle School loading and unloading zone



SCHEDULE I.  PARKING RESTRICTIONS.



 

Street
 
Location
 
Restriction




Center Street
 
From Main Street east to Walnut Street
 
Parking limited to 2 hours between hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
day except Sundays and public holidays


Iona Street
 
From the alley to Main Street
 
Parking prohibited


Iona Street
 
North side, first 2 spaces from Trinity Street
 
Parking prohibited


Iona Street
 
South side between Main Street and Mitchell Street
 
Parking prohibited


Iona Street
 
South side between Trinity Street and Pittman Street
 
Parking prohibited


Iona Street
 
South side, between Mitchell Street and Trinity Street
 
Parking prohibited except during funerals


Main Street
 
From Railroad Street and Byrd Street south to the intersection of Red Cross
Street
 
Parking limited to 2 hours between hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
day except Sundays and public holidays. Overnight parking is strictly
prohibited


McDaniel Street
 
From Morro Street, east to the town landfill
 
Parking prohibited


Thompson Street
 
From Main Street west to the end of Branch Bank and Trust (BB&T) property,
except as otherwise provided
 
Parking limited to 2 hours between hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
day except Sundays and public holidays


Thompson Street
 
Between the north alley east and west entrances
 
Parking prohibited


Thompson Street
 
South side, adjacent to Fairmont Department Store
 
Parking is limited to 15 minutes


Thompson Street
 
North side, from Main Street to the second bank entrance
 
Parking prohibited


Trinity Street
 
West side from Iona Street north to Railroad Street
 
Parking prohibited


Walnut Street
 
Property adjacent to and owned by any church, except while attending services
in the church
 
Parking prohibited


Walnut Street
 
East side, between Cottage and Center Streets
 
Parking prohibited except on Sundays




 



(1988 Code, §§ 14-2005, 14-2006, 14-2007, 14-2008, 14-2009)  (Am. Ord.
17-172, passed 6-20-2017)



SCHEDULE II.  FAIRMONT MIDDLE SCHOOL LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONE.



 

Street
 
Location


Iona Street
 
North side, 20 feet west and 20 feet east of sidewalk cut located
approximately midway between Trinity Street and Pittman Street.



 



(1988 Code, § 14-2010)



CHAPTER 77:  GOLF CARTS



Section



   77.01   Policy statement



   77.02   Rules and regulations



§ 77.01  POLICY STATEMENT.



   This chapter is adopted in the interest of public safety. Golf carts,
hereinafter “cart(s)”, are not designed or manufactured to be used on
public streets and roads, hereinafter “street(s)”, and the Town of
Fairmont in no way advocates or endorses their operation on streets. The town
by regulating such operation is merely addressing safety issues. This chapter
is not to be relied upon as a determination that operation on streets is safe
or advisable even if done in accordance with this chapter. All persons
operating carts must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of
themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists,
bicyclists, and pedestrians. All persons that operate or ride carts on
streets inside the town do so at their own risk. The town shall have no
liability under any theory of liability, for permitting carts to be operated
on streets under legislative authority granted by the State of North
Carolina, and pursuant to such legislative authority, such cart operation
shall be in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 12-148, passed 9-18-2012)



§ 77.02  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Carts shall only be operated on streets within the municipal limits of
the town in accordance with the following rules and regulations.



   (A)   Any person who operates a cart in the town assumes all
liability associated with operating the cart.



   (B)   Any person who operates a cart must be at least 16 years of
age and possess a valid driver’s license required by the State of North
Carolina for operation of a motor vehicle. Cart operators must carry their
driver’s license on their person at all times while operating a cart on the
streets in the corporate limits.



   (C)   (1)   Carts shall be driven on streets only from dawn to
dusk, unless the cart is equipped with 2 lighted lamps, one on each side of
the front of the cart, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of at least 300 feet to the front of such cart, and a red lamp on
the rear, exhibiting a red light visible under like conditions from a
distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such cart.



      (2)   In lieu of the red lamp, the cart may alternatively be
equipped at the rear with 2 red reflectors of a diameter of not less than 3
inches, which are designed, located and maintained so that each reflector is
visible for at least 500 feet when approached by a motor vehicle displaying
lawful undimmed headlights.



   (D)   Carts operated after sunset must have mechanical turn signals.
Hand signals may be used during daylight hours in lieu of turn signals.



   (E)   Carts shall be equipped with a rear view mirror.



   (F)   Carts shall only be driven on streets in the town with a
posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less.



   (G)   Any person who operates a cart on the streets in the town
shall adhere to all applicable state laws concerning the possession and use
of alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs, and all applicable state traffic
laws.



   (H)   No cart shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner.



   (I)   Carts shall be operated to the right side of the travel lane
unless making a left turn.



   (J)   The maximum occupancy of a cart traveling on streets shall be
one person per bucket seat or three people per bench seat. Child/infant
restraints are required to be used in the cart in the same manner as required
for passenger vehicles.



   (K)   Carts shall not be operated on any sidewalk in the town.



   (L)   Carts shall not be operated on or across any public or private
properties outside the street right of way without the permission of the
property owner.



   (M)   Carts shall only park in handicapped parking spaces if the
driver or at least one passenger has a valid handicap-parking placard and
such placard is properly displayed in the cart.



   (N)   No cart shall be operated at a speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent for the existing conditions and in no instance at a
speed greater than 20 miles per hour.



   (O)   (1)   All owners of carts operated on streets within the
town shall complete and submit a cart registration form. The completed forms
will be maintained by the Fairmont Police Department. All carts operated on
the streets must have a valid permit sticker issued by the Police Department.
A yearly registration fee will be charged for this permit sticker to cover
the costs of implementing and maintaining this chapter. Permit stickers will
be issued annually, and are valid from July 1 of the year of issuance to June
30 of the following year. The following fees shall apply:



         (a)   Inspection by Police Department      $25
Annually



            (includes permit sticker)



         (b)   Re-inspection by Police Department    $10



            (If a cart fails the initial inspection)



      (2)   The Chief of Police retains the right to refuse to issue
and/or revoke any permit sticker from any cart at any time for any reason
that he feels is appropriate to ensure the safety and well-being of the
citizens of the town or the motoring public.



   (P)   Golf cart owners who disagree with a decision by the Police
Chief may file with the Chief, Town Clerk or Town Manager a written appeal
stating the basis for an appeal to the town’s Board of Commissioners.
Hearings held under this division shall be conducted in accordance with local
hearing procedure. The Town’s Board of Commissioners shall make a final
decision on the appeal within 90 days of the date the appeal was filed and
shall transmit a written copy of its decision by first class mail.



   (Q)   Each owner shall have proof of cart ownership and must
complete a waiver of liability, releasing the town, its employees, and
officials from all liability that may arise as a result of operating a cart
on streets inside the town. A current waiver of liability must be on file
with the Fairmont Police Department to operate a cart on a town street.



   (R)   Lost or stolen permit stickers are the responsibility of the
owner. A Police report must be filed in the event of a lost or stolen permit
sticker. The Chief of Police shall have discretion in determining whether a
permit sticker may be re-issued in this instance. If no record can be found
of a previous application, or the receipt of a permit sticker, the Chief of
Police may direct the applicant to reapply, and also resubmit any and all
fees necessary, before a replacement permit sticker is issued.



   (S)   Any person who operates a cart on the streets shall have a
golf cart rider liability insurance coverage in an amount not less than that
required by state law for motor vehicles operated on public highways. Proof
of such insurance shall be in the possession of the operator of the cart
while operating the cart and a copy shall be provided to the Police
Department at the time of permitting.



   (T)   The above requirements do not apply to a cart crossing a
street at a golf course crossing designated by signs duly erected by the town
or the North Carolina Department of Transportation for such crossing when a
cart is being used for golf purposes when using the crossing.



   (U)   Any act constituting a violation of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall subject the offender, upon
conviction, to a fine not to exceed $50. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense. If an offender fails to pay a fine within 10
days of a final judgment or if there are more than 6 violations of this
chapter within a permitting period, the privileges and permit granted by this
chapter shall be revoked by the Fairmont Police Department.



   (V)   Carts used or owned by the town and operated for special
events or official business shall be exempt from permit fees but shall
otherwise comply with the above requirements.



(Ord. 12-148, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 12-149, passed 12-18-2012)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      91.   NUISANCES



      92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



      93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION



      94.   ANIMALS



      95.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      96.   SIGNS



CHAPTER 90:
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Generally




   90.001   Planting and protection of trees and shrubs



   90.002   Assemblies and crowds



   90.003   Display of goods



   90.004   Placing objects



   90.005   Playing games



   90.006   Maintenance of public areas



   90.007   Garbage and trash receptacles



   90.008   Duties of Department of Public Works



   90.009   Street-damaging machinery prohibited



   90.010   Sidewalk policy; maintenance



   90.011   Loitering; drug-related activity




Driveways




   90.025   Curbs and gutters



   90.026   Permit required



   90.027   Application; fee



   90.028   Standards for issuance




Street Improvements




   90.040   Definitions



   90.041   Requirements for acceptance of new streets



   90.042   Improvement requirements for existing streets



   90.043   Opening and improving streets without petition



   90.044   Construction according to specifications



   90.045   Installation of utilities



   90.046   Resurfacing improvements



   90.047   Streetlights and developer’s costs




Excavations and Repairs




   90.060   Supervision and control



   90.061   Street repair



   90.062   Requirements during excavations



   90.063   Permit required



   90.064   Application; fees



   90.065   Municipal liability




Parades and Demonstrations




   90.075   Definitions



   90.076   Exceptions



   90.077   Certain activities prohibited



   90.078   Interference prohibited



   90.079   Picketing



   90.080   Permit required



   90.081   Grounds for denial



   90.082   Application; issuance



   90.083   Revocation



 



   90.999   Penalty



GENERALLY



§ 90.001  PLANTING AND PROTECTION OF TREES AND SHRUBS.



   Citizens may plant trees in front of their lots and around their lots
on the sidewalks under the supervision of the Director of Public Works,
provided they shall not plant any that are detrimental to the town. No trees
or shrubs shall be planted in the street rights-of-way or gutters. No person
shall cut or damage any tree upon the sidewalks of the town without the
permission of the Director of Public Works or shall dig up or injure any tree
or shall tack or post any advertisement upon the trees of the town.



(1988 Code, § 20-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.002  ASSEMBLIES AND CROWDS.



   All crowds or assemblages of persons that shall congregate on the
streets or sidewalks of the town, thereby obstructing streets or sidewalks to
the inconvenience of pedestrians and vehicle operators, shall be dispersed by
the police, and any person who refuses to obey the warning of the officer
shall be deemed to violate this section; provided that nothing in this
section shall prevent builders from obstructing the streets for a reasonable
length of time with material while work is in progress.



(1988 Code, § 20-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.003  DISPLAY OF GOODS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or set out for exhibition
any goods, wares or merchandise directly connected with the business
transacted by him or her, on the sidewalk in front of a place of business,
store or building owned, controlled or occupied by him or her without
specific approval of the Board; however, written request from a sponsoring
agency or an individual merchant to hold a 1-day sidewalk sale may be
approved by the Town Manager. Sponsoring agency requests will be for
town-wide sidewalk sales only and individual requests will be limited to 3
per year.



(1988 Code, § 20-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.004  PLACING OBJECTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, pile, deposit, erect,
keep or place, or cause, permit or suffer to be stored, piled, deposited,
erected, kept or placed upon any sidewalk in the town any wood, coal, boxes,
barrels, stone, brick, lumber, dirt, merchandise, shipping case, stand,
stall, booth or showcase or other obstruction of any kind, except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance.



(1988 Code, § 20-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.005  PLAYING GAMES.



   No person shall play baseball, football or any other game of ball or
shall pitch or catch a ball on any street or sidewalk within the primary fire
limits of the town.



(1988 Code, § 20-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.006  MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC AREAS.



   Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any
commercial establishment or premises which maintains any paved or unpaved
areas for the use of the public, either for parking or as access area and
incident to the carrying on of the principal business of any commercial
establishment or premises and which parking or access areas abut or lie
within 10 feet of any public street or other public way, shall keep and
maintain areas clean and free from trash, litter, rubbish and any materials
liable to be blown, deposited or cast upon a street or other public way.



(1988 Code, § 20-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.007  GARBAGE AND TRASH RECEPTACLES.



   Suitable receptacles shall be provided in all parking or access areas
within the meaning of § 90.006. Receptacles shall be plainly marked and
constructed to prevent scattering of any trash, litter, rubbish or other
materials deposited therein.



(1988 Code, § 20-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.008  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   The Department of Public Works shall keep the streets, sidewalks and
public square in a neat and clean condition and shall cause all obstructions
to be removed therefrom.



(1988 Code, § 20-8)



§ 90.009  STREET-DAMAGING MACHINERY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drag, or run or cause to be
dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine or tool upon
any asphalt, bithulitic, warrenite or other type of permanently paved street
of the town which shall be liable, in any way to injure or cut the surface
thereof. It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same
manner.



(1988 Code, § 20-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.010  SIDEWALK POLICY; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Sidewalk policy. The Town of Fairmont’s policy on sidewalks
is based upon G.S. § 160A-217 and is considered an improvement for both the
owner and the town.



   (B)   Sidewalks:



      (1)   Should be part of the town-wide system only;



      (2)   Cannot adversely affect an adjacent property;



      (3)   Land should be dedicated as an easement, if not part of
an already dedicated right-of-way;



      (4)   Costs should be based upon a 50/50 basis and shall be
considered by the Board on the availability of funds;



      (5)   All work is subject to approval by the town Public Works
Director; and



      (6)   Petitions to the Board should be made according to the
guidelines of G.S. § 160A-217 and approval of request(s) by the Town Board
should follow the same.



   (C)   Maintenance.



      (1)   The property owner shall petition to the Town Board on a
50/50 basis for costs incurred from the maintenance performed on sidewalks
located on property and that which is located on town-maintained streets.



      (2)   The town shall repair any damages done at 100% cost, for
damages incurred by any town employees and/or vehicles while carrying out
town duties.



      (3)   The owner of the property shall be assessed at 100% of
costs from damages to the sidewalks which are located on the owner’s
property and located on town maintained streets. Those wishing to participate
in this policy may do so by petitioning the Board of Commissioners by
submitting their request in writing to the office of the Town Manager 4 days
before the regular scheduled Board meeting.



(1988 Code, § 20-10) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.011  LOITERING; DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY.



   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE means
any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park, driveway,
parking lot or transportation facility, or the doorways and entrance ways to
any building which fronts on any of those places, or a motor vehicle in or on
any of those places or any property owned by the Town of Fairmont.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, a KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG
USER, POSSESSOR OR SELLER  is a person who has, within the knowledge of the
arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any
violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances
referred to in the North Carolina Controlled Substances Act, G.S. § 90-5, or
has been convicted of any violation of any substantially similar laws of any
political subdivision of this state or of any other state or of federal law.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a person to remain or wander
about in a public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the
purpose to engage in a violation of any subdivision of the North Carolina
Controlled Substances Act, G.S. § 90-5. Circumstances shall include:



         (a)   Repeatedly beckoning to, stopping or attempting to
stop passers-by, or repeatedly attempting to engage passers-by in
conversation;



         (b)   Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor
vehicles;



         (c)   Repeatedly interfering with the free passage of
other persons;



         (d)   The person is a known unlawful drug user,
possessor or seller;



         (e)   The person behaves in a manner as to raise a
reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is engaged in an
unlawful drug-related activity;



         (f)   The person repeatedly passes to or receives from
passers-by, whether on foot or in a vehicle, money or objects;



         (g)   The person takes flight upon the approach or
appearance of a police officer;



         (h)   The person is at a location frequented by persons
who use, possess or sell drugs; or



         (i)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known
unlawful drug user, possessor or seller, or is known to be or have been
involved in drug-related activities.



      (4)   A violation of any provisions of this section shall
subject the offender to the penalties set forth in § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.



(1988 Code, § 20-11)



   (B)   (1)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or
prowls in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding
individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons
or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered
in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes
flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or
herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances
makes it impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an
offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any
alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting the person to
identify himself or herself and to explain his or her presence or conduct. No
person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the police
officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial
that the explanation given by the person was true and, if it had been
believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a loiterer or
prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay in
arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the
suspect’s escape.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being
warned by a police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have
been posted, to loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public or
quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or that
portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or
obstruct unreasonably the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It
shall be unlawful for any person to block, obstruct or prevent free access to
the entrance to any building open to the public.



      (3)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the
following definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles (whether moving or not) and buildings open to the general public,
including those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment and the
doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing
them.



(Ord. passed 6-15-2004) Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory references:



   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. §  160A-175



   Similar provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-174 and 14-4



DRIVEWAYS



§ 90.025  CURBS AND GUTTERS.



   All curbs and gutters to be installed on public streets of the town
shall include construction of that part of any driveway which is within the
public right-of-way of the street so as to provide a continuous driveway from
the street to the property line, unless the owner of the property or his or
her agent should request otherwise. The number, location, width and design of
the driveway shall be in accordance with normally accepted standards and
practices as determined by the Director of Public Works.



(1988 Code, § 20-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.026  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade
any driveway on the public streets, unless a written permit therefor has been
issued by the Clerk upon approval of the Manager or the Director of Public
Works.



(1988 Code, § 20-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.027  APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   All persons desiring a driveway permit shall make application
therefor, which application shall show:



      (1)   The name and address of the owner or agent in charge of
the property abutting the proposed work area;



      (2)   The name and address of the party doing the work;



      (3)   The location of the work area;



      (4)   Attached plans showing details of the proposed
alteration;



      (5)   The estimated cost of the alteration; and



      (6)   Other information as the approving officer shall find
reasonably necessary to the determination of whether a permit should be
issued.



   (B)   Application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established by the Board.



(1988 Code, § 20-32)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.028  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The Clerk shall issue a driveway permit when he or she finds that:



   (A)   The plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the
Manager or the Director of Public Works, to whom they shall be forwarded by
the Clerk within a reasonable time after receipt thereof;



   (B)   The work shall be done according to the standard
specifications of the town for public work of like character;



   (C)   The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular
and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the
means of egress to and from the property affected and adjacent properties; and



   (D)   The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be
unreasonably impaired.



(1988 Code, § 20-33)



STREET IMPROVEMENTS



§ 90.040  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC UTILITIES.  Includes power, gas, light, telephone and telegraph
corporations, and others as may operate like public services, and also shall
include departments of the town providing any of the above services as well
as water distribution and sewage disposal.



   STREET IMPROVEMENTS.  Includes any 1 or any combination of the
following terms: grading, regrading, paving, re-paving, macadamizing and
re-macadamizing of streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places or ways,
and the construction, reconstruction and altering of curbing, guttering,
storm sewers, turnouts, water mains and water, gas or sewer connections
therein.



(1988 Code, § 20-51)



§ 90.041  REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF NEW STREETS.



   (A)   Dedication for public use on recorded map. Streets shall be
considered for acceptance for maintenance by the town when the proper street
width is dedicated for public use and a map is recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds of the county. The map and street shall meet the
requirements established by Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Waiver of street design requirements. The design requirements
for streets as provided for by Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances may be
excepted by the Board to the degree that exception shall be in the general
best interest of the town. The Board may not make any exception where only
the special interest of any group or individual is to be served nor in regard
to any street which is covered as part of a subdivision by Chapter 153 of
this code of ordinances. Subdivision streets shall be completely under the
provisions of Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances.



(1988 Code, § 20-52)



§ 90.042  IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING STREETS.



   Any improvements made by the town, its contractor or agent to existing
streets shall be in accordance with the requirements for new streets
established by Chapter 153 of this code of ordinances. Specific design
requirements in this chapter may be excepted or modified by the Board to the
degree that exception or modification shall be in the general best interest
of the town.



(1988 Code, § 20-53)



§ 90.043  OPENING AND IMPROVING STREETS WITHOUT PETITION.



   It shall be wholly discretionary with the Board whether any street
improvement work is necessary or desirable and shall be done or not. The
Board may at its sole discretion make any street improvement and pay the cost
thereof from revenues received by the town without the involvement of
petition or assessment.



(1988 Code, § 20-54)



§ 90.044  CONSTRUCTION ACCORDING TO SPECIFICATIONS.



   All street improvements shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications furnished by the Director of Public Works, and all work shall
be done under his or her supervision.



(1988 Code, § 20-55)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.045  INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES.



   At least 30 days before a contractor is notified that a street is ready
for him or her to proceed with his or her work the Director of Public Works
shall notify all public utilities that the street is being turned over to the
contractor for the execution of his or her contract. If those so notified are
not ready or cannot get ready within the 30 days, the Director of Public
Works shall be so notified in writing, whereupon he or she may, upon the
approval of the Manager and the Board, delay the sending of the notice to the
contractor.



(1988 Code, § 20-58)



§ 90.046  RESURFACING IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   In all cases where a street is being re-paved, the Director of
Public Works shall be authorized to close the street or part of the street
from the time the work is started until a time as in his or her judgment the
street is suitable for ordinary traffic thereon. If there is any dispute as
to the time when pavement is sufficiently set or hardened or otherwise has
become fit for travel, the decision of the Director of Public Works shall be
final. It shall be the special duty of the Director of Public Works to see
that the provisions of this section are enforced, both as to the erection of
barriers or enclosures and as to travel on any street by vehicles, during the
time prohibited. It shall also be the duty of the Director of Public Works to
serve the notice as may be necessary to protect any person having a permanent
line thereon, such as bus lines, taxicab lines and the like.



   (B)   No person shall interfere with the closing or undertaking by
operating a car or otherwise traveling thereon before the enclosures have
been removed therefrom and the street opened for travel.



(1988 Code, § 20-57)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.047  STREETLIGHTS AND DEVELOPER’S COSTS.



   (A)   Streetlights shall be installed and maintained by the town in
accordance with policies and designs approved by the Board.



(1988 Code, § 20-58)



   (B)   Developers shall be assessed, when applicable, as abutting
property owners for the cost of street improvements done by the town.



(1988 Code, § 20-59)



EXCAVATIONS AND REPAIRS



§ 90.060  SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.



   All excavations and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places
of the town shall be under the supervision and control of the Director of
Public Works, whose duty it shall be to inspect the same from time to time
during the progress thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he or she shall
make a final inspection and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is
restored to a condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or
work was made or done, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment
are removed therefrom. Any person refusing or failing to comply with any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof, and where
failure or refusal is continued after notice from the Director of Public
Works, every day’s continuance shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



(1988 Code, § 20-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.061  STREET REPAIR.



   When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of
the town shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making the
excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or
opening, and refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and
specifications issued by the Director of Public Works or his or her duly
authorized representative. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to
comply with any provision of this section shall be guilty of a violation
thereof; and where neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice
from the Director of Public Works or his or her authorized representative,
every day’s continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



(1988 Code, § 20-77)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.062  REQUIREMENTS DURING EXCAVATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under this
subchapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a
dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of
the town without placing and maintaining proper guardrails 3 feet from the
ground and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the excavation,
sufficient to warn the public of excavation, and to protect all persons using
reasonable care from injuries on account of the excavation. It shall be
unlawful to cut drains or ditches across the sidewalks or streets unless
boxing is used and the same is covered on a level with the sidewalk.



(1988 Code, § 20-78)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.063  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig any ditch,
trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or
other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe,
wires or poles or for any other purpose unless a written permit therefor has
been issued by the Clerk, upon approval of the Manager or Director of Public
Works; provided that a permit shall not be required where work is performed
under a contract with the town but if work requires a sidewalk or street to
be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the Clerk, the
Public Works Department and the Police Department at least 2 hours before
obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency.



(1988 Code, § 20-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.064  APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   All persons desiring a permit to make an opening in any street
or sidewalk, as set forth in § 90.063, shall make written application
therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening,
the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to
be cut.



   (B)   Application shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be
established by the Board.



   (C)   All fees collected under the provisions of this section shall
be paid into the general fund.



(1988 Code, § 20-92)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.065  MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.



   Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in this subchapter
agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold
harmless the town against any claims or expenses, including attorney’s fees
for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out
of the person’s operations, excluding only the liability of the town for
its sole negligence except in connection with general supervision of work
performed by the person.



(1988 Code, § 20-93)



PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS



§ 90.075  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK.  That portion of a street lying between street intersections;
except, however, the west side of Main Street between Iona and Thompson
Streets shall be deemed to be 2 blocks, with the centerline of Center Street
dividing the 2 blocks.



   GROUP DEMONSTRATION.  Any assembly together or concert of action
between or among 2 or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter
or making known any position or promotion of persons, or of or on behalf of
any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting
attention of assembly.



   PARADE.  Any assemblage of 2 or more persons participating in or
operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession
of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other
public grounds or places.



   PICKET LINE. Any 2 or more persons formed together for the purpose of
making known any position or promotion of persons, or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons.



(1988 Code, § 20-111)



§ 90.076  EXCEPTIONS.



   This subchapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Funeral processions; or



   (B)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(1988 Code, § 20-112)



§ 90.077  CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.



   The following acts or activities when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of any parade, picket line or group
demonstration are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:



   (A)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm, any weapon or
article including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks or flashlights
which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon; or



   (B)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal,
whether leashed or unleashed.



(1988 Code, § 20-113)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Possession of weapon at parade, see G.S. § 14-277.2



§ 90.078  INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade,
picket line or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a
permit duly issued by the Chief of Police.



(1988 Code, § 20-114)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.079  PICKETING.



   (A)   Peaceful picketing in the furtherance of a lawful purpose
shall be permitted in the town provided the same is done under the following
conditions:



      (1)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks
reserved for pedestrian movement and may not be conducted on the portion of a
street used primarily for vehicular traffic.



      (2)   Not more than 10 pickets promoting the same objective
shall be permitted to use 1 of the 2 sidewalks within a block of the town at
any 1 time.



      (3)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs
not exceeding 2 feet in width and 2 feet in length promoting the objective
for which the picketing is done; provided the words used are not defamatory
in nature or would tend to produce violence.



      (4)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and
may not march closer together than 15 feet except in passing one another.



      (5)   If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use
the same sidewalk for picketing and use would result in the presence of more
than 10 pickets thereon, the Chief of Police shall allot time to each group
of pickets for the use of the sidewalk on an equitable basis.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to physically interfere
with pickets in the use of the sidewalk or to address profane, indecent,
abusive or threatening language to or at pickets which would tend to provoke
pickets or others to a breach of the peace.



   (C)   The police officers of the town may, in the event of the
assemblage of persons in numbers as to tend to intimidate pickets pursuing
their lawful objective through numbers alone or through use of inflammatory
words, direct the dispersal of persons so assembled and may arrest any person
who fails to absent himself or herself from the place of assemblage when so
directed by the police.



   (D)   Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the
town shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing the crowd shall
disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be
unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed
by a police officer.



(1988 Code, § 20-115)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.080  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate
in any parade, picket line or group demonstration in or upon any street,
sidewalk, alley or other public place within the town unless a permit
therefor has been issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 20-126)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.081  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for the proposed
parade, picket line or group demonstration unless he or she finds that:



      (1)   The parades, picket lines or group demonstrations will
commence before 6:00 a.m. or terminate after 5:00 p.m.;



      (2)   The parades, picket lines or group demonstrations are to
be held at the same time and place as those designated in a permit issued
pursuant to a written application previously received by the Chief of Police
or his or her designee;



      (3)   The conduct of the parade, picket line or group
demonstration will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
other traffic contiguous to its route;



      (4)   The conduct of the parade, picket line or group
demonstration will require the diversion of so great a number of police
officers of the town to properly police the line of movement of the parade
and of contiguous areas that adequate police protection cannot be provided
the remainder of the town;



      (5)   The conduct of the parade, picket line or group
demonstration will require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances
that adequate ambulance service to portions of the town not occupied by the
parade and contiguous areas will be prevented;



      (6)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade, picket line or group demonstration will
substantially interfere with adequate fire and police protection of or
ambulance service to areas contiguous to the assembly areas;



      (7)   The conduct of the parade, picket line or group
demonstration is reasonably likely to result in violence to persons or
property causing serious harm to the public; or



      (8)   The conduct of the parade, picket line or group
demonstration will interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment to
an extent that adequate fire protection cannot be provided to the town.



   (B)   Picket lines or picketing activities shall also be subject to
the provisions of § 90.079.



(1988 Code, § 20-127)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.082  APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.



   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall issue permits as
required in the preceding section, and in the issuance thereof he or she
shall:



   (A)   Require a written application for permit to be filed not less
than 24 hours in advance of the parade, picket line or group demonstration
which application shall specify the time and place for the commencement of
any picket line and the time and place, route and duration of any parade or
group demonstration;



   (B)   Require that the application for a permit specify whether or
not minors below the age of 18 years will be permitted to participate; and



   (C)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and
the permit shall designate the person in charge of the activity. That person
shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line or group demonstration
and shall carry the permit with him or her at that time. The permit shall not
be valid in the possession of any other person.



(1988 Code, § 20-128)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.083  REVOCATION.



   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade,
picket line or group demonstration for any of the following causes:



   (A)   The violation by any participant of § 90.077; or



   (B)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit.



(1988 Code, § 20-129)



§ 90.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, convicted of violating the provisions of § 90.011
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined an
amount not to exceed $500 and/or imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30
days as provided by G.S. § 14-4. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate offense.



CHAPTER 91:
NUISANCES



Section




Generally




   91.01   Definition



   91.02   Illustrative enumeration



   91.03   Subchapter supplemental



   91.04   Prohibited



   91.05   Complaint and investigation



   91.06   Notice to abate



   91.07   Abatement by town



   91.08   Administrative policy on nuisance abatement




Abandoned and Nuisance Vehicles




   91.20   Definitions



   91.21   Exceptions



   91.22   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   91.23   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized



   91.24   Administration and enforcement



   91.25   Removal of vehicle; notice to owner; exceptions



   91.26   Notice to owner of removal



   91.27   Right to probable cause hearing



   91.28   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings



   91.29   Disposition of unclaimed vehicle



   91.30   Conditions on removal of vehicle from private property



   91.31   Protection against criminal or civil liability



   91.32   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle



GENERALLY



§ 91.01  DEFINITION.



   In this chapter the term NUISANCE means the doing of an unlawful act,
the omitting to perform a duty or the suffering or permitting any condition
or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:



   (A)   Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of
others;



   (B)   Is offensive to the senses;



   (C)   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or
renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway,
sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage;



   (D)   In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use
of property; or



   (E)   Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life
and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.



(1988 Code, § 15-1)



§ 91.02  ILLUSTRATIVE ENUMERATION.



   (A)   The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or
permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of the following
items, conditions or actions are a nuisance.



   (B)   This enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be
conclusive, limiting or restrictive:



      (1)   Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other
abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things;



      (2)   Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice,
snakes and other vermin;



      (3)   All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying
vibrations;



      (4)   All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as
well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the
emission or generation of odors and stenches;



      (5)   The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within
a reasonable time after death;



      (6)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream,
lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial
wastes or other substances;



      (7)   Any building, structure or other place or location where
any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is
conducted, performed or maintained;



      (8)   Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or
maintained on any lot or piece of ground;



      (9)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



      (10)   The unauthorized obstruction of any public street, road
or sidewalk;



      (11)   The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds, bushes,
undergrowth or grass to a height in excess of 11 inches causing or
threatening to cause a hazard detrimental to the public health or safety;



      (12)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is
offensive by virtue of odor or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of rats,
mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health;



      (13)   Any accumulation of rubbish, trash or junk causing or
threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to cause the
accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause the
inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes or vermin of any kind which is or
may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health; and



      (14)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which
violates the rules and regulations of the County Health Department.



(1988 Code, § 15-2) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.03  SUBCHAPTER SUPPLEMENTAL.



   This subchapter shall be in addition to any other remedies that may
exist under law for the abatement of nuisances. This subchapter shall not
prevent the town from proceeding in a criminal action against any person.



(1988 Code, § 15-3)



§ 91.04  PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or
maintenance of a nuisance.



(1988 Code, § 15-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.05  COMPLAINT AND INVESTIGATION.



   The Clerk, upon notice from any person of the existence of a nuisance
shall cause to be made by the appropriate County Health Department official
or town official, the investigation as may be necessary to determine whether,
in fact, conditions exist as to constitute a nuisance.



(1988 Code, § 15-5)



§ 91.06  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   (A)   For purposes of this section the respondent is the person in
possession of the property where a public nuisance (as described in §§
91.01 and 91.02) is located, as well as the owner of the property, if
different form the former.



   (B)   Upon a determination that there exists on any property
conditions constituting a public nuisance (as described in §§ 91.01 and
91.02), the Town Manager shall notify the respondent by certified and first
class mail of that condition and shall order the abatement thereof within 15
days of the date of the notice. If after due diligence the respondent’s
correct address cannot be determined, then the required notice shall be hand
delivered by a designated representative of the town or shall be posted
conspicuously on the offending property. The notice shall order the abatement
of the nuisance within 15 days of the delivery or posting of the notice.



   (C)   As to the uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds, bushes,
undergrowth or grass to a height in excess of 11 inches causing or
threatening to cause a hazard detrimental to the public health or safety,
this notice shall only be given once in any calendar year.



   (D)   At any time before the expiration of the 15 day abatement
period specified in this section, the respondent may request a hearing before
the Housing Appeals Board to appeal the finding of the official who preformed
the investigation that a public nuisance exists on the premises.  Upon
completion of the hearing, the Housing Appeals Board shall consider the
evidence before it and shall, within 7 days, either revoke the initial order,
issue a final order which differs from the initial, or reinstate the initial
order as a final abatement order.



   (E)   Any request for a hearing pursuant to this section must be in
writing and must be filed in the office of the Town Manager. The Town Manager
shall fix a time for the hearing, and the initial abatement order or the
accrual of interest in the statement of charges shall be temporarily
suspended pending the hearing. The hearing must be held by the Housing
Appeals Board within 31 calendar days following receipt of the request for
hearing by the office of the Town Manager. At the hearing, the individual
affected by the order shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to
refute the findings which supported the abatement order or the removal of the
nuisance condition.



(Ord. passed 11-15-2005)



§ 91.07  ABATEMENT BY TOWN.



   (A)   If any person who was ordered to abate a nuisance pursuant to
this chapter, fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove the condition
constituting the nuisance within 15 days from receipt of the last order
relating thereto, the Town Manager shall cause the condition to be removed or
otherwise remedied by having employees of the town or a private contractor
designated by the Town Manager go upon the premises and remove or otherwise
abate the nuisance under the supervision of an office or employee or a
private contractor designated by the Town Manager. As to the uncontrolled
growth of noxious weeds, bushes, undergrowth or grass to height in excess of
11 inches causing or threatening to a cause a hazard detrimental to the
public health or safety, any time within the calendar year in which notice
was given that the condition is found to exist, the condition is to be
removed or otherwise remedied as set forth below.



   (B)   Any person who has been ordered to abate a nuisance may within
the time allowed by this chapter request the town in writing to remove the
condition, the cost of which shall be paid by the person making the request.



   (C)   The actual cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner of the lot or
parcel of land and it shall be the duty of the tax collector or other
appropriate town official to mail a statement of the charges to the owner or
other person in possession of the premises within instructions that the
charges are due and payable within 30 days from receipt thereof.



   (D)   If charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance
are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges as
provided for in division (C), the charges shall become a lien upon the land
or premises where the public nuisance was located and shall be collected as
unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193(a).



   (E)   If charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance
are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges as
provided for in division (C), the charges shall also become a lien upon any
other real property owned by the person in default within the city limits or
within 1 mile of the city limits, except for the person’s primary
residence. A lien established pursuant to this division, as provided in G.S.
§ 160A-193(b), is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a
money judgment. This division shall not apply if the person in default can
show that the nuisance was created solely by the actions of another.



   (F)   If the lien provided in division (E) above is not promptly
satisfied, it shall be collected as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. §
160A-193.



   (G)   If the lien provided in division (F) above is not promptly
satisfied, it shall be collected as a money judgment.



(Ord. passed 11-15-2005)



§ 91.08  ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY ON NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall direct or inspect all nuisances (lots,
vehicles, business property or junk yards) at least quarterly; with vacant
lots on a 15 day inspection schedule April 1 through October 31.



   (B)   If the town enters a lot for cutting, the charge will be
prorated on the basis of $100 per hour, with the minimum charge being $50,
with the cost recovery followed as spelled out in §§ 91.07 (C) billing and
(D) failure to pay for the cost.



   (C)   The Town Manager shall direct or enforce inspections, give
proper notices, hearings, abatement and cost recovery as directed by § 91.07.



   (D)   The Town Manager shall make written reports to the Council
regarding compliance violations when necessary.



(Ord. passed 11-15-2005)



ABANDONED AND NUISANCE VEHICLES



§ 91.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  A motor vehicle that is:



      (1)   Left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;



      (2)   Left on a public street or highway for longer than 7
days;



      (3)   Left on property owned or operated by the town for
longer than 24 hours; or



      (4)   Left on private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than 2 hours.



   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL .   The supervisory employee of the Police
Department or the Department of Code Enforcement, respectively, designated to
authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE.  A machine designed or intended to travel
over land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.



   NUISANCE VEHICLE .   A motor vehicle on public or private property
that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public
nuisance and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other
insects or a breeding ground or harbor for rats or other pests;



      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious
vegetation over 8 inches in height;



      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;



      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil
and other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;



      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be
operated from the inside such as trunks, hoods and the like;



      (6)   One which presents a substantial risk of injury to
minors or other persons because of broken glass, jagged edges or protrusions
or otherwise;



      (7)   So situated or located that there is danger of its
falling or turning over; or



      (8)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and
safety hazard and a public nuisance by the Board of Commissioners.



(1988 Code, § 15-21)



Statutory reference:



   Abandoned vehicles and the like, see G.S. §§ 20-219.9 et seq.,
160A-303



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-303(b)



§ 91.21  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall apply to any vehicle in an enclosed
building or any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the
operation of the enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage
place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.



(1988 Code, § 15-22)



§ 91.22  ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow the vehicle to be
abandoned.



   (B)   Upon investigation, proper officials of the town may determine
that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.



(1988 Code, § 15-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Removal authorized, see § G.S. § 160A-303(c)



§ 91.23  NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner of a motor
vehicle or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property upon which
the vehicle is located to lease or allow the vehicle to remain on the
property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.



   (B)   Upon investigation, proper officials of the Department of Code
Enforcement may determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety
hazard and a nuisance vehicle and order the vehicle removed.



(1988 Code, § 15-24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Removal authorized, see G.S. § 160A-303(c)



§ 91.24  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The Police Department and the Code Enforcement Department of the town
shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
subchapter. The Police Department shall be responsible for administering the
removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public
streets and highways within the town and property owned by the town. The
Department of Code Enforcement shall be responsible for administering the
removal and disposition of abandoned and nuisance vehicles located on private
property. The town shall, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck
operators or towing businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned
vehicles and nuisance vehicles in compliance with this subchapter and
applicable state laws. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to limit
the legal authority or powers of officers of the Police Department in
enforcing any other laws or otherwise carrying out their duties.



(1988 Code, § 15-25)



§ 91.25  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE; NOTICE TO OWNER; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as set forth in § 91.25 a vehicle to be towed
or otherwise removed because it has been abandoned or declared to be a
nuisance vehicle shall be towed only after notice to the owner or person
entitled to possession of the vehicle. In those instances, notice shall be
given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the
vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a
specified date, no sooner than 7 days after the notice is affixed, unless the
vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to this time.



      (2)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property
and nuisance vehicles, if the owner or person entitled to possession does not
remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle
is abandoned or a nuisance vehicle, the appeal shall be made to the Board of
Commissioners in writing, heard at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Board, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed
until the appeal is heard and decided.



(1988 Code, § 15-26)



   (B)   (1)   The requirement that notice be affixed to an
abandoned or nuisance vehicle at least 7 days prior to removal may, as
determined by the authorizing officer, be omitted in those circumstances
where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic
obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and
welfare.



      (2)   For vehicles left on the public streets and highways,
circumstances include, and the Board of  Commissioners hereby determines
that immediate removal of those vehicles is warranted when they are:



         (a)   Obstructing traffic;



         (b)   Parked at the designated places identified in
Chapter 73;



         (c)   Parked in a no stopping or standing zone;



         (d)   Parked in loading zones; or



         (e)   Parked in bus zones.



      (3)   With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on
town owned property other than streets and highways, and on private property,
vehicles may be removed without giving the minimum 7 days’ prior notice
only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds and enters
findings in appropriate daily records a special need for prompt action to
protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of
illustration but not limitation, circumstances include vehicles blocking or
obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked
in a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing
damage to public or private property.



(1988 Code, § 15-27)



§ 91.26  NOTICE TO OWNER OF REMOVAL.



   (A)   Any vehicle which has been determined to be an abandoned or a
nuisance vehicle may be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck
operator or towing business contracting to perform services for the town.
Whenever a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town official shall
immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, notice to
include the following:



      (1)   Description of the removed vehicle;



      (2)   Location where the vehicle is stored;



      (3)   Violation with which the owner is charged, if any;



      (4)   Procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle;
and



      (5)   Procedure the owner must follow to request a probable
cause hearing on the removal.



   (B)   This notice shall, if feasible, be given by telephone;
however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written notice,
including the information set forth in division (A) of this section, shall,
unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or her
agent, also be mailed to the owner’s last known address.



   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in this state, notice shall be
given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in this state, notice
shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of
the vehicle.



   (D) Whenever an abandoned or nuisance vehicle is removed, and the
vehicle has no valid registration or registration plate the authorizing town
official shall make reasonable efforts, including the checking of the vehicle
identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the
vehicle and to notify him or her of the information as set forth in division
(A) of this section.



(1988 Code, § 15-28)



Statutory reference:



   Mandatory provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-303(c), 20-219.11



§ 91.27  RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING.



   After the removal of an abandoned motor vehicle or vehicle declared to
be a nuisance vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession
is entitled to a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause
existed for removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in
writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court
judge to receive hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within
72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of law.



(1988 Code, § 15-29)



Statutory references:



   Hearing generally, see G.S. § 20-219.11



   Hearing required, see G.S. § 160A-303(d)



§ 91.28  REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.



   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the vehicle removed pursuant to
this subchapter by paying the towing and storage fee or posting a bond for
double the amount of the towing and storage fee to the private tow truck
operator or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle.



(1988 Code, § 15-30)



§ 91.29  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.



   Any vehicle declared to be an abandoned or nuisance vehicle under this
subchapter which is not claimed by the owner or other party entitled to
possession, will be disposed of by the private tow truck operator or towing
business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of the vehicle shall be
carried out in coordination with the town, and in accordance with G.S. §§
44A-1 et seq.



(1988 Code, § 15-31)



(G.S. §§ 44A-1 et seq.)



§ 91.30  CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of the property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a
vehicle is declared a nuisance vehicle. The town may require any person
requesting the removal of an abandoned or nuisance vehicle from private
property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability
incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof.



(1988 Code, § 15-32)



§ 91.31  PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.



   No person shall be held to answer any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of any abandoned or
nuisance vehicle, for disposing of a vehicle as provided in this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 15-33)



§ 91.32  UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from
any storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been
impounded pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, unless and until all
towing and impoundment fees, or bond in lieu of fees, have been paid.



(1988 Code, § 15-34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92:
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Interfering with fire alarm apparatus



   92.02   Interfering with firefighters or fire apparatus



   92.03   Riding on vehicles




Fire Department




   92.15   Organization; membership



   92.16   Duties of Chief; authority at fires




Fire Prevention Code




   92.30   Code adopted; enforcement



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  INTERFERING WITH FIRE ALARM APPARATUS.



   No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the fire alarm
system or injure the poles, wires, boxes or other apparatus connected
therewith.



(1988 Code, § 10-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.02  INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTERS OR FIRE APPARATUS.



   No person shall interfere with a firefighter in the discharge of his or
her duty or hinder him or her  in the performance of his or her duty, nor
shall any person other than members of the Fire Department loiter about any
fire station or change, handle or meddle in any manner with any fire engine
or any other fire apparatus.



(1988 Code, § 10-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.03  RIDING ON VEHICLES.



   No person other than a bona fide member of the Fire Department shall
mount any fire engine, wagon or apparatus before it leaves the station while
on its way to or from a fire or at any other time unless by permission of the
driver or officer in command of the engine, wagon or other apparatus.



(1988 Code, § 10-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Municipal fire protection, see G.S. §§ 160A-291 et seq.



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 92.15  ORGANIZATION; MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of the Chief of the Fire
Department and a sufficient number of firefighters, voluntary, part- or
full-time, to maintain and operate the Department. The Manager shall appoint
the Chief and approve the appointment to the Department of all members. The
Department may from time to time adopt its own rules and regulations
governing the Department subject to the approval of the Manager.



(1988 Code, § 10-16)



   (B)   (1)   The members of the Fire Department shall be not less
than 18 years of age and shall be subject to the policies, procedures and
requirements as may from time to time be established by competent authority
for members of the Fire Department.



      (2)   The members of the Fire Department shall receive
compensation as the Board shall direct.



(1988 Code, § 10-17)



§ 92.16  DUTIES OF CHIEF; AUTHORITY AT FIRES.



   (A)   (1)   The Chief, subject to supervision by the Manager,
shall:



         (a)   Have general control of the Department, the
personnel, apparatus and fire alarm systems;



         (b)   Command the Department and supervise the
firefighting and extinguishing of all fires and have the authority to keep
away from the vicinity of all fires any and all idle, disorderly or
suspicious persons;



         (c)   Inspect or cause to be inspected all trucks and
other equipment of the Fire Department each and every week to ascertain that
equipment is being kept in proper condition; and



         (d)   Inspect or cause to be inspected all fire hydrants
at least once every 3 months and shall make a report of the inspection to the
Manager.



      (2)   The Fire Chief shall make a monthly written report to
the Manager of all meetings of the Fire Department and the attendance of the
members, all fires occurring in the town and all out-of-town calls made by
members of the Department.



      (3)   The Fire Chief shall have all fire hydrants tested at
least twice each year and shall notify the Director of Public Works in
writing of any hydrants that are not in good working order.



      (4)   (a)   The Chief is to assume the functions of Fire
Inspector.



         (b)   As such, he or she shall have authority to enter
any and all premises, at a reasonable time for purposes of inspection.



         (c)   Upon receipt of a complaint, he or she shall
forthwith investigate.



         (d)   He or she shall investigate the causes of fires
and shall keep records of his or her findings as to origin, location, owner,
extent of damage and injury.



         (e)   The findings must be reported to the state
insurance commissioner at regular intervals.



         (f)   He or she shall cause the removal of fire hazards
by serving proper orders to the owner or agent of premises in question.



         (g)   The orders shall state a reasonable time limit.



         (h)   Failure to comply with the order shall be
considered a misdemeanor.



(1988 Code, § 10-18)



   (B)   (1)   The officer in command shall have authority to summon
aid.



      (2)   During the continuance of a fire, the Fire Chief, his or
her assistant or the Manager shall have authority to call upon any citizen to
render assistance in pulling down or demolishing any building or in removing
goods or furniture from a building on fire or in danger of fire, but not
without the consent of the Manager or of the officer of the Fire Department
who may be in charge.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful to congregate on the streets or
alleys near a fire in a manner which would interfere with the activities of
the Fire Department.



(1988 Code, § 10-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Duties of Fire Chief, see G.S. § 160A-292



   Fire department authorized, see G.S. § 160A-291



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 92.30  CODE ADOPTED; ENFORCEMENT.



   The current Standard Fire Prevention Code is adopted herein by
reference and may be enforced by the Department of Code Enforcement.



(1988 Code,§§ 10-31, 10-32)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption by reference, see G.S. § 160A-76



CHAPTER 93:
HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




Generally




   93.01   Unlawful to violate county health regulations



   93.02   Unlawful to interfere with Health Officer



   93.03   Burials




Smoking




   93.15   Definitions



   93.16   Purpose



   93.17   Smoking prohibited in town buildings



   93.18   Smoking regulated in town vehicles



   93.19   Town property



   93.20   Signs



   93.21   Exemptions



   93.22   Administration



   93.23   Conflict of laws



 



   93.99   Penalty



GENERALLY



§ 93.01  UNLAWFUL TO VIOLATE COUNTY HEALTH REGULATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any lawfully adopted
rule or regulation of the County Board of Health. The enforcement of this
chapter shall be under the supervision of the County Health Officer.



(1988 Code, § 11-1)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.02  UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH HEALTH OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the
Health Officer or any of his or her assistants in the lawful discharge of
their duties.



(1988 Code, § 11-2)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  BURIALS.



   It shall be unlawful to bury a corpse or dead body of any human being
within the corporate limits of the town, except in a cemetery or burial site
approved and designated for the purpose by the Board.



(1988 Code, § 11-3)  Penalty, see § 93.99



SMOKING



§ 93.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SMOKING.  Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted pipe,
lighted cigar, lighted cigarette or other combustible tobacco product in any
manner or in any form.



   TOWN BUILDING.  Any building owned by or leased by the Town of
Fairmont. It includes without limitation offices, restrooms, break areas,
lobbies, work areas and all interior walkways, stairwells, doorways,
passageways and entrances.



   TOWN VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle or motor-driven riding machinery
owned by or leased to the town including but not limited to cars, trucks,
buses and vans.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 93.16  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of municipal employees and is in the public interest to improve
indoor air quality, reduce fire hazards and minimize any health risks
associated with involuntary exposure to environmental tobacco smoke. Studies
have shown that breathing environmental tobacco smoke is a cause of disease,
including lung cancer, in healthy nonsmokers. At special risk are elderly
people, individuals with cardiovascular disease and individuals with impaired
respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway
disease.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 93.17  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN TOWN BUILDINGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke inside any building or
facility or portion thereof of a building or facility now or hereafter owned,
leased, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the town, except as
specifically authorized by this subchapter. However, the Town Manager has the
authority to designate a smoking area, as he or she deems necessary.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.18  SMOKING REGULATED IN TOWN VEHICLES.



   (A)   Smoking is prohibited in town vehicles where the presence of a
burning tobacco product or the nature of the vehicle would make smoking a
safety hazard. Examples include a vehicle being operated in the vicinity of a
flammable substance or a vehicle requiring use of an operator’s 2 hands at
all times for proper operation.



   (B)   Smoking is not allowed within town vehicle “pool cars”
that are shared by departments.



   (C)   Smoking is allowed in other town vehicles if all occupants
agree.



   (D)   Smoking is prohibited in all other town vehicles when those
other vehicles are being used to transport members of the public.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.19  TOWN PROPERTY.



   Smoking is permitted outside on land owned by or leased to the town and
outside of town buildings, except as restricted by written rule of the Town
Manager or by declaration by the Fire Marshal.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.20  SIGNS.



   Appropriate signage shall be conspicuously displayed in public areas of
town-owned or leased buildings indicating that smoking is prohibited as
follows:



   (A)   “No Smoking” or other signs relating to this smoking
subchapter shall have letters of not less than 1 inch in height or the
international “no smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it) no smaller than 3 inches in diameter.



   (B)   Signs shall be conspicuously posted in town buildings in a
position clearly visible on entry into every building.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 93.21  EXEMPTIONS.



   This subchapter shall not apply to private dwelling units in town-owned
or leased public housing neighborhoods. A residential shelter is a town-owned
building.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 93.22  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Town Manager is responsible for administering this subchapter and
is authorized and directed to establish regulations for the administration of
this subchapter.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 93.23  CONFLICT OF LAWS.



   If any portion of this subchapter or the enforcement thereof shall be
preempted by any state or federal authority,  preemption shall not operate
to invalidate the rest of this subchapter; and the same shall remain in full
force and effect.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   (1)   Violation of § 93.15et seq. shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $25 to be recovered by the Town
of Fairmont. Violators shall be first issued a written warning, then any
subsequent violations must be paid within 48 hours of the violation.
Violation of § 93.15et seq. shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction
punishable under G.S. § 14-4.



      (2)   Violation of § 93.15et seq. by a town employee may
result in a disciplinary action under the town’s personnel policies.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



CHAPTER 94:
ANIMALS



Section




Generally




   94.01   Purpose and definitions



   94.02   Agency authority and responsibility




Control




   94.15   Non-domestic animals prohibited



   94.16   Keeping of pigeons and bees



   94.17   Exhibition of certain animals



   94.18   Animals on sidewalks



   94.19   Bird sanctuary



   94.20   Licensing



   94.21   Number of domestic animals kept



   94.22   Cruelty to animals



   94.23   Animals at large



   94.24   Keeping of vicious and dangerous animals



   94.25   Animals creating nuisance



   94.26   Abuse prohibited



   94.27   Dog and cat identification tag



   94.28   Compliance with state rabies laws; vaccination



   94.29   Bitten by animal; notice; confinement



   94.30   Area-wide emergency quarantine



   94.31   Unlawful killing or releasing of certain animals



   94.32   Failure to surrender animal for confinement



   94.33   Impoundment; notice; redemption



   94.34   Destruction or adoption of unredeemed animal



   94.35   Leash requirement



   94.36   Wounded, diseased or unweaned animals



   94.37   Restraint and disposition of animals



   94.38   Keeping stray animals; requirements; failure to surrender



   94.39   Authorized killing of vicious dogs



   94.40   Enforcement; interference



 



   94.99   Penalty



GENERALLY



§ 94.01  PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted by the North Carolina General
Assembly, this chapter is enacted to regulate, restrict or prohibit, if
necessary, animals; to protect the public from unvaccinated, diseased, stray,
roaming, dangerous or wild animals; to make unlawful acts of animals that
interfere with the enjoyment of property or the peace and safety of the
community; and to carry out any other lawful duties authorized by state laws
and applicable ordinances.



   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABATTOIR.  Place for killing animals; a place where animals are
slaughtered for their meat and by-products. Also called a SLAUGHTERHOUSE.



      ANIMAL.  Every living creature, domestic or non-domestic, but
does not include humans.



      ANIMAL SHELTER.  Any premises designated by the County Health
Director for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals.



      AT LARGE.  Any animal shall be deemed to be at large when it is
off the property of its owner or keeper, not under physical restraint or when
not under the control of the owner or other person accompanying the animal by
means of a leash or line of some type not exceeding 6 feet or a reasonable
length in the case of an animal-drawn cart, wagon or similar object, nor
within a private vehicle with the consent of the operator thereof.



      CAT.  A domestic feline of any age.



      COUNTY.  Robeson County.



      DEPREDATE.  Laying waste or plundering.



      DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  An animal kept at home as a pet; an animal
kept for companionship, interest or amusement.



      DOG.  A domestic canine of any age.



      EXPOSED TO RABIES .   An animal shall be deemed to have been
exposed to rabies if it has been bitten by or been in the presence of any
animal known or suspected to have been infected with rabies.



      IMPOUNDMENT.  Any animal in custody of a person or animal
shelter duly authorized by the Robeson County Health Department.



      KEEPER.  A person having custody of an animal or who keeps or
harbors an animal or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about
any premises occupied or controlled by the person.



      NUISANCE.  An animal or group of animals shall be considered a
nuisance if it:



         (a)   Damages, soils or defiles private or public
property;



         (b)   Interferes with, molests or attacks persons or
other animals;



         (c)   Is repeatedly at large;



         (d)   Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive
conditions including fouling of the air by odors;



         (e)   Chases, snaps at, harasses or impedes pedestrians,
bicyclists or vehicles;



         (f)   By virtue of number or type is offensive or
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare;



         (g)   Is diseased or dangerous to the public health; or



         (h)   Creates noise or any other undesirable action.



      OWNER.  A person having the right of property in an animal, any
person owning, keeping, harboring or responsible for an animal and for the
purpose of this chapter the head of a household shall be deemed to be the
owner in respect to any animal owned, kept or harbored by any person residing
in the household and kept on the premises.



      RESTRAINT.  Any animal shall be considered under restraint if it
is within the real property limits of its owner or secured by a leash or lead
or confined.



      STRAY.  Any domestic animal not under restraint and found off
the property of its owner or keeper.



      SUSPECTED OF HAVING RABIES.  An animal, which is unvaccinated
against rabies or has bitten a person.



      TOWN.  Town of Fairmont.



      VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  Any establishment maintained and operated
by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases
and injuries of animals.



      VICIOUS ANIMAL.  An animal that constitutes a physical threat to
humans or other domestic animals.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 94.02  AGENCY AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Authority is hereby granted to the Code Enforcement Officer to
administer this chapter, to act as Animal Control Officer and to develop an
animal control program to carry out any lawful duties authorized by state
laws and applicable ordinances.



   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall:



      (1)   Have the responsibility along with the Department of
Public Works to enforce all laws of the state and all ordinances of the town
pertaining to animals and shall cooperate with all law enforcement officers
within the town and the county in fulfilling this duty;



      (2)   Enforce and carry out all laws of the state and all
ordinances of the town pertaining to rabies control;



      (3)   Be responsible for reporting all reported animal bites
and the condition of the animal causing the bite to the Robeson County Health
Department for the quarantine of any dog, cat or other animal involved and
suspected of having rabies;



      (4)   Be responsible for the seizure and impoundment, where
deemed necessary, of any dog or other animal in the town involved in a
violation of this chapter or any other town ordinance or state law;



      (5)   Investigate cruelty or abuse with regard to animals;



      (6)   Make canvasses of the town, including the homes in the
town, as necessary for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this
chapter or state statute;



      (7)   Keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records
of:



         (a)   Seizure, impoundment and disposition of all
animals coming into custody of the Animal Control Program;



         (b)   Bite cases, violations and complaints, and
investigation of them;



         (c)   All monies which were derived from fees, penalties
or other sources;



         (d)   Any other matters deemed necessary by the Town
Manager; and



      (8)   Be empowered to issue notices of violation of this
chapter in form as the Code Enforcement Officer may prescribe.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



CONTROL



§ 94.15  NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   This section shall apply to properties located within the
corporate limits of the town or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction within
100 feet of the corporate limits of the town.



   (B)   No person shall possess or harbor any non-domestic animal
which is dangerous to persons or property, or which has the potential of
being dangerous to persons or property. This section shall not apply to bona
fide circuses, petting zoos, and other traveling commercial animal
exhibitions of limited duration.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep, stable,
or house any livestock, horses, cows, fowl, sheep, goats, or other
non-domestic animals, including poultry, within the corporate limits of the
town within 175 feet of any dwelling, school, church, restaurant, grocery
store, drugstore, or other retail establishment, or within 100 feet of a
septic tank or private water supply intended for human consumption. In
addition, it shall also be unlawful to keep or maintain such animals by means
of tether, fence, or other type enclosure within 100 feet of the property
line of an adjoining lot unless the adjoining lot is, and the lot or area
housing the livestock are, under the same ownership. The following conditions
must also be met when housing non-domestic livestock.



      (1)   Lot size. The lot, section of land, or parcel shall not
be less than 2 acres of undeveloped land. Land area can be met by combining
lots as long as the combined unimproved area is at least 2 acres in size.



      (2)   No livestock shall be maintained for commercial sale or
processing purposes in any residential zoning district of the town. All
livestock shall be maintained for personal use and consumption only.



      (3)   Structures for livestock. Best management practices
shall be applied in using and maintaining structures for livestock, including
stables, so as to eliminate or minimize nuisance and adverse impacts to the
maximum extent possible. All yards, premises, sheds, structures, coops, and
the like, occupied by livestock shall be deemed a nuisance if not cleaned
regularly and kept in a sanitary condition at all times.



      (4)   Livestock shall be limited to three regardless of
species with the exception of domestic chickens/fowl. Chickens/fowl shall be
limited to 10. Any combination of the permitted number of chickens/fowl and
the permitted number of other livestock shall require 1 additional acre of
land.



   (D)   Hogs or swine are prohibited; exceptions. No hogs or swine are
permitted to be in any zone within the corporate limits, except in an
industrial district for manufacturing purposes and/or in connection with a
fair or other special event conducted on a temporary basis.



   (E)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit the
maintaining, keeping, or housing of any hogs or pigs for immediate slaughter
by licensed meat packer or abattoir.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003; Am. Ord. 19-186, passed 1-15-2019)  Penalty, see §
94.99



§ 94.16  KEEPING OF PIGEONS AND BEES.



   (A)   No person shall keep any pigeons within the corporate limits
of the town unless the pigeons are kept confined and not permitted to leave
the premises of the owner.



   (B)   No person shall cultivate or hive bees within the corporate
limits of the town.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.17  EXHIBITION OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit a stud horse or jack on
any street, alley or other public place or on any private property within the
town that will expose the animal to the public view.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.18  ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall lead, ride or drive any horse or other large animal
upon any of the sidewalks of the town without a permit issued by the Board of
Commissioners. No person shall display or cause to be displayed on any
sidewalk in the town live poultry of any kind or any other fowl in coops,
boxes, cages or in any other manner without a permit issued by the Board of
Commissioners.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.19  BIRD SANCTUARY.



   (A)   The area embraced within the corporate limits of the town and
all lands owned or leased by the town outside the corporate limits are hereby
designated as a bird sanctuary.



   (B)   The bird clubs of the town may erect artistic signs giving
notice of the regulation provided in this section at places and of design as
may be approved by the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



Statutory reference:



   Bird sanctuaries, see G.S. § 160A-188



§ 94.20  LICENSING.



   The owner of any dog kept within the town shall pay a license tax in
the amount and at a time as may be annually levied and provided for by
ordinances of the Town Board.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory references:



   Animal taxes authorized, see G.S. § 160A-212



   Authority to regulate domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186



   Vaccination required, see G.S. § 160A-185



§ 94.21  NUMBER OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS KEPT.



   No owner shall keep more than 3 domestic animals within the town except
within a pet shop or animal shelter or the premises of a humane society.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.22  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, torture,
torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate
or kill, wound, injure, poison, abandon or subject to conditions detrimental
to its health or general welfare any animal, or to cause or procure that
action. The words TORTURE and TORMENT shall be held to include every act,
omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death
is caused or inflicted; but terms shall not be construed to prohibit the
Robeson County Health Department Animal Control Department or its agents or
veterinarians from destroying dangerous, unwanted or injured animals in a
humane manner, nor to prohibit the lawful use of animals in scientific
research.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to fail to
provide his or her animal with proper shelter and protection from the
weather, sufficient and wholesome food and water to keep his or her animal in
good health and comfort, the opportunity for vigorous daily exercise,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and humane care and
treatment.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.23  ANIMALS AT LARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having care,
responsibility, or custody of any horse, mule, cow, goat, sheep, hog, dog,
cat, chicken, duck, goose, or any other animal to allow the animal to run at
large in the corporate limits of the town. Every animal found running at
large within the corporate limits of the town shall be taken by the
Department of Public Works or law enforcement, confined, and shall be
impounded pursuant to § 94.33.



   (B)   Any person who violates division (A) shall be liable for
damages in a private lawsuit for any damages caused to any person whose
property is damaged while the animal is at large and shall be subject to the
enhanced penalties of § 94.99(B)(2).



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having care,
responsibility, or custody of any to allow or permit the animal to discharge
feces or urine upon the premises of any other person. However, if that person
shall remove the feces deposited by the animal within 5 minutes of its
deposit, or if the owner of the property has given permission allowing use of
the property for discharge feces or urine, then such activity shall not be a
violation of this section.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003; Am. Ord. 17-171, passed 6-20-2017)  Penalty, see §
94.99



Cross-reference:



   Animals creating nuisance, see § 94.25



§ 94.24  KEEPING OF VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall possess or harbor any non-domestic animal
which is dangerous to persons or property or which has the potential of being
dangerous to persons or property.



   (B)   No owner shall keep any vicious dog or other animal within the
town. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on a public street or
sidewalk in the town with a vicious dog, whether or not the dog is on a
leash, in a manner calculated to inspire terror among citizens and/or
visitors of the town.



   (C)   Any vicious/public nuisance animal without any recognizable
identification may be destroyed after the Robeson County Health Department
Animal Control Officer has been unsuccessful in his or her attempt to catch,
trap or tranquilize (within an enclosed area) the animal. Any dog or cat left
at the animal shelter may be impounded or euthanized at the discretion of the
Animal Control Officer.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.25  ANIMALS CREATING NUISANCE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper to permit an
animal to create a nuisance, or to maintain a nuisance created by an animal.
Compliance shall be required as follows:



      (1)   When Code Enforcement Officer, law enforcement officer
or person duly authorized by the town observes a violation, the owner or
keeper will be provided written notification of the violation and be given 48
hours from time of notification to abate the nuisance;



      (2)   Upon receipt of a written detailed and signed complaint
being made to the Code Enforcement Officer by any person that any other
person is maintaining a nuisance as defined in this chapter, the Code
Enforcement Officer or delegate shall cause the owner or keeper of the animal
in question to be notified that a complaint has been received, and shall
cause the situation complained of to be investigated and a report and
findings thereon to be reduced to writing; and



      (3)   If the written findings indicate that the complaint is
justified, the Code Enforcement Officer or person duly authorized by the town
shall cause the owner or keeper of the animal in question to be so notified
in writing, and ordered to abate the nuisance within 48 hours by whatever
means may be necessary. If the owner or keeper of the animal is unknown and
cannot be ascertained, the notice and order, along with a general description
of the animal, shall be posted for 48 hours at the town hall. If after 48
hours the owner or keeper of the animal remains unknown, the animal may be
impounded or humanely destroyed.



   (B)   Every female dog or cat, while in heat, shall be confined in a
building or secure enclosure in a manner that she will not be in contact with
another dog or cat, and will not create a nuisance by attracting other
animals; provided, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed area on the premises of
the owner of an animal being bred.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or have
within the town an animal that habitually or repeatedly makes noises that
tend to annoy, disturb or frighten its citizens.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to fail or refuse to abate
the nuisance as required by this section.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.26  ABUSE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to entice or lure any
animal out of an enclosure or off the property of its owner or keeper, or to
seize, molest or tease any animal while the animal is held or controlled by
its owner or keeper or while the animal is on the property of its owner or
keeper.



   (B)   No person, except a duly sworn and authorized law enforcement
officer performing his or her duties under the provisions of this chapter,
shall shoot any wild game or other animal, whether wild or tame, with any
gun, firearm or bow and arrow or willfully poison any animal within the town.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.27  DOG AND CAT IDENTIFICATION TAG.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to fail to
provide his or her dog or cat, which is 4 months of age or older with an
identification tag on which is inscribed the name of the dog or cat, and the
owner’s name, address and telephone number.



   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to fail to
provide his or her dog or cat with a collar or harness to which a current
identification tag described under this section is securely attached. The
collar or harness with the attached identification tag must be worn at all
times, except during the times the animal is performing at shows, obedience
trials, tracking tests, field trials, schools or other events sanctioned and
supervised by a recognized organization, or is engaged in hunting or some
other activity in which a collar might endanger its safety.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.28  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE RABIES LAWS; VACCINATION.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any animal owner or other
person to fail to comply with the state laws relating to the control of
rabies.



      (2)   It is the purpose of this chapter to supplement the
state laws by providing a procedure for the enforcement of state laws
relating to rabies control, in addition to the criminal penalties provided by
state law.



   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper to fail
to provide current vaccination against rabies (hydrophobia) for any dog or
cat 4 months of age or older. Should it be deemed necessary by the County
Health Director or the Board of Health that other pets be vaccinated in order
to prevent a threatened epidemic or to control an existing epidemic, it shall
be unlawful for an owner or keeper to fail to provide current vaccination
against rabies for that pet.



      (2)   A rabies vaccination shall be deemed current for a dog
or cat if the first 2 doses of vaccine are administered 12 months apart and
each subsequent booster dose of vaccine administered as per the vaccine
manufacturer’s recommended schedule.



   (C)   (1)   Proof of vaccination shall be required upon request
by the Code Enforcement Officer, law enforcement or Department of Public
Works and shall be in the form of a tag, stamped with a number and the year
for which issued and a rabies vaccination certificate.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner or keeper
to fail to provide the dog or cat with a collar or harness to which a current
rabies tag issued under this section is securely attached. The collar or
harness, with attached tag, must be worn at all times.



      (3)   In addition to all other penalties as prescribed by law,
a dog or cat is subject to impoundment in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter if the dog or cat is found not to be wearing a currently valid
rabies tag.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use for any
animal a rabies vaccination tag issued for an animal other than the one using
the tag.



      (5)   All dogs or cats shipped or otherwise brought into the
town, except for exhibition purposes where the dogs or cats are confined and
not permitted to run at large, shall be securely confined and vaccinated
within 1 week after entry, and shall remain confined for 2 additional weeks
after vaccination unless accompanied by a certificate issued by a licensed
veterinarian showing that the dog or cat is apparently free from rabies and
has not been exposed to it and that the dog or cat has received a proper dose
of rabies vaccine not more than 6 months prior to the date of issuing the
certificate.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.29  BITTEN BY ANIMAL; NOTICE; CONFINEMENT.



   (A)   (1)   When a person has been bitten by an animal having
rabies or suspected of having rabies, it shall be the duty of that person, or
his or her parent or guardian if the person is a minor, and the person owning
the animal or having the animal in his or her possession or under his or her
control, to notify the County Health Director or person duly authorized by
the County Health Director immediately and give their names and addresses and
the owner or person having the animal in his or her possession or under his
or her control shall immediately securely confine it for 10 days at the
expense of the owner in the place as may be designated by the County Health
Director. It shall be the duty of every physician, after his or her first
professional attendance upon a person bitten by any animal having rabies or
suspected of having rabies, to report to the County Health Director the name,
age and sex of the person so bitten, and precise location of the bite wound,
within 24 hours after first having knowledge that the person was bitten. If
the owner of or a person who has in his or her possession or under his or her
control an animal having rabies or suspected of having rabies refuses to
confine the animal as required by this chapter or by G.S. § 130A-196, the
County Health Director at his or her discretion may order seizure of the
animal and its confinement for 10 days in a place the County Health Director
designates.



      (2)   Law enforcement agencies investigating animal bites
shall report the bites immediately to the County Health Director or person
duly authorized by the County Health Director and give the names and
addresses of the persons bitten and the owner of the animal.



      (3)   Animals confined pursuant to division (A) of this
section shall not be released from confinement within the town except by
written permission from the County Health Director.



      (4)   Animals confined pursuant to division (A) of this
section shall be confined at the expense of the owner or keeper.



      (5)   In the case of an animal whose owner or keeper is not
known, the animal shall be kept for the supervised confinement period
required by this chapter at the animal shelter or other place as designated
by the County Health Director.



      (6)   Badly wounded, diseased or suffering animals which are
suspected of having rabies shall be taken to the County Animal Control
Facility for disposition.



   (B)   Animals not vaccinated against rabies which are bitten by a
known or suspected rabid animal shall be taken immediately to the County
Animal Control Facility for disposition unless the owner or keeper agrees to
strict isolation of the animal at a veterinary hospital for a period of 6
months at the owner’s or keeper’s expense. If the animal has a current
rabies vaccination, the owner or keeper shall show proof of re-vaccination.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.30  AREA-WIDE EMERGENCY QUARANTINE.



   When the County Health Director declares an area-wide quarantine for a
period as he or she deems necessary and invokes emergency quarantine, no dog
or cat may be taken or shipped from the town without written permission of
the County Health Director. During a quarantine, the County Health Director,
law enforcement officers, Department of Public Works or persons duly
authorized by the County Health Director may seize and impound any dog or cat
found running at large in the town.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 94.31  UNLAWFUL KILLING OR RELEASING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or release any animal under
observation for rabies, or any animal under observation for biting a human,
or to remove an animal from town officials without written permission from
the County Health Director.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.32  FAILURE TO SURRENDER ANIMAL FOR CONFINEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to surrender any
animal for confinement as required in this chapter, when demand is made
therefor by the Code Enforcement Officer, Department of Public Works and law
enforcement or the County Health Director.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.33  IMPOUNDMENT; NOTICE; REDEMPTION.



   (A)   (1)   Any animal which appears to be lost, stray or
unwanted, or not wearing a currently valid dog identification tag and a
currently valid rabies vaccination tag, as required by state law or this
chapter, or not under restraint in violation of this chapter, may be seized,
impounded, confined in a humane manner and taken to the animal shelter.



      (2)   Impoundment of an animal shall not relieve the owner or
keeper from any penalty that may be imposed for violation of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   Upon impounding an animal, notice of impoundment
shall be posted at town hall for a minimum of 72 hours, beginning with the
time the animal is taken to the animal shelter, or until the animal is
disposed of. Reasonable effort shall be made to identify the owner or keeper
and inform the owner or keeper of the conditions whereby the animal may be
redeemed.



      (2)   The notice shall be prominently displayed on a bulletin
board of town hall listing the time and place of the taking of the animal,
together with the time and date of posting the notice, shall be stated in the
notice.



   (C)   Upon the impounding of any dog by the town, the Code
Enforcement Officer or other authorized person in charge thereof, shall make
and keep a record of the dog, showing the date confined, a brief description
of the animal, whether wearing vaccination and identification tags and if
listed for taxes, name and address of the owner if available from the tag or
other means and the nature, and date, of the final disposition made of the
dog.



   (D)   If the owner of any dog impounded shall appear within 4 days
after being notified, a period to commence from the date notice is
telephoned, mailed or posted, he or she shall be entitled to the possession
of his or her dog, provided that he or she satisfies the pound-master that he
or she has complied with all of the requirements of this chapter as to the
listing and payment of all dog license taxes, current and delinquent, rabies
vaccination and the proper collaring and tagging of the dogs; and upon the
further provision that the owner pays the sum of $10 to cover the costs
incurred by the town in impounding and maintaining the dog. The compliance of
the owner with the provisions of this section relative to the redemption of
an impounded dog shall in no way relieve or discharge the owner from any
criminal prosecution brought against him or her for the violation of the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 94.34  DESTRUCTION OR ADOPTION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMAL.



   (A)   If an impounded animal is not redeemed by the owner or keeper
within the period prescribed, it may be destroyed in a humane manner or shall
become the property of the animal shelter and offered for adoption to a
responsible adult who is willing to comply with this chapter and with
policies promulgated by the County Board of Health.



   (B)   No animal which has been impounded by reason of it being a
stray, unclaimed by its owner or keeper, shall be allowed to be adopted from
the animal shelter during a period of emergency rabies quarantine invoked by
special authorization of the County Health Director.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 94.35  LEASH REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to control his or
her dog(s).



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having
possession, charge, care, custody or control of any dog to fail to keep the
dog exclusively upon his or her own premises, or on the private premises of
another with prior consent provided, however, a dog may leave the premises
only if:



      (1)   A dog is under restraint by virtue of being in the
custody of a competent person and held by a leash, chain or other device of
sufficient strength to maintain control of the dog by that person;



      (2)   A dog is under direct control by virtue of being held
within a secure enclosure; or



      (3)   A person with a disability has the right to have a
service dog accompany that person in all places “to which the general
public is invited,” without a leash. This provision is written specifically
to cover people who are blind, deaf or mobility impaired, and only refers to
dogs, not service animals in general, provided:



         (a)   The dog must either be serving as, or be in
training to be, a guide, leader, listener or support dog.



         (b)   The owner must have proof that the dog has been or
is being trained as a service dog.



(Ord. passed 11-16-2004)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.36  WOUNDED, DISEASED OR UNWEANED ANIMALS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any animal seized
and impounded which is badly wounded, diseased (not a rabies suspect) or not
weaned and has no identification shall be taken immediately to the county
animal shelter.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 94.37  RESTRAINT AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an animal that
cannot be seized by reasonable means may be humanely restrained and taken
immediately to the county animal shelter.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 94.38  KEEPING STRAY ANIMALS; REQUIREMENTS, FAILURE TO SURRENDER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the town knowingly and
intentionally to harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement or otherwise
allow to remain on his or her property any animal which does not belong to
him or her, unless he or she has, within 72 hours from the time the animal
came into his or her possession, complied with all requirements of ownerships
as prescribed in this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender any
stray animal to the Code Enforcement Officer, law enforcement or Department
of Public Works upon demand.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.39  AUTHORIZED KILLING OF VICIOUS DOGS.



   Whenever any police officer or other authorized employee or agent of
the town discovers any dog running at large or in other violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the police officer, employee or agent shall
capture the dog and impound it in the town pound; provided, that if the dog
shows any symptoms of or is reasonably suspected of having rabies, or appears
of a vicious nature as to make it reasonably appear that the animal at the
time constitutes a menace to the safety of the one seeking to capture it, or
any other person, then the officer, agent or employee of the town, or other
person by his or her direction, may immediately shoot or otherwise kill the
same on the spot, in as humane a manner as practical, and with due regard to
the safety of other persons.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



Statutory references:



   Animal shelters, see G.S. § 160A-493



   Protection of livestock and poultry from ranging dogs, see G.S. §§
67-30 et seq.



§ 94.40  ENFORCEMENT; INTERFERENCE.



   (A)   This chapter may be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (B)   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the Animal
Control Officer or any agents or employees of the Animal Control Program, or
the Robeson County Public Health Director or his or her designee, in their
performance of any duties under this chapter, nor seek to release any animal
in the custody of the same or of the animal shelter unless otherwise
specifically authorized by law. The penalty for a violation of this section
shall be as set forth in § 94.99 below.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. Notwithstanding any civil penalties which may be
assessed under division (B) below, any person violating any of the provisions
of this chapter may be found guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor under G.S. §§
14-4 and 153A-123. For a continuing violation, each day’s violation shall
be deemed to be a separate offense.



   (B)   Civil penalties. In addition to, and not in lieu of the
criminal penalties and other remedies provided by this chapter or by state
law, a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may also subject
the offender to the civil penalties hereinafter set forth. The Animal Control
Officer shall be authorized to issue a citation to the person, giving notice
of the violation. Citations so issued may be delivered in person or mailed by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person charged
if the person cannot otherwise be readily located. The civil penalty or
penalties set forth in the citation must be paid within 7 days of the receipt
of the citation and shall be paid to the Town Clerk. If the person charged
fails to pay the civil penalty within the time prescribed, a criminal summons
shall be issued against the person charging a misdemeanor violation of this
chapter under division (A) above and, upon conviction, that person shall in
addition to the penalties prescribed for the misdemeanor violation of this
chapter be punished as the court prescribes for failure to pay the civil
penalties imposed hereby. The civil penalties for a violation of this chapter
shall be as follows:



      (1)   For a violation of any provision of this chapter, the
civil penalty shall be $25 for a first offense, $50 for a second and $100 for
a third or subsequent offense.



      (2)   For a violation of any provisions of § 94.40, the civil
penalty shall be $100 for a first offense, $250 for a second offense and $500
for a third or subsequent offense.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003; Am. Ord. 17-171, passed 6-20-2017)



CHAPTER 95:
PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   95.01   Purpose



   95.02   Definitions



   95.03   Rules and regulations



   95.04   Lease rental



   95.05   Enforcement



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for the public
health, safety and welfare in respect to the recreational activities,
programs and facilities of the Town of Fairmont. This chapter is designed to
maximize the enjoyment of recreation in Fairmont’s recreation facilities
and programs and offer protection from conditions, which could harm, injure
or offend any group or individual.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 95.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LOITERING.  If a person or group of people remain, linger, stand idly
about or wander about in a recreational park or facility in a manner
inconsistent with the intended use of the park or facility and/or causes the
delay or hindrance of the use of the recreational park or facility by others.



   PARK.  An area of land set aside for public use, as:



      (1)   A piece of land with few or no buildings within the Town
of Fairmont, maintained for recreational and ornamental purposes;



      (2)   Landscaped town square; or



      (3)   A large tract of land kept in a natural state and
usually reserved for the enjoyment and recreation of visitors.



   SERVICE ANIMAL.  Any guide dog, signal dog or other animal
individually trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 95.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The following shall be the rules and regulations of all the
recreational facilities of the Town of Fairmont including any park,
recreation area, playground, ballfield, picnic shelter or any other
recreation facility and the parking facilities thereof and shall be strictly
enforced.



   (A)   Use of park areas and facilities is “at your own risk.”
The Town of Fairmont assumes no responsibility or liability for misuse of
park or recreational facilities.



   (B)   Park and recreational facility hours of operation are as
follows: Monday through Sunday, sunup to sundown. It shall be unlawful for
any person to enter, use or remain within any park between the hours of
sundown to sunup unless a town-sponsored event is delayed or a written permit
therefor has been obtained from the Town Manager or his or her designee.



   (C)   Littering is expressly prohibited. All trash must be placed in
provided trash receptacles. Under no circumstances shall household garbage or
waste generated outside the park be permitted to be disposed of in the park
facilities or on park grounds.



(G.S. § 14-399)



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully mark, deface,
disfigure, injure, tamper with, display or remove any structure, equipment,
facilities or other property, either real or personal. (G.S. § 14-32)



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, cut, carve,
transplant or remove any tree or plant, injure the bark, pick the flowers or
seeds of any tree or plant, to dig or otherwise disturb grass areas in any
other way or injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.



(G.S. § 14-128)



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey all
traffic signs. All vehicles, including motorcycles, must be parked in parking
spaces provided. Service roads and walking paths are for pedestrians and town
vehicles only. It shall also be unlawful for failure to obey all traffic
officers or persons being authorized and instructed to direct traffic
whenever and wherever needed in the park.



   (G)   Vehicles left unattended for more than 24 hours on park
property will be towed away at the owner’s expense.



   (H)   Physically interfering with the lawful use of the park and its
facilities by others or insulting profane, indecent, abusive or threatening
language in a manner which would tend to provoke others to a breach of peace
is prohibited.



(G.S. § 14-132)



   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, use or possess
firearms, concealed and/or dangerous weapons of any nature within any park.
This section shall not apply to law enforcement officers when engaged in the
discharge of their duties.



   (J)   (1)   No person shall, within the confines of any
town-owned or town-operated recreation facility, park, or recreation areas:



         (a)   Bring upon, possess, consume, or display any beer,
wine, whiskey, or other intoxicating liquor or beverage or controlled
substances or the containers thereof;



         (b)   Sell, deliver, or attempt to sell or deliver any
alcoholic beverage or illegal substance; or



         (c)   Be reasonably suspected to be under the influence
of alcohol or any controlled substance or to fail to leave immediately upon
the request of a police officer, recreation personnel, town employee, or
volunteer in lawful control of the premises, if such request is based upon
suspicion that the person is under the influence of alcohol or any controlled
substance.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the organizer of a
community event or festival provides a copy of a valid ABC permit to the town
10 days prior to the date of the event, the Town Manager shall grant
permission for the event to be an "alcohol-approved event" by the issuance of
a writing setting forth the dates, hours, and boundaries within which alcohol
may be consumed.



      (3)   The following requirements apply to all alcohol-approved
events:



         (a)   The event must be open to the public at large;



         (b)   There can only be one event scheduled at the same
town-owned or town-operated recreation facility, park, or recreation area on
the same day when an alcohol-approved event is scheduled for that place on
that date. The first person to request the scheduling of an event shall be
given priority in scheduling;



         (c)   The requirements of all ABC rules and regulations
and state laws regarding possession and distribution of alcoholic beverages
must be met throughout the event; and



         (d)   The bounds of the event located in the Fairmont
Community Park for alcoholic beverages is limited to the half of the park
containing the Fairmont Development Corporation Pavilion.



      (4)   A person who is not an occupant of a motor vehicle and
who is old enough to be permitted by state law to consume or possess malt
beverages and /or unfortified wine shall be allowed to possess and consume
such during an alcohol-approved event in the designated area.



      (5)   The sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages at or on
town property is restricted to the hours and areas designated in the written
permission of the Town Manager. No person shall bring, carry, or transport
any alcoholic beverage into or onto any site in which such a special event is
taking place, except under the direction of the event organizer.



   (K)   The holding of any exhibition, ceremony or making of any
speech without permission from the Parks and Recreation Department will not
be allowed.



   (L)   Soliciting of any kind on park property is prohibited. This
includes the distribution of any handbills or circulars, or posting, placing
or erecting any bills, notices, paper or advertising devices not authorized
by the Parks and Recreation Department and/or the Town Manager.



   (M)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell food, beverages or
merchandise or solicit donations for any individual, group, club, company or
corporation without first obtaining a permit from the Town Manager or his or
her designee.



   (N)   Animals are strictly prohibited. This section shall not apply
to service animals used by handicapped persons.



   (O)   Skateboards, skates, bicycles, all-terrain vehicles,
motorcycles, dirt bikes, go-carts, golf carts or other motorized vehicles are
prohibited. This shall not apply to authorized emergency and maintenance
vehicles, nor to motorized wheelchairs and similar vehicles used by
handicapped persons. All other motorized-type vehicles must be parked in
parking spaces provided. Bicycles must be parked in the bicycle racks
provided.



   (P)   It shall be unlawful for any person to boat, swim, bathe, wade
or fish in the Old Field Canal.



   (Q)   No open fires or campfires are allowed. All fires must be
contained in the park grills, which are designed for charcoal only. Personal
grills in good operating condition may be used in designated picnic areas
only. No grills or other cooking appliances shall be used under shelters.



   (R)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, have in his or
her possession, set off or otherwise cause to explode, discharge or burn any
firecrackers, other fireworks, explosives or non-explosives, such as
sparklers or discharge them or throw them into any area from land or highway
adjacent thereto.



   (S)   No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, or other flammable material within any
park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.



   (T)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a picnic area or
shelter before the grill fire is completely extinguished and before all trash
in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is
placed in receptacles provided. If no receptacles are available, then refuse
and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the user to be properly
disposed of elsewhere.



   (U)   The use of individual picnic sites and picnic shelters,
together with tables and benches, shall follow the rule of “First Come,
First Served,” unless a picnic reservation has been issued according to
regulations adopted by the Board of Commissioners.



   (V)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in any area
without first obtaining a permit from the Town Manager or his or her
designee. No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter
for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in any park
after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or
that could be used for that purpose, such as a camper, RV, motor home or the
like, without a permit obtained from the Town Manager or his or her designee.



   (W)   Erecting tents, canopies or nailing decorations to park
structures is not allowed without permission from the Parks and Recreation
Department and/or the Town Manager.



   (X)   Fairground activities, flea market, garage sales and the like
are not allowed without proper approval and permit from the Parks and
Recreation Department and/or the Town Manager.



   (Y)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter an area posted as
“Closed to the Public” or reserved to other individuals.



   (Z)   Hunting of any kind is prohibited.



   (AA)   Hitting golf balls is prohibited.



   (BB)   Audio and musical devices should be operated at a volume not
to disturb other visitors, with the exception of Parks and Recreation
activities and authorized events.



   (CC)   No rock or other projectile throwing is allowed.



   (DD)   The using of any area or facility for commercial purposes are
prohibited, without prior approval by the Parks and Recreation Department.



   (EE)   Any section or part of any park, recreation area or facility
may be declared closed to the public by the Town of Fairmont at any time and
for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated
intervals (daily or otherwise) and closed to certain uses.



   (FF)   Any requests for special events or use of the parks and
recreational facilities shall be presented to and approved by the Town
Manager or his or her designee. If these requests are approved, a permit will
be issued and the Town Manager or his or her designee will assess any fees.



   (GG)   The Town Manager and the Recreation Director have the
authority and responsibility to recommend rules and regulations governing the
use and maintenance of parks and recreational facilities to the Board of
Commissioners for their consideration. Rules and regulations become effective
as adopted by the Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002; Am. Ord. 14-155, passed 6-17-2014)  Penalty, see §
95.99



§ 95.04  LEASE RENTAL.



   Any person or persons entering into a lease or rental agreement of any
recreation facility or recreation area agrees to hold harmless the Town of
Fairmont. The sponsor shall assume full responsibility. Rates shall be
charged, and a rate schedule shall be updated and approved by the Fairmont
Board of Commissioners. Failure to abide by the listed rules and regulations
will result in forfeiture of future rental use of the town’s facilities.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Users of all parks and recreation facilities shall adhere to
not only this chapter, but also to any rules and regulations set by the Town
of Fairmont Board of Commissioners.



   (B)   The Police Department shall have the authority to eject from
any facility any person acting in violation of the rules and regulations
posted.



   (C)   It is prohibited to interfere with or hinder any Town of
Fairmont employee or contracted individual from performing their official
duties.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The Town of Fairmont Police Department may
issue citations or take other legal measures as may be allowed to enforce the
terms and provisions of the rules and regulations set forth for the Fairmont
Community Park.



   (B)   Any violation of this chapter shall be an infraction
punishable by a fine of not more than $50, plus court costs or imprisonment
for not more than 30 days, or both, in the discretion of the court, as
provided by G.S. § 14-4.



   (C)   If any violation continues, each day’s violation may be
considered a separate offense.



   (D)   Flagrant misuse of parks and recreation facilities will result
in a forfeiture of future use or reservation privileges.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



CHAPTER 96:  SIGNS



Section



   96.01 - 96.50 Reserved



   96.51   Statement of intent and definition



   96.52   Sign required for business



   96.53   Permit required for sign; fee



   96.54   Time frame for compliance; extensions



   96.55   Responsibility for compliance; exception



   96.56   Maintenance of signs; exemption from fees



   96.57   Prohibited signs



   96.58   Exception



   96.59   Removal of prohibited signs; enforcement



   96.60   Removal of signs from closed businesses; enforcement



§§ 96.01 - 96.50  RESERVED.



§ 96.51  STATEMENT OF INTENT AND DEFINITION.



   (A)   The intent of these regulations in regulating signs as
specified in this chapter and elsewhere through the code of ordinances is:



      (1)   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of
communication in the town through size and location appropriate to each
district;



      (2)   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment by
limiting the number and size of signs;



      (3)   To maintain and enhance the town’s ability to attract
sources of economic growth and development;



      (4)   To promote vehicular and pedestrian traffic safety;



      (5)   To minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on
nearby property;



      (6)   To regulate the use of sign elements that detract from
or are not in keeping with the history of the town, such as luminescent or
iridescent paints;



      (7)   To ensure that non-locally-owned businesses are not
placed at an unfair advantage and to prevent homogenization of the town’s
landscape by regulating distinctive shapes and colors such as roofs when used
as branding for franchises or chains;



      (8)   To assist visitors in locating natural, historic and
cultural attractions of the town through clear and consistent signage and
other way-finding tools.



   (B)   “Sign” in this chapter means any outdoor notice containing
words, letters, figures, numerals, emblems, devices, trademarks or trade
names or combinations thereof, by which anything is made known such as the
designation of a firm, corporation, profession, business, commodity or
product, and includes, but is not limited to, business signs, billboards, and
outdoor advertising structures. This definition may be refined by the context
in which the word is used.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.52  SIGN REQUIRED FOR BUSINESS.



   Prior to commencing business, every enterprise doing business within
the town shall have a valid and current business sign in compliance with this
chapter.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.53  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR SIGN; FEE.



   (A)   No sign shall hereafter be erected or attached to, suspended
from, or supported on a building or structure nor shall any existing sign be
structurally altered, remodeled or relocated until a zoning permit for same
has been issued by the Zoning Administrator, except as otherwise provided
herein.



   (B)   Unless otherwise stated herein, the zoning permit fee shall be
$25.



   (C)   Signs existing at the time of enactment of this chapter are
exempted from this requirement.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.54  TIME FRAME FOR COMPLIANCE; EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, businesses not in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall have 90 days from the
date of the adoption of this chapter to come into compliance.



   (B)   Businesses legitimately requiring additional time may make
application to the Town Manager for extensions of 30 days, to a maximum of 90
days. Should the Town Manager deny any request for extension, the business
owner shall have 10 business days from the date of denial to come into
compliance.



   (C)   Signs which violate § 96.56(A)(2) or § 96.57(A) or (D), must
meet the zoning requirements found in § 154.006(B)(3).



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.55  RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   It is the responsibility of each business owner to comply with
this chapter and § 154.008.



   (B)   In the absence of compliance by the owner of the business, it
shall become the responsibility of the owner of that business’s building to
ensure compliance.



   (C)   In the instance of determined legitimate hardship, the Code
Enforcement Officer may provide an extension in writing of no more than 90
days for compliance.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.56  MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS; EXEMPTION FROM FEES.



   (A)   All signs shall be maintained so as to be in good condition,
and:



      (1)   If mechanical, they shall be in proper working order;



      (2)   Conform with the character of the business district or
neighborhood in which situated; otherwise, they must meet the zoning
requirements found in § 154.006(B)(3).



   (B)   The following sign deficiencies shall be cause for notice to
repair:



      (1)   Broken signs, and signs missing letters or numbers;



      (2)   Rusted metal signs;



      (3)   Faded signs, if at least 50% of a sign is illegible.



   (C)   Existing businesses that require zoning or building permits to
make alterations or repairs in order to come into compliance with this
section shall be exempt from paying the zoning fee as required by § 96.53
herein.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.57  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs shall be prohibited within the town:



   (A)   Off-premise signs, with the exception of historic signs.



   (B)   A sign which is a copy or imitation of an official highway
sign and carries the words “STOP” or “DANGER.”



   (C)   Third-party advertising signs.



   (D)   A sign that obstructs corner visibility or visibility at a
driveway between a height of 3 and 8 feet within the triangular area formed
by the intersecting street right-of-way lines (and/or driveway entrance) and
a straight line connecting points on said street lines (and/or driveway
entrance) each of which is 25 feet distant from the point of intersection.
Vertical elements will be allowed so long as no more than 5% of the area
between 3 and 8 feet is obstructed on all rights-of-way (and/or driveway
entrances). (See §§ 153.53 and 154.028 for additional requirements of this
nature.)



   (E)   A sign posted on any telephone or electric light poles or on
any tree along any street.



   (F)   A sign that obstructs ingress and egress to any window, door,
fire escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to provide light, air,
ingress, or egress for any room or building as required by law.



   (G)   A sign that violates any provision of any law of the State of
North Carolina relative to outdoor advertising.



   (H)   A sign or window display which contains, employs, or utilizes
lights or lighting which rotates, flashes, lights intermittently, moves, or
alternates, or gives the appearance of the same.



   (I)   A sign located within a public right-of-way or within 30 feet
of the centerline of any public thoroughfare, except as provided herein.



   (J)   Any sign using luminescent, reflective, Day-Glo, iridescent,
electro-luminescent, laser, and similar paints and materials on buildings,
structures and signs visible from any public right-of-way. This restriction
shall not apply to street identification signs, government installed signs,
official traffic control signs and signs used for evacuation and emergency
purposes.



   (K)   Banners used in lieu of permitted signs for longer than 2
weeks (state law prohibits banners across state rights-of-way).



   (L)   A sign, including a political sign, erected to serve a
temporary purpose which is not removed within 60 days.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.58  EXCEPTION.



   The following shall be excluded from the regulations set out in this
chapter:



   (A)   Signs not exceeding 1 square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post office box numbers, names of occupants of premises or
other identification of premises not having commercial connotations.



   (B)   Flags and insignias of any government, except when displayed
in connection with commercial promotion.



   (C)   Legal notices, identification, information or directional
signs erected or required by governmental bodies.



   (D)   Directional signs not exceeding 20 square feet in area and
bearing no advertising matter other than the name and logo of a business.



   (E)   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings,
except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights.



   (F)   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter.



   (G)   Signs determined by the Planning Board to be of an historic
nature.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.59  REMOVAL OF PROHIBITED SIGNS; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   All signs prohibited by § 96.57 of this chapter shall be
removed within 30 days from the enactment of this chapter, unless otherwise
herein specified.



   (B)   In the event that the business’s owner fails to remove his
or her sign as proscribed herein above, it shall be the responsibility of the
building’s owner to ensure the sign’s removal.



   (C)   The building’s owner shall be given a notice in writing by
the Code Enforcement Officer that the sign has not been removed, and will be
given 15 business days from the date of receipt of the letter to comply with
the order.



   (D)   If the building owner fails to comply with the order of the
Code Enforcement Officer within the time proscribed, the town shall cause the
sign to be removed or renovated, and shall bill the building owner for the
cost of remediating the violation.



   (E)   If the building owner fails to pay the bill for remediation
within 30 days, the town may initiate a civil action in the nature of a debt
to collect for the costs of remediation.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 96.60  REMOVAL OF SIGNS FROM CLOSED BUSINESSES; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The owner(s) of any establishment that goes out of business
shall remove that business’s signs from the building within 15 business
days of the business’s closure.



   (B)   In the event that the business’s owner fails to remove his
or her sign as proscribed herein above, it shall be the responsibility of the
building’s owner to ensure the sign’s removal.



   (C)   The building’s owner shall be given a notice in writing by
the Code Enforcement Officer that the sign has not been removed, and will be
given 15 business days from the date of receipt of the letter to comply with
the order.



   (D)   If the building owner fails to comply with the order of the
Code Enforcement Officer within the time proscribed, the town shall cause the
sign to be removed or renovated, and shall bill the building owner for the
cost of remediating the violation.



   (E)   If the building owner fails to pay the bill for remediation
within 30 days, the town may initiate a civil action in the nature of a debt
to collect for the costs of remediation.



(Ord. 10-129, passed 6-15-2010)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      111.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE



      112.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



      113.   GAME ROOMS



      114.   MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE YARDS



      115.   COMPUTER GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS



CHAPTER 110:
GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Regulations




   110.01   Tree cutting and trimming



   110.02   Weekly list of attractions required from motion picture
houses




Privilege License Taxes




   110.15   Definitions



   110.16   Unlawful to conduct business without license



   110.17   Exemptions



   110.18   License tax upon certain trades and business operations



   110.19   Tax Collector designated to certain tasks



   110.20   Schedule



   110.21   Application



   110.22   Effect of license



   110.23   Term; expiration date



   110.24   Proration of tax



   110.25   Collection of unpaid tax



   110.26   Display of license



   110.27   License valid only for person and place named therein



   110.28   Separate tax for separate place of business



   110.29   Multiple businesses



   110.30   Seasonal businesses



   110.31   Sale or change in place of business



   110.32   No abatement of license tax



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 110.01  TREE CUTTING AND TRIMMING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or trim trees for
compensation within the town unless that person has a privilege license.



   (B)   The person shall immediately remove trimmings and limbs and
trash resulting therefrom.



(1988 Code, § 12-1)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 110.02  WEEKLY LIST OF ATTRACTIONS REQUIRED FROM MOTION PICTURE HOUSES.



   Every person conducting any show or motion picture house shall furnish
to the Tax Collector or other officer designated by the Board a list of
attractions of the house for each week not later than Tuesday of the
preceding week.



(1988 Code, § 12-2)



PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES



§ 110.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENT.  The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer or
distributor.



   BUSINESS.  Any trade, occupation, profession, business, franchise or
calling of any kind, subject by the provisions of this subchapter to a
license tax.



   ENGAGED OR ENGAGING IN BUSINESS WITHIN THE TOWN.  When he or she is
engaged in business activity of any type, either as owner or operator of a
business, by maintaining a business within the town or by picking up or
delivering merchandise or performing services within the town.



   FISCAL YEAR.  The period beginning with July 1 and ending with June 30
next following.



   QUARTER.  Any 3 consecutive months.



   SEASONAL IN NATURE.  A business that is taxed by this subchapter on an
annual basis, but is operated within the town for less than 6 months of the
year.



(1988 Code, § 12-16)



§ 110.16  UNLAWFUL TO CONDUCT BUSINESS WITHOUT LICENSE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or his or her agent or servant to
engage in or carry on a business in the town for which there is required a
license, without first having paid the license tax and obtained the license.
For the purpose of this section the opening of a place of business or
offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing
in furtherance of the business shall be construed to be engaging in or
carrying on a business. Each day that a person shall engage in or carry on
the business as aforesaid shall be construed to be a separate offense.



(1988 Code, § 12-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Privilege license taxes generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-211 et seq.,
105-33 et seq.



§ 110.17  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Any person who engages in business within this town for
religious, educational or charitable purposes may be exempt from paying any
privilege license tax levied by this subchapter upon application for the
exemption and review of the exemption application.



   (B)   Any blind person engaging in business within this town shall
be exempt from paying any privilege license tax levied by this subchapter



(1988 Code, § 12-18)



§ 110.18  LICENSE TAX UPON CERTAIN TRADES AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS.



   In addition to the tax on property, as otherwise provided for, and
under the power and authority conferred in the laws of the state, there shall
be levied and collected annually or more often where provided for, a
privilege license tax on trades, professions, business operations,
exhibitions, circuses and all subjects authorized to be licensed, as set out
in this subchapter. All licenses shall be a personal privilege and shall not
be transferable. Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to
prevent the Board from imposing from time to time, as it may see fit, license
taxes as are not specifically defined in this subchapter, or from increasing
or decreasing the amount of any special license tax, or from prohibiting or
regulating the businesses subject to the provisions of ordinances.



(1988 Code, § 12-20)



§ 110.19  TAX COLLECTOR DESIGNATED TO CERTAIN TASKS.



   (A)   The town Tax Collector is hereby designated as the proper
official to collect license taxes and to issue licenses.



   (B)   The Tax Collector shall make any investigation necessary to
determine the tax liability of persons engaged in business within the town.
If necessary, the Tax Collector is authorized to enter upon the premises of
any business during normal business hours for the purpose of determining
whether this subchapter has been complied with.



(1988 Code, § 12-20)



§ 110.20  SCHEDULE.



   The privilege license taxes levied by this subchapter shall be in the
amount and on the trades, professions, agencies, business operations and
other subjects set out in the schedule of license taxes adopted by ordinance
which is on file in the town office.



(1988 Code, § 12-21)



§ 110.21  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Every person desiring to obtain a license for the privilege of
engaging in a business within this town shall make application therefor in
writing to the Tax Collector.



   (B)   The application, to be made on a form provided by the Tax
Collector, shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Name and nature of the business for which the license is
sought;



      (2)   The address where the business is conducted, and a
mailing address for the business, if different;



      (3)   The name and address of the person filling out the
application, and his or her relationship to the business;



      (4)   The gross receipts of the business for the most recently
completed tax year, if applicable; and



      (5)   Any other information which the Tax Collector determines
to be necessary.



(1988 Code, § 12-22)



§ 110.22  EFFECT OF LICENSE.



   The issuance of a license under this subchapter does not authorize the
carrying on of a business for which additional licenses or qualifications are
required by state or local law, nor does the issuance of a license prevent
the town from enacting additional regulations applicable to the licensee.



(1988 Code, § 12-23)



§ 110.23  TERM; EXPIRATION DATE.



   (A)   All privilege license taxes shall be for the fiscal year in
which the tax is due, unless otherwise specified, and shall expire on June 30
of each fiscal year.



   (B)   The privilege license tax is due on July 1 of each year.



   (C)   If, however, a person begins a business after July 1, the tax
for that year must be paid before the business is begun.



(1988 Code, § 12-24)



§ 110.24  PRORATION OF TAX.



   Except when a tax is based on gross receipts, if a business is begun
after January 31 but before July 1, the privilege license tax shall be 1/2 of
the amount otherwise due.



(1988 Code, § 12-25)



§ 110.25  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAX.



   (A)   If a person begins or continues to engage in a business taxed
under this subchapter without payment of the required privilege license tax,
the Tax Collector may use either of the following methods to collect the
unpaid tax:



      (1)   The remedy of levy and sale or attachment and
garnishment, in accordance with G.S. § 160A-207; or



      (2)   The remedy of levy and sale of real and personal
property of the taxpayer in accordance with G.S. § 105-109(d).



   (B)   Any person who begins or continues to engage in a business
taxed under this subchapter without payment of tax is liable for an
additional tax of 5% of the original tax due for each 30 days or portion
thereof that the tax is delinquent.



(1988 Code, § 12-26)



§ 110.26  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Each person issued a license under this subchapter shall post the
license in a conspicuous place in his or her regular place of business. If
there is no regular place of business, the license shall be kept where it may
be inspected at appropriate times by the town Tax Collector. If a machine or
other item of personal property is licensed, the license shall be affixed to
the machine or item.



(1988 Code, § 12.27)



§ 110.27  LICENSE VALID ONLY FOR PERSON AND PLACE NAMED THEREIN.



   A license issued for the privilege of conducting a business is only
valid for the business conducted at the place and by the licensee named
therein.



(1988 Code, § 12-28)



§ 110.28  SEPARATE TAX FOR SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   Unless otherwise provided by state law or by the privilege license tax
schedule, if a person engages in a business in 2 or more separate places, a
separate license tax shall be required for each place of business. For
purposes of this section, if a person engages in the same business at 2 or
more locations within the town, which locations are contiguous, communicate
with and open directly into each other and are operated as a unit, the person
is liable for only 1 license tax.



(1988 Code, § 12-29)



§ 110.29  MULTIPLE BUSINESSES.



   If a person is engaged in more than 1 business or business activity
made subject to a privilege license tax under this subchapter, the person
shall pay the license tax prescribed for each business, even if the
businesses are conducted at the same business location.



(1988 Code, § 12-30)



§ 110.30  SEASONAL BUSINESSES.



   Except when a tax is based on gross receipts, a person engaged in a
business which is seasonal in nature is liable for 1/2 of the amount of
privilege license tax otherwise due.



(1988 Code, § 12-31)



§ 110.31  SALE OR CHANGE IN PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   If a person holding a license required by this subchapter
sells his or her business to another then a new license is necessary, unless
a special permit to continue business under the original license is obtained
from the Board.



(1988 Code, § 12-32)



   (B)   (1)   If a person who has obtained a license for a business
taxed under this subchapter desires to move from 1 business location to
another within the town, the license which has been issued shall be valid for
the remainder of the license year at this new location, and no additional tax
need be paid.



      (2)   Within a reasonable time after the change in location,
however, the person shall inform the Tax Collector of the change in address.



(1988 Code, § 12-33)



§ 110.32  NO ABATEMENT OF LICENSE TAX.



   No privilege license tax shall be abated nor shall any refund of any
part thereof be made in any case where the licensee discontinues his or her
business before the end of the period for which the license was issued.



(Prior Code, § 12-34)



CHAPTER 111:
VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section




Taxicabs




   111.01   Operation; generally



   111.02   Certificate of necessity



   111.03   Liability insurance required



   111.04   Rates and fares to be posted



   111.05   Fares prescribed



   111.06   Annual license required; application



   111.07   Chief of Police and application



   111.08   Issuance and revocation of permit



   111.09   Posting of permit



   111.10   Photograph and fingerprints to be attached to permit



TAXICABS



§ 111.01  OPERATION; GENERALLY.



   No person shall operate a taxicab business in the town without a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Board of
Commissioners.



(1988 Code, § 21-1)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal regulation of taxicabs, see G.S. § 160A-304



§ 111.02  CERTIFICATE OF NECESSITY.



   (A)   Any person holding a certificate of necessity who goes out of
the taxicab business and ceases to operate his or her taxicab for a period of
90 days shall immediately lose his or her certificate, which shall be
automatically cancelled.



   (B)   No holder of a certificate of necessity may transfer or sell
the certificate.



(1988 Code, § 21.2)



§ 111.03  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   When an application for a certificate under this subchapter is
approved, the applicant shall be required to obtain a policy from an
insurance carrier authorized to do business in this state. The insurance
policy shall be conditioned on the operator’s responding in damages for any
liability incurred on account of any injury to persons or damage to property
and shall be in at least the minimum amounts required by state law. The
insurance policy shall be filed with the Board of Commissioners as a
condition precedent to the operation of any taxicab.



(1988 Code, § 21-3)



Statutory reference:



   Financial responsibility of taxicab operators, see G.S. § 160A-304



§ 111.04  RATES AND FARES TO BE POSTED.



   Every taxicab operated within the town or operated between the town and
points unincorporated within a radius of 5 miles of the town shall have at
all times prominently posted and displayed in the taxicab, so as to be
visible to the passengers therein, the rates and fares for the use of the cab.



(1988 Code, § 21-4)



Statutory reference:



   Schedule of fares to be posted, see G.S. § 160A-304



§ 111.05  FARES PRESCRIBED.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall fix or charge a greater or lesser
rate of fare for a taxicab service than the following:



         (a)   For the first mile, or fraction thereof - the
current schedule of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk.



         (b)   For each succeeding 1/10 mile or fraction thereof,
beyond the town limits - the current schedule of costs and fees are on file
with the Town Clerk.



         (c)   For each hour of waiting time, or fraction thereof
- the current schedule of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk.



         (d)   For each stop, not exceeding 10 minutes per stop -
the current schedule of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk.



         (e)   For each bag of groceries - the current schedule
of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk.



         (f)   For each bag of luggage, of any kind whatsoever -
the current schedule of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk.



      (2)   The above rates apply for 1 or 2 passengers only, and
any additional passengers shall be $1.00 extra. A card, printed in an
appropriate fashion, shall prominently display the above rate schedule in the
plain view of any and all passengers in the taxicab.



   (B)   Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in
motion, beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has been called,
or the time consumed while standing or waiting at the direction of the
passenger, but no charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency or
breakdown of the taxicab or for time consumed by premature response to a call.



(1988 Code, § 21.5)



§ 111.06  ANNUAL LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   (1)   Every person before operating any taxicab within the
town shall apply to the Tax Collector for an annual license and shall secure
from the Tax Collector an annual license for the privilege of operating each
taxicab. He or she shall pay for the annual license a tax in the sum required
under this subchapter.



      (2)   The license shall be valid from July 1 of each year to
June 30 of the following year.



(1988 Code, § 21-6)



   (B)   No person shall drive any taxicab carrying passengers for hire
from place to place within the town or between town and unincorporated places
within 5 miles of the town unless that person shall first have applied to and
secured from the Town Manager a permit to operate a taxicab.



(1988 Code, § 21-7)



   (C)   The application for a permit to operate a taxicab shall be
made upon blanks furnished by the town for the purpose and shall state the
name, address, physical condition, physical description, former employers,
court record and license number. The application shall be signed and sworn to
by the applicant. The applicant shall further appear at the Police Department
for the purpose of having his or her fingerprints taken, the impression of
which shall constitute a part of his or her application. The applicant shall
also furnish a photograph of himself or herself made within 30 days of his or
her application. The dimensions of the photograph shall be 2-1/2 inches by
2-1/2 inches or 3 inches by 3 inches, full face; and this photograph shall be
a part of his or her application.



(1988 Code, § 21-8)



Statutory references:



   Municipal authority to license and regulate operators of taxicabs who
operate within a city or



   between a city and unincorporated places within 5 miles of a city, see
G.S. § 20-37



   Privilege license tax imposed on taxi operators, see G.S. §§
160A-211, 20-97



§ 111.07  CHIEF OF POLICE AND APPLICATION.



   The Chief of Police shall be charged with the duty of investigating the
facts stated in the application and shall report his or her findings and
recommendations to the Town Manager.



(1988 Code, § 21-9)



§ 111.08  ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall issue a permit to the applicant to
drive a taxicab if he or she finds that the applicant:



      (1)   Has not been convicted of a felony in this state or any
other state within the past 5 years;



      (2)   Has not been convicted within the past 5 years of
violation of any federal or state law relating to the use, possession or sale
of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs, or of any law
relating to prostitution;



      (3)   Has no addiction to or habitual use of alcoholic
beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs;



      (4)   Is a citizen of the United States;



      (5)   Has not been an habitual violator of traffic laws and
ordinances during the 5 years prior to the application; and



      (6)   Has passed a physical examination by a licensed
physician within 30 days of the date of the application.



(1988 Code, § 21-10)



   (B)   A permit to drive a taxicab may be revoked by the Town Manager
at any time after its issuance for the following reasons:



      (1)   The holder is convicted of a felony;



      (2)   The holder is convicted of a violation of any federal or
state statute relating to the sale, use or possession of alcoholic beverages,
narcotic or barbiturate drugs or prostitution;



      (3)   The holder becomes an addict or habitual user of
alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs; or



      (4)   The holder is habitually convicted of violations of
traffic laws or ordinances.



   (C)   (1)   For the first offense of division (B)(1) above,
conviction of a felony, the permit shall be revoked for a period of 3 years.
For a second conviction the permit shall be revoked permanently.



      (2)   For a conviction of any of the offenses set forth in
division (B)(2) or (B)(3) above, the permit shall be revoked for 3 years.



      (3)   For 3 convictions by the holder of violations of traffic
laws within a 12-month period, the holder of a permit shall be adjudged to an
habitual violator, and the permit shall be revoked for a period of 3 years.



(1988 Code, § 21-11)



Statutory reference:



   Grounds for refusal of permit, see G.S. § 160A-304



§ 111.09  POSTING OF PERMIT.



   At all times while operating his or her taxicab, or a taxicab belonging
to any other person, the driver shall prominently post and display so as to
be visible to the passengers therein his or her permit to drive a taxicab.



(1988 Code, § 21-12)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to require posting of permit, see G.S. § 160A-304(a)



§ 111.10  PHOTOGRAPH AND FINGERPRINTS TO BE ATTACHED TO PERMIT.



   Each permit to drive a taxicab shall have attached thereto the picture
and fingerprints of the person to whom the permit is issued. The photographs
and fingerprints shall be so attached to the permit as to be visible to
anyone examining the front of the permit.



(1988 Code, § 21-13)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to require posting of identification in cab, see G.S.
§ 160A-304(a)



CHAPTER 112:
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Privilege license required



   112.03   Registration



   112.04   Badge



   112.05   Peddling upon public streets



   112.06   Soliciting subscriptions



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER.  Any person who transports goods from place to place and
sells or offers for sale goods or who, without traveling from place to place,
sells or offers for sale any goods from any vehicle or device; provided, that
any person who separates the acts of sale and delivery for the purpose of
evading the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a peddler.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person who travels from place to place taking or
offering to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for
personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are
displayed or money is collected in advance.



   TRANSIENT VENDOR.  Any person who engages in a temporary business of
selling and delivering goods and who, for this purpose, uses or occupies any
building or premises; provided, that no person shall be relieved from
complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by conducting a
transient business in association with any permanently established merchant.



(1988 Code, § 12-51)



§ 112.02  PRIVILEGE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any peddler, solicitor or transient vendor must, prior to performing or
conducting any business activity including but not limited to the sale of or
offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or service, obtain a
privilege license in accordance with Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances.



(1988 Code, § 12-52)



§ 112.03  REGISTRATION.



   Each and every person doing business in the town as a peddler,
solicitor or transient vendor shall file with the Clerk on a form to be
provided for the purpose a statement setting forth the following information:



   (A)   Name and address of individual filing statement;



   (B)   Name and address of principal or employer if individual is an
agent or employee;



   (C)   Credentials showing relationship of agent and employee;



   (D)   Description of individual filing statement including height,
weight, sex, age, color and distinguishing characteristics if any;



   (E)   The goods to be sold or offered for sale or the type of
services to be rendered;



   (F)   The period of time during which the business will be carried
on in the town;



   (G)   Description of automobile or other vehicle to be used in the
business, including the make, model, body style, color and license number; and



   (H)   The state license number.



(1988 Code, § 12-53)



§ 112.04  BADGE.



   (A)   The Clerk shall issue to each person filing the statement
required by § 112.03 a badge substantially as follows:



      20_____  Town of______________    No._______



   SOLICITOR’S BADGE



      _____________has registered with the Town Clerk as required by
Ordinance.



      (Name)      ________



               (Date)



            _________________________



            Town Clerk



   (B)   During the time the person is engaged in soliciting, the badge
shall be worn on the front of his or her outer garment in a manner as to be
conspicuous.



(1988 Code, § 12-54)



§ 112.05  PEDDLING UPON PUBLIC STREETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell fish, oysters or
other freshwater food or seafood from wagons, trucks or other vehicles on any
of the public streets or public property.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle any goods, wares
or merchandise upon any public street or public property.



(1988 Code, § 12-55)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.06  SOLICITING SUBSCRIPTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit subscriptions to
newspapers, magazines, periodicals and the like, wherein premiums or gifts
are given to obtain subscription or to induce persons to subscribe to same
unless the solicitor obtains permission from the Town Manager and pays the
Tax Collector a fee fixed by the Board for each day that subscriptions are
solicited.



(1988 Code, § 12-56)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 113:  GAME ROOMS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Rules of operation of game room



   113.03   Adult manager on premises required



   113.04   Licensee responsible for acts and conduct of interested
parties



   113.05   License required



   113.06   Application; form, filing, contents, fee and investigation



   113.07   Determination of application by Board of Commissioners



   113.08   Issuance and display of license



   113.09   Notification of change in application information



   113.10   Voidance



   113.11   Grounds for revocation



   113.12   Notice and hearing prior to revocation or denial



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEPARTMENT .   The Police Department of the town.



   GAME ROOM.  Any place of business that operates 1 or more mechanical
games, video gaming machines, pay devices, coin-operated machines, video
games, pinball machines and other computer, electronic or mechanical devices
that are operated and played for amusement, including any machine that
involves the use of skill or dexterity to solve problems or tasks or to make
varying scores or tallies and that do not emit, issue, display, print out or
otherwise record any receipt, paper, coupon, token, other form of record
which is capable of being redeemed, exchanged or repurchased for cash, cash
equivalent or prizes or reward free replays.



   INTERESTED PARTY.  Any person who is an application for a license or
who is an employee of any applicant for a license, any person who is a
partner in a partnership which is an applicant for a license and any person,
partnership or corporation which is an officer, director or principal
stockholder of a corporation which is an applicant for a license.



   VIDEO GAMING MACHINE.



      (1)   A slot machine as defined in G.S. § 14-306(a); and



      (2)   Other forms of electrical, mechanical or computer games
such as:



         (a)   A video poker game or any other kind of video
playing card game;



         (b)   A video bingo game;



         (c)   A video craps game;



         (d)   A video keno game;



         (e)   A video lotto game;



         (f)   Eight liner;



         (g)   Pot of Gold; or



         (h)   A video game based on or involving the random or
chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers or symbols not
dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player.



(Ord. passed 11-16-2004)



§ 113.02  RULES OF OPERATION OF GAME ROOM.



   (A)   All game rooms shall be closed during school hours.



   (B)   All game rooms shall be closed from 11:00 p.m. until 8:00 a.m.
daily.



   (C)   Games rooms which house exclusively machines that involve the
use of skill or dexterity to solve problems or tasks or to make varying
scores or tallies and that do not emit, issue, display, print out or
otherwise record any receipt, paper, coupon, token, other form of record
which is capable of being redeemed, exchanged or repurchased for cash, cash
equivalent or prizes or reward free replays may be open on Sunday from 2:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.



   (D)   Game rooms which house any machine(s) that do emit, issue,
display, print out or otherwise record any receipt, paper, coupon, token,
other form of record which is capable of being redeemed, exchanged or
repurchased for cash, cash equivalent or prizes or reward free replays may
not open on Sunday.



   (E)   No playing on any game shall be allowed during the times when
game rooms are required by this chapter to remain closed.



   (F)   No minor (17 years of age or younger) shall be allowed to
operate a video gaming machine.



   (G)   All game room businesses must comply with requirements of G.S.
§§ 14-289 et seq.



(Ord. passed 11-16-2004)



§ 113.03  ADULT MANAGER ON PREMISES REQUIRED.



   There must be an adult 18 years of age or older managing the business
on the premises of every game room during the hours of operation at all times.



(1988 Code, § 12-78)



§ 113.04  LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE FOR ACTS AND CONDUCT OF INTERESTED PARTIES.



   The acts and conduct of any interested party in the conduct of the
business of operating a game room shall be deemed to be the acts and conduct
of the licensee.



(1988 Code, § 12-79)



§ 113.05  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No interested party shall operate a game room unless the party shall
have first applied for and received the regulatory license provided for by
this chapter. It shall be unlawful to operate a game room within the town
without a regulatory license as required by this section, or in any area
where the business is not permitted by the zoning ordinance of the town.



(1988 Code, § 12-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.06  APPLICATION; FORM, FILING, CONTENTS, FEE AND INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Every application for the regulatory license required by this
chapter shall be upon a form approved by the Manager and shall be filed with
the Town Clerk. Every application shall be made under oath and shall contain
the following information:



      (1)   The name, age and residence of any interested party;



      (2)   The address of the premises where the business shall be
located;



      (3)   The proposed hours of operation of the business;



      (4)   A complete statement of all criminal convictions of any
interested party;



      (5)   Dimensions of land owned or controlled by the applicant
as premises for the business;



      (6)   A description of any other business to be operated on
the same premises or any adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant; and



      (7)   A statement of any prior revocations of a license to
operate a game room or similar business.



(1988 Code, § 12-92)



   (B)   An application fee as may be determined from time to time (the
current schedule of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk) shall be
paid to and collected by the Town Clerk to cover the cost of processing the
application when an application for a license required by § 113.05 is
submitted.



(1988 Code, § 12-93)



   (C)   (1)   The Town Clerk shall, within 5 business days,
transmit a copy of the application for a license required by § 113.05 to the
Police Department for an investigative report, to the Building Inspector to
determine compliance with all building regulations and to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer to determine compliance with all zoning regulations.



      (2)   The Police Department, Building Inspector and Planning
Board shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, report the
results of their examinations to the Town Clerk.



(1988 Code, § 12-94)



§ 113.07  DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION BY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.



   An application for a license required by this chapter in proper form,
accompanied by all reports required by this chapter, shall be submitted to
the Board of Commissioners, which shall approve the application if the Board
of Commissioners determines that:



   (A)   The application contains no misstatement of fact;



   (B)   Any interested party has not been convicted of selling
intoxicating beverages, narcotic drugs or marijuana or of violating any
gambling laws of this state or of violating any comparable statute of any
other state;



   (C)   The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable
zoning, building or other municipal codes; and/or



   (D)   Any interested party has not had revoked a previously issued
license for engaging in a business dealing with operating a game room.



(1988 Code, § 12-95)



§ 113.08  ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon approval of the application for a license required by §
113.05 by the Board of Commissioners, the Clerk shall issue a privilege
regulatory license to the applicant.



(1988 Code, § 12-96)



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of all interested parties to
ensure that the license required by this chapter be prominently displayed
within the business.



(1988 Code, § 12-97)



§ 113.09  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION.



   Any change in the size of the premises of a game room must be reported
immediately to the Town Clerk. Other application information must be updated
annually.



(1988 Code, § 12-98)



§ 113.10  VOIDANCE.



   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall become void if the
licensee moves or ceases to operate at the location required to be stated in
the application for the license.



(1988 Code, § 12-99)



§ 113.11  GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.



   A regulatory license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked
by action of the Board of Commissioners if the Board determines that:



   (A)   The licensee or any interested party has violated any
provisions of this chapter or other applicable code;



   (B)   The licensee or interested party is convicted of selling
intoxicating beverages, narcotic drugs or marijuana on the licensed premises
or elsewhere;



   (C)   The licensee or any interested party violates any zoning,
building or other code or ordinance as the same apply to the premises;



   (D)   The licensee or any interested party suffers or permits any
gambling activity or the sale or use of any racing, football or other parlay
cards or gambling boards or devices on the licensed premises;



   (E)   The licensee or any interested party suffers or permits the
licensed premises to become disorderly or permits any profane, obscene or
indecent language thereon;



   (F)   The licensee or any interested party suffers or permits any
intoxicating beverages, narcotic drugs or marijuana to be sold or kept or
consumed on the licensed premises; or



   (G)   The licensee or any interested party employs, in carrying on
the business, any person who has been convicted of violating any gambling
laws of the state or of any other state.



(1988 Code, § 12-100)



§ 113.12  NOTICE AND HEARING PRIOR TO REVOCATION OR DENIAL.



   Before the Board of Commissioners revokes a license issued pursuant to
this chapter, or if the Board of Commissioners determines that reasonable
grounds exist to deny an application for a license pursuant to this chapter,
the Board of Commissioners shall cause a written notice to be sent by
certified mail or other appropriate means to the licensee or applicant
affected, at the address stated in the license or application. The notice
shall advise the affected party of a right to appear before the Board of
Commissioners, with or without legal counsel, at a stated time or place, for
the purpose of presenting any evidence, examining any evidence submitted and
examining or cross-examining any person providing evidence.



(1988 Code, § 12-101)



CHAPTER 114:
MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE YARDS



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Storage yard regulations



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD (STORAGE YARD).  More than wrecked, scrapped,
ruined, dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles or motorized equipment which
is not being restored to operation located on a land parcel used in
conjunction with any establishment, or more than wrecked, scrapped, ruined,
dismantled or inoperable motor vehicles or motorized equipment used in
conjunction with the establishment but located on another land parcel, shall
be subject to this chapter.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
and designed or intended for the shelter, support, enclosure or protection of
persons, animals or chattels.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  Any real property on which or in which there is
operated or maintained any commercial, industrial or service business or
activity for profit.



   FARE.  Singularly or jointly owned land parcel or contiguous parcels
on which agricultural operations are conducted as the substantial use, to
include cultivation of crops, the husbandry of livestock and forestry.



   FENCE.  A continuous, opaque, unperforated barrier extending from the
surface of the ground to a uniform height of not less than 8 feet from the
ground at all points constructed of wood, stone, steel or other metal, or any
substance of a similar nature and strength.



   GARAGE (STORAGE YARD).  An establishment which is maintained and
operated for the primary purpose of making mechanical and/or body repairs to
motor vehicles, and which is not used to store more than 6 motor vehicles
that are not capable of being driven under their own power and are not being
repaired or serviced.



   GATE.  A door or other device attached to a fence which, when opened,
provides a means of ingress and egress of persons and things and which, when
closed, forms a continuous barrier as part of the fence to which it is
attached.



   HOUSING UNIT.  A house, an apartment, a group of homes or a single
room occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for 1 or
more humans.



   JUNK .   Scrapped copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, appliances,
paper, trash, rubber, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, dismantled or
wrecked motorized equipment or parts thereof, iron, steel and other scrap
ferrous material.



   JUNKYARD (STORAGE YARD) .   Any land parcel which is maintained,
operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk in conjunction
with any establishment located on the same or another land parcel or any
establishment which is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping,
buying or selling junk regardless of the length of time that junk is stored
or kept, or for maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard. JUNKYARD
shall not include the county-operated sanitary landfill.



   LAND PARCEL .   A single tract or contiguous tracts of land under
single or joint ownership.



   MOTOR VEHICLE .   Every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon land, air or water which is
propelled by non-human or mechanical power sources, and every device designed
to run upon land, air or water that is pulled or pushed by a device propelled
by non-human or mechanical power.



   MOTORIZED EQUIPMENT .   Every device that is propelled or powered by
non-human or mechanical power sources which is designed to accomplish any
work.



   PUBLIC ROAD.  Any road or highway which is now or hereafter designated
and maintained by the North Carolina Department of Transportation as part of
the state highway system, whether primary or secondary, hard-surfaced or
other highways.



   REPAIR SHOP—MOTOR VEHICLES.  An establishment which is maintained
and operated for the purpose of making mechanical and/or body repairs to
motor vehicles and which is not used to store more than 6 motor vehicles that
are not capable of being driven under their own power and are not being
restored to operable condition, regardless of the length of time that
individual motor vehicles are stored or kept at a property. There is no limit
to the number of vehicles that may be stored on site that are being restored
to operable condition.



   RESIDENTIAL AREA.  Twenty-five or more housing units within a
geographical area comprised of a 1/4 mile-wide strip contiguous and parallel
to the external boundaries of the tract of real property on which an
automobile graveyard or junkyard is located.



   SCHOOL.  Any public or private institution for the teaching of
children under 18 years of age which is recognized and approved by the North
Carolina Board of Education.



   SERVICE STATION (STORAGE YARD).  Any establishment which is maintained
and operated for the primary purpose of making retail sales of fuels,
lubricants, air, water and other items for the operation and routine
maintenance of motor vehicles, and/or for making mechanical repairs,
servicing and/or washing of motor vehicles, and which is not used to store
more than 6 motor vehicles that are not capable of being driven under their
own power and that are not being restored to operable conditions, regardless
of the length of time that individual motor vehicles are stored or kept at a
property. There is no limit to the number of vehicles that may be stored on
site that are being restored to operable condition.



   VECTORS.  An organism that carries pathogens from 1 host to another.



   VEGETATION.  Evergreen trees, including, but not limited to, white
pine and/or hemlock, evergreen shrubs or plants, that can reach a height of 8
feet within a period of 8 years from the date planted.



   WIRE FENCE.  A continuous, translucent, perforated barrier extending
from the surface of the ground to a uniform height of not less than 8 feet
from the ground at all points, constructed of wire, steel or nylon mesh, or
any substance of a similar nature and strength, but which perforations or
openings are not larger than 2 inches.



(1988 Code, § 12-111)



§ 114.02  STORAGE YARD REGULATIONS.



   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to bona fide service stations,
repair shops or garages.



   (B)   This chapter shall in no way regulate, restrict, prohibit or
otherwise deter any bona fide form and its related uses.



   (C)   All new and existing storage yards (junkyards and/or
automobile graveyards) established subject to the following conditions:



      (1)   The Town of Fairmont shall inspect each junkyard and
automobile graveyard at least 2 times each year to determine compliance with
this chapter and that no vectors are present. Should vectors be identified,
the owner/operator/maintainer shall submit satisfactory evidence to the town
that vectors have been eliminated.



      (2)   The owner/operator shall dispose of all petroleum
products and residue in a manner that will not adversely affect the
environment and that will comply with state and federal regulations.



      (3)   Each storage yard shall be entirely surrounded by an
opaque fence or by a wire fence and vegetation. Vegetation shall be planted
on the outbound or inboard side of a fence, contiguous to, and not more than
5 feet from the fence. The vegetation shall be of a type that can reach a
minimum height of 8 feet within 8 years from the date planted and shall be
planted at intervals evenly spaced and in close proximity to each other so
that a continuous, unbroken hedgerow (without gaps or open spaces not larger
than 2 inches) will exist to height of at least 8 feet along the length of
the fence surrounding the junkyard or automobile graveyard. The hedgerow
shall be maintained as a continuous, unbroken hedgerow for the period the
property is used as a junkyard and/or automobile graveyard.



      (4)   Each owner, operator or maintainer of a storage yard to
which this chapter applies shall utilize good husbandry techniques, as for
example, pruning, mulching and proper fertilization, so that the vegetation
can reach a height of 8 feet within 8 years of the date planted and will have
maximum density and foliage.



      (5)   Dead or diseased vegetation shall be replaced at the
next appropriate planting time.



      (6)   The fence or wire fence shall have not more than 4 gates
for the purpose of ingress and egress of motor vehicles. The gates shall be
closed and securely locked at all times, except during business hours.



      (7)   Each business or establishment affected by this chapter
shall have 180 days to comply with this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 12-112)



CHAPTER 115:  COMPUTER GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Privilege license fees



   115.03   Failure to pay or to obtain a regulatory license



   115.04   Serial numbers required



   115.05   Codes Enforcement Officer to ensure compliance



   115.06   Allowable locations



   115.07   Rules of operation of computer gaming establishments



   115.08   Adult manager required on premises



   115.09   Licensee responsible for acts and conduct of interested
parties



   115.10   License required



   115.11   Application; form, filing, contents, fee and investigation



   115.12   Determination of application by Board of Commissioners



   115.13   Issuance and display of license



   115.14   Notification of change in application information



   115.15   Voidance; exception



   115.16   Grounds for revocation



   115.17   Notice and hearing prior to revocation or denial



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPUTER. Any electronic machines, including computers, used as game
promotions or for amusement subject to the provisions of this chapter.



   COMPUTER GAMING ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   Any business enterprise utilizing 1 or more computers as
game promotions or for amusement. In a game promotion, a person may conduct a
game of chance in connection with the sale of consumer products or services
and/or for which the elements of chance and prize are present. This term
includes, but is not limited to, internet sweepstakes, internet cafes, and
cybercafes. This definition only applies where a machine emits, issues,
displays, prints out or otherwise records any receipt, paper, coupon, token,
or other form of record which is capable of being redeemed, exchanged or
repurchased for cash, cash equivalent, prizes, services or any other item of
value, whether or not the value of such distribution is determined by
electronic games played or by predetermined odds. This includes a system
which invites patrons to purchase prepaid internet access cards that also
allow them to use computer terminals with gaming software as an ancillary
benefit.



      (2)   This term does not include any lottery approved by the
State of North Carolina.



   DEPARTMENT. The Fairmont Department of Public Safety.



   INTERESTED PARTY. Any person who is an applicant for a license or who
is an employee of any applicant for a license, any person who is a partner in
a partnership which is an applicant for a license and any person, partnership
or corporation which is an officer, director or principal stockholder of an
entity which is an applicant for a license.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.02  PRIVILEGE LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   A privilege license fee shall be paid annually for each and
every computer at a computer gaming establishment as follows:



      For the first 10 machines within a
building            $1,500 per machine



      For machines 11 to 25 within the same
building         $1,000 per machine



      For machines 26 to 40 within the same
building         $750 per machine



      For any additional machines within the same building   $500
per machine



   (B)   All privilege license fees shall be due and payable on or
before July 1st of each year for the ensuing 12 months. The privilege license
fee for machines placed in use between January 1st and June 30th shall be 1/2
the appropriate fee as established above. No interested party shall allow a
computer to be operated until the appropriate privilege license fees have
been paid for the machine.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009; Am. Ord. 12-145, passed 6-19-2012)



§ 115.03  FAILURE TO PAY OR TO OBTAIN A REGULATORY LICENSE.



   (A)   Failure to pay the privilege license fees required by this
chapter or to obtain the regulatory license required by this chapter before
any such act is requited shall result in a penalty equal to 100% of the fee
that is due, in addition to the fee itself.



   (B)   Consciously and purposely hiding computers, using switching
devices to change screens in order to hide the true purpose and use of a
computer, or any other ploy to hide the intended use of any computer within
the establishment shall be considered as perpetrating a fraud upon the town
and shall result in the immediate permanent revocation of the
establishment’s privilege license.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.04  SERIAL NUMBERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   As part of the licensing procedure, the operator shall provide
the serial number of each and every computer in the establishment. The serial
numbers of computers placed into service after the license is granted (and
the additional privilege license fees) shall be provided to the Town Clerk
prior to any use of the machine.



   (B)   Computers that are removed from the establishment shall be
reported, with the serial number, to the Town Clerk; any replacement computer
shall be reported, with the serial numbers of the original and replacement
machines, to the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.05  CODES ENFORCEMENT OFFICER TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE.



   The Fairmont Codes Enforcement Officer shall ensure that the
regulations contained herein shall be enforced; to those ends, the Codes
Enforcement Officer may inspect business establishments for compliance.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.06  ALLOWABLE LOCATIONS.



   (A)   Computer gaming establishments shall be limited to the
following zoning districts and no others:



      (1)   CB - central business;



      (2)   GB - general business;



      (3)   NB - neighborhood business;



      (4)   R5 - residential, by conditional use permit only.



   (B)   Exception for National Register location:



      (1)   Notwithstanding the above, computer gaming
establishments shall not be allowed in the area designated as “Historic
Downtown Fairmont.”



      (2)   Any such establishments in existence on April 7, 2010,
shall be exempt from this requirement as long as the use of the property as a
computer gaming establishment shall meet the requirements of § 154.006 from
the date of the adoption of the amendment codified herein.



   (C)   The zoning regulations encompassed within this chapter shall
be in full force and effect within all areas of the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the town.



   (D)   In all zoning districts where computer gaming establishments
are authorized, they may not be placed within 250 feet of any church, or of
any public or private school, or of any licensed day care facility.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009; Am. Ord. 10-131, passed 3-16-2010; Am. Ord.
11-141, passed June 30, 2011)



§ 115.07  RULES OF OPERATION OF COMPUTER GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   All computer gaming establishments shall be closed from 12:00
midnight until 8:00 a.m. daily.



   (B)   No playing on any computer subject to this chapter shall be
allowed during the times when computer gaming establishments are required by
this chapter to remain closed.



   (C)   No minor (17 years of age or younger) shall be allowed to
operate a computer subject to this chapter.



   (D)   All computer gaming establishments must comply with
requirements of G.S. Chapter 14, Article 37.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.08  ADULT MANAGER REQUIRED ON PREMISES.



   There must be an adult 18 years of age or older managing the business
on the premises of every computer gaming establishment during the hours of
operation at all times.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.09  LICENSEE RESPONSIBLE FOR ACTS AND CONDUCT OF INTERESTED PARTIES.



   The acts and conduct of any interested party in the conduct of the
business of operating a computer gaming establishment shall be deemed to be
the acts and conduct of the licensee.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.10  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No interested party shall operate a computer gaming
establishment unless the party shall have first applied for and received the
regulatory license provided for by this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
operate a computer gaming establishment within the town without a regulatory
license as required by this section.



   (B)   Establishments operating at the time of the adoption of this
chapter shall have applied for the regulatory license provided for by this
chapter by December 31, 2009. Any such establishment denied a license shall
cease operations of machines within 3 days of notice of such denial by a law
enforcement officer.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.11  APPLICATION; FORM, FILING, CONTENTS, FEE AND INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Every application for the regulatory license required by this
chapter shall be upon a form approved by the Manager and shall be filed with
the Town Clerk. Every application shall be made under oath and shall contain
the following information:



      (1)   The name, age and residence of all interested parties;



      (2)   The address of the premises where the business shall be
located;



      (3)   The proposed hours of operation of the business;



      (4)   A complete statement of all criminal convictions of all
interested parties;



      (5)   Dimensions of land owned or controlled by the applicant
as premises for the business;



      (6)   A description of any other business to be operated on
the same premises or any adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant; and



      (7)   A statement of any prior revocations of a license of any
interested party to operate a computer gaming establishment or similar
business in any jurisdiction.



   (B)   An application fee as may be determined from time to time (the
current schedule of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk) shall be
paid to and collected by the Town Clerk to cover the cost of processing the
application when an application for a license required by § 115.10 is
submitted.



   (C)   (1)   The Town Clerk shall, within 5 business days,
transmit a copy of the application for a license required by § 115.10 to the
Police Department for an investigative report, to the Building Inspector to
determine compliance with all building regulations and to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer to determine compliance with all zoning regulations.



      (2)   The Police Department, Building Inspector and Planning
Board shall, within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, report the
results of their examinations to the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.12  DETERMINATION OF APPLICATION BY BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.



   An application for a license required by this chapter in proper form,
accompanied by all reports required by this chapter, shall be submitted to
the Board of Commissioners, which shall approve the application if the Board
determines that:



   (A)   The application contains no misstatement of fact;



   (B)   No interested party has been convicted of selling intoxicating
beverages, narcotic drugs or marijuana or of violating any gambling laws of
this state or of violating any comparable statute of any other state;



   (C)   The applicant conforms to all requirements of applicable
zoning, building or other municipal codes; and/or



   (D)   No interested party has had revoked a previously issued
license for engaging in a business dealing with operating a computer gaming
establishment in any jurisdiction.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.13  ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon approval of the application for a license required by §
115.10 by the Board of Commissioners, the Clerk shall issue a regulatory
license to the applicant.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of all interested parties to
ensure that the license required by this chapter be prominently displayed
within the business.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.14  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE IN APPLICATION INFORMATION.



   Any change of any of the facts stated in an application filed under
this chapter must be reported immediately to the Town Clerk.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.15  VOIDANCE; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall become void if
the licensee moves or ceases to operate at the location required to be stated
in the application for the license.



   (B)   However, any licensed computer gaming establishment required
to relocate under § 115.06(B) herein above shall not have their license
voided due to said relocation.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.16  GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.



   A regulatory license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked
by action of the Board of Commissioners if the Board determines that:



   (A)   The licensee or any interested party has violated any
provisions of this chapter or other applicable code provision;



   (B)   The licensee or interested party is convicted of selling
intoxicating beverages, narcotic drugs or marijuana on the licensed premises
or elsewhere;



   (C)   The licensee or any interested party violates any zoning,
building or other code or ordinance as the same applies to the premises;



   (D)   The licensee or any interested party suffers or permits any
activity in violation of G.S. Chapter 14, Article 37;



   (E)   The licensee or any interested party suffers or permits the
licensed premises to become disorderly or permits any profane, obscene or
indecent language thereon;



   (F)   The licensee or any interested party suffers or permits any
intoxicating beverages, narcotic drugs or marijuana to be sold or kept or
consumed on the licensed premises; or



   (G)   The licensee or any interested party employs, in carrying on
the business, any person who has been convicted of violating any gambling
laws of the state or of any other state.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



§ 115.17  NOTICE AND HEARING PRIOR TO REVOCATION OR DENIAL.



   Before the Board of Commissioners revokes a license issued pursuant to
this chapter, or if the Board of Commissioners determines that reasonable
grounds exist to deny an application for a license pursuant to this chapter,
the Board of Commissioners shall cause a written notice to be sent by
certified mail or other appropriate means to the licensee or applicant
affected, at the address stated in the license or application. The notice
shall advise the affected party of a right to appear before the Board of
Commissioners, with or without legal counsel, at a stated time and place, for
the purpose of presenting any evidence, examining any evidence submitted and
examining or cross-examining any person providing evidence.



(Ord. 09-127, passed 12-15-2009)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERALLY



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER



      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



CHAPTER 130:
GENERALLY



Section



   130.01   Damaging municipal property



   130.02   Climbing water tank



   130.03   Posting bills; other advertising



   130.04   Placing handbills on motor vehicles



   130.05   Placing political signs on public property



   130.06   Begging, soliciting and panhandling prohibited



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  DAMAGING MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.



   No person shall injure, tamper with, remove, paint upon or deface any
bridge, culvert, ditch and drain, sign, signpost, street light, traffic
signal, bulletin board or other municipal property upon the streets and
sidewalks or elsewhere except employees of the town in the performance of
their duties.



(1988 Code, § 13-1)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory references:



   Injuring houses, churches, fences and walls and the like, see G.S. §
14-144



   Injuring personal property, see G.S. § 14-160



   Injuring wires, fixtures of telephone and power companies, see G.S.
§§ 14-154, 14-156



   Injury to public buildings, see G.S. § 14-132



   Malicious injury to real property, see G.S. § 14-127



§ 130.02  CLIMBING WATER TANK.



   It shall be unlawful for any person other than persons employed by the
town to climb up the water tank in the town.



(1988 Code, § 13-2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  POSTING BILLS; OTHER ADVERTISING.



   No person shall stick, paint, brand, stamp, write or put upon any
house, fence, wall, pavement, post or upon any property owned by any person
or owned by the town any printed, written, painted or other advertisement,
bill, notice, sign or poster, without first having obtained the written
permission of the owner of that property and having received a permit from
the Clerk.



(1988 Code, § 13-3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Unlawful posting of advertisements, see G.S. § 14-145



§ 130.04  PLACING HANDBILLS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.



   No person shall place a handbill on a motor vehicle. It is an
affirmative defense to a prosecution for violating this section that the
handbill was placed on the vehicle with the consent of the operator of the
vehicle.



(1988 Code, § 13-4)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  PLACING POLITICAL SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall place a political sign on public property. It is an
affirmative defense to a prosecution for violating this section that the sign
was placed with the consent of the owner of the property.



(1988 Code, § 13-5)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  BEGGING, SOLICITING AND PANHANDLING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACCOSTING.  Approaching or speaking to an individual or
individuals in a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent
bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his or her person, or
upon property in his or her immediate possession.



      BEG, SOLICIT or PANHANDLE.  The communication, by use of
gestures, spoken words, written or printed word or other acts as are
conducted in the furtherance of the purpose of immediately collecting
contributions of money, food or goods, for the use of one’s self or others.
As used in this section, the word SOLICIT and its forms includes BEGGING and
PANHANDLING.



      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any store, grocery store, restaurant
or carry out, office building, gas station.



      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  Any bank, industrial bank, credit union
or savings and loan.



      FORCING ONESELF UPON THE COMPANY OF ANOTHER:



         (a)   Continuing to solicit in close proximity to the
individual addressed after the person to whom the solicitation is directed
has made a negative response, either verbally, by physical sign, by
attempting to leave the presence of the person soliciting or by other
negative indication;



         (b)   Blocking the passage of the individual solicited;
or



         (c)   Otherwise engaging in conduct that could
reasonably be construed as intending to compel or force a person to accede to
a solicitation.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit or
panhandle, as defined in division (A) above:



      (1)   By accosting another, or by forcing oneself upon the
company of another;



      (2)   Within 20 feet of the entrance to any financial
institution, any automatic teller machine or any commercial establishment;



      (3)   At any outdoor dining or merchandise area; provided that
areas are in active use at the time;



      (4)   At any transit stop or taxi stand, or in a public
transit vehicle;



      (5)   While the person being solicited is standing in line
waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment;



      (6)   By touching the person being solicited without that
person’s consent;



      (7)   By blocking the path of a person being solicited or
blocking the entrance or exit to any building or vehicle;



      (8)   By or with the use of profane or abusive language,
during the solicitation or following an unsuccessful solicitation;



      (9)   By or with the use of any gesture or act intended to
cause a reasonable person to be fearful of the solicitor or feel compelled to
accede to the solicitation;



      (10)   After dark, which shall mean 1/2 hour after sunset
until 1/2 hour before sunrise;



      (11)   While under the influence of alcohol, as defined in the
North Carolina Controlled Substance Act, being G.S. §§ 90-86 et seq.;



      (12)   While on private property after being asked to either
leave or refrain from begging, soliciting or panhandling; or



      (13)   By begging, soliciting or panhandling as part of a
group of 2 or more people, using words or gestures intended to intimidate a
person into giving money.



(Ord. passed 5-18-2004)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory references:



   Authority to prohibit or regulate begging, see G.S. §§ 160A-179, 14-4



   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of § 130.06
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined an
amount not to exceed $500 and/or imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30
days as provided by G.S. § 14-4. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate offense.



(Ord. passed 5-18-2004)



CHAPTER 131:
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY



Section



   131.01   Fire bombs



   131.02   Carrying deadly weapons



   131.03   Discharging firearms



   131.04   Discharging airguns



   131.05   Unused or abandoned wells



   131.06   Signs prohibiting the carrying of concealed weapons



§ 131.01  FIRE BOMBS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FIRE BOMB.  Any type of object designed or constructed so that
upon being propelled it will explode or ignite its area of impact.



      MOLOTOV COCKTAIL .   Any breakable container, or any container
which is designed in a manner that upon being propelled it will at impact
empty its contents which is filled with an inflammable fluid or substance,
and which is fitted with a fuse or wick.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manufacture,
possess, transport or use any Molotov cocktail or other fire bomb.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to
possess all the items or materials needed to manufacture Molotov cocktails or
other fire bombs, other than on his or her or their premises. The provisions
of this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any other ordinance or
general statute of the state on this subject.



   (D)   The Mayor and in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro Tempore,
and in the absence of both officials, the Chief of Police, shall be and they
are hereby authorized to enforce this section for periods of time as they
shall deem necessary.



(1988 Code, § 13-26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Fire bombs and the like, see G.S. § 14-288.8



§ 131.02  CARRYING DEADLY WEAPONS.



   (A)   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to carry about
his or her person any deadly weapon, under any of the following circumstances
or conditions:



      (1)   While under the influence of intoxicating drink or
narcotic drugs;



      (2)   At any public assembly;



      (3)   In a manner calculated to inspire terror; or



      (4)   While taking part in a parade or march the purpose or 1
of the purposes of which is to inspire terror.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to members of the armed forces of
the United States, officers of the government of the United States, this
state or any subdivision thereof charged with the execution of the laws of
the United States, this state or the town, when acting in the discharge of
their official duties.



(1988 Code, § 13-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Possession of weapon at parade, see G.S. § 14-277.2



§ 131.03  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms within the
corporate limits of the town.



   (B)   Division (A) does not apply to:



      (1)   Law enforcement officers, members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of the National Guard while engaged in the
performance of their official duties; or



      (2)   Persons exercising the right of self defense, defense of
others or defense of property.



(1988 Code, § 13-28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms, see G.S. § 160A-189



§ 131.04  DISCHARGING AIRGUNS.



   No person shall discharge an air rifle or air pistol in the town.



(1988 Code, § 13-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.05  UNUSED OR ABANDONED WELLS.



   Unused or abandoned wells shall be filled by the owners or agents in
charge of the property on which wells are located. Failure to fill wells
within 30 days after written notification to do so shall be a violation of
this section.



(1988 Code, § 13-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Leaving unused well open and exposed, see G.S. § 14-287



§ 131.06  SIGNS PROHIBITING THE CARRYING OF CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   (A)   Posting of signs required.  The Town Manager is hereby
authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate
locations on or within each park and each building or portion of a building
owned, leased as lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the
town as well as the appurtenant premises to buildings, indicating that
carrying a concealed handgun is prohibited therein.



   (B)   Location of signs.  Signs on buildings shall be visibly
posted on the exterior of each entrance by which the general public can
access the building. The Town Manager shall exercise discretion in
determining the number and appropriate location of signs to be placed on or
within appurtenant premises and parks.



(1988 Code, § 13-31)



CHAPTER 132:
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER



Section



   132.01   Spitting



   132.02   Noise



   132.03   Profanity



   132.04   Curfew for minors



 



   132.99   Penalty



§ 132.01  SPITTING.



   No person shall spit on the sidewalks or on the floors of any public
buildings.



(1988 Code, § 13-51)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.02  NOISE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or assist in
creating, permit, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of that character,
intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any
individual is prohibited.



   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or
if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any signal
device or any unreasonably loud or harsh sound and the sounding of a device
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;



      (2)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than
police, fire or other emergency vehicle;



      (3)   The use or operation of any manual or automatic piano,
phonograph, radio, loudspeaker, any other instrument or sound amplifying
device so loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof, or in a
manner as to render the same a public nuisance; provided, however, that upon
application to the Board, permits may be granted to responsible organizations
to produce programs in music, speeches or general entertainment;



      (4)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or loud continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any
person in the vicinity;



      (5)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle
so out of repair, so loaded or in a manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;



      (6)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or
as a warning of danger;



      (7)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;



      (8)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed
air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;



      (9)   The erection including excavation, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays except in
the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only
with a permit from the Clerk, which permit may be renewed for a period of 3
days or less while the emergency continues;



      (10)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street
adjacent to any school, institution of learning or court while the same is in
session, or within 150 feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes
with the working of the institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed
on streets indicating that the same is a school, court or hospital street;



      (11)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any
street adjacent to any church, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in
streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;



      (12)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection
with loading or unloading any vehicle, of the opening and destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers;



      (13)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any
building or premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the
vicinity thereof;



      (14)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers,
vendors and other persons which disturbs the quiet and peace of the
neighborhood;



      (15)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale or display of merchandise;



      (16)   The use of any mechanical loudspeaker or amplifiers on
trucks or other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes
except where specific license is received from the Board;



      (17)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage
or filling station in any residential district so as to cause loud or
offensive noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.;



      (18)   The firing or discharging of squibs, crackers,
gunpowder or other combustible substances in the streets or elsewhere for the
purpose of making noise or disturbance except by permit from the Board.



(1988 Code, § 13-52)  Penalty, see § 132.99



Statutory reference:



   Noise regulations authorized, see G.S. § 160A-184



§ 132.03  PROFANITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in any public or private place to
swear, curse, sing or speak openly obscene words loudly enough to be heard by
persons on any street or other public place or to make obscene proposals at
those places.



(1988 Code, § 13-53)  Penalty, see § 132.99



Statutory reference:



   Profanity, see G.S. §§ 14-196 et seq.



§ 132.04  CURFEW FOR MINORS.



   (A)   The purpose of this section shall be to establish a curfew for
minors in the Town of Fairmont, thus promoting the health, safety and welfare
of both minors and adults in the town by creating an environment offering
protection and security for all concerned.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ADOLESCENT MINOR.  A minor as defined herein who has reached his
or her sixteenth birthday, but has not reached his or her eighteenth birthday.



      GUARDIAN.  One who legally has the care and management of the
person defined as a minor by this section.



      JUVENILE MINOR.  A minor as defined herein who has not reached
his or her sixteenth birthday.



      MINOR.  A person who has not reached his or her eighteenth
birthday and is not married, emancipated or a member of the armed services of
the United States.  MINOR shall include juvenile minors and adolescent
minors.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Areas such as, but not limited to, all common
areas open to all for common use; alleys, streets, public areas, highways,
parks; establishments open to the public for the conduct of business.



   (C)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;



      (2)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   Involved in an emergency;



      (4)   Attending an official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic
organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, and
official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor; or



      (5)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



   (D)   A curfew applicable to minors is established and shall be
enforced as follows:



      (1)   Time limits.  It is unlawful for any juvenile minor to
be or remain upon any public place as defined in this chapter in the town
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Monday through Sunday.  It shall be
unlawful for any adolescent minor to be or remain upon any public place as
defined in this chapter in the town between midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Monday
through Sunday.



      (2)   Exceptions.  The restrictions provided by division
(C)(1) above shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by a guardian or
other person charged with the care and custody of a minor, nor shall the
restriction apply to any minor who is traveling between his or her home or
place of employment, church, municipal building or school where a function is
being held.



      (3)   Responsibility of adults.  It is unlawful for any
parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of any
minor to allow or permit a minor to be in or upon a public place within the
town within the curfew hours set by division (C)(1) except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(2).



      (4)   Responsibility of business establishments.  It is
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating a place of business or
amusement to allow or permit any minor to remain in or upon any place of
business or amusement operated by them within the curfew hours set by
division (C)(1), except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2).



      (5)   Enforcement.



         (a)   When a minor is found to be in violation of this
section, the officer will check the curfew file located at the Police
Department in the dispatcher’s office to see if the juvenile is a first
offender. If the juvenile is a first offender, he or she will be taken to the
residence of his or her parent or guardian. A written warning will be given
to that adult and an information report will be taken by the officer to
include the name of the juvenile and adult, the time, date and location of
the offense. This report will be kept in the curfew policy file and a copy of
the report will be forwarded to the town’s juvenile detective.



         (b)   If, upon checking the curfew policy file, the
juvenile is found to be a repeat offender, he or she will be taken to the
residence of his or her parent or guardian and the adult will be subject to a
criminal citation pursuant to division (C)(6) of this section. A report will
be turned in to the curfew policy file and a copy forwarded to the town’s
juvenile detective.



         (c)   If the juvenile is under 12 years of age, a report
will be made and a copy forwarded to the Robeson County Department of Social
Services.



      (6)   Aiding and abetting by adult or guardian.  It shall be
a violation of this section for an adult, guardian or parent to allow,
permit, encourage, aid or abet a minor in the violation of division (C)(1) of
this section except otherwise provided in division (C)(2).



      (7)   Refusal of guardian or parent to take custody of a
minor.  If any guardian or parent refuses to take custody of his or her
minor found in violation of this section, the officer(s) with custody of the
minor shall contact the Robeson County Department of Social Services and
release the minor to that agency, pending further investigation by the Police
Department and the Department of Social Services. The adult will be subject
to criminal citation pursuant to division (C)(6) of this section.



(1988 Code, § 13-54) (Am. Ord. 06-104, passed 11-21-2006)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.



   (B)   The punishment for violation of § 132.04 shall be a fine of
up to $50 and/or imprisonment up to 30 days.



(1988 Code, § 13-54)



CHAPTER 133:
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section




Generally




   133.01   Consumption of malt beverages and unfortified wine




Sexually Explicit Materials




   133.15   Definitions



   133.16   Display; defense



   133.17   Violations; declared public nuisances



   133.18   Interpretation of multiple displays; violations



   133.19   Enforcement



   133.20   Remedies cumulative



GENERALLY



§ 133.01  CONSUMPTION OF MALT BEVERAGES AND UNFORTIFIED WINE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt beverages and
unfortified wine on the public streets of the town or any private property
which is frequented by the public in the town. For the purposes of this
section, the “private property” that is frequented by the public in the
town shall include all property wherein persons are invited by express or
implied invitation to go upon the property, whether for the purposes of
engaging in business or purchasing from establishments located on the
property or wherein private properties are used for parking areas for the
general public, and shall include any qualified public area in front of or
adjacent to any store, shop, restaurant, luncheonette, drive-in restaurant,
drive-in car wash, laundry or other place of business, and shall include any
parking lots or other vacant private property open to the public.



(1988 Code, § 13-76)  Penalty, § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to prohibit consumption of malt beverages and unfortified
wine on property owned or controlled by town, see G.S. § 18B-300



SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALS



§ 133.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  Any commercial establishment offering sexually explicit
material for sale.



   KNOWINGLY.  With knowledge of the content, nature and character of the
material, but does not require knowledge that any material is sexually
explicit.



   MATERIAL.  Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, handbill or
similar printed or written matter; any drawing, picture, illustration,
transparency, photograph, motion picture, film negative, film positive,
videotape or similar representation or reproduction.



   MINOR.  A person under the age of 18 years.



   NUDITY .   The showing, in the context of sexual or erotic conduct or
arousal, of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or anal area, with
less than full opaque covering, or the showing of the female breasts with
less than full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the
areola, or the depiction of covered or uncovered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



   PUBLIC DISPLAY WITH RESPECT TO SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL .   Placing
or making available that material in any public place so that minors may
possess or handle any material and peruse, inspect or leaf through it.



   SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL .   Any material which:



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary community
standards would find, when considered in the whole context in which it is
used or presented appeals to the prurient interest in sex of minors;



      (2)   Depicts or describes ultimate sex acts, normal or
perverted, actual or explicitly simulated; masturbation, excretory functions
or direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals or anal area; nudity; or
acts of apparent or actual sexual stimulation or gratification; and/or



      (3)   When considered as a whole and in the context in which
it is used or presented, lacks serious artistic, literary, political,
educational or scientific value to minors.  Material may be found to be
explicit if the externally visible covers thereof meet the standards of this
section or if the contents thereof meet the standards of this section.



(Prior Code, § 13-89)



Statutory reference:



   Obscenity and material harmful to minors, see G.S. §§ 14-190.1 et seq.



§ 133.16  DISPLAY; DEFENSE.



   (A)   It is a violation of this division if any person knowingly
places sexually explicit material upon public display in any public place
through which minors pass or to which they are invited as members of the
general public, except that sexually explicit material may be displayed as
provided in division (A)(1) of this section.



      (1)   A business shall not be deemed to place sexually
explicit material upon public display in any area through which minors pass
or to which they are invited as members of the general public, if the
following conditions are met:



         (a)   The sexually explicit material is placed in racks
or on shelves separate from racks, shelves or other sales display cases from
other material;



         (b)   The racks or shelves are located at least 60
inches from floor level and within 8 feet or less of a cash register or
similar purchase location;



         (c)   Those racks or shelves are constructed with a full
opaque barrier that shields the sexually explicit material so that only the
title of the material or material that is not sexually explicit is visible on
the covers but so that the materials may be conveniently removed and perused
or inspected, subject to the business’s practices, by persons not minors;



         (d)   Any of the racks or shelves or portions thereof
that contain 1 or more items of sexually explicit material are clearly and
continuously visible without obstruction from the cash register or purchase
location; and



         (e)   The cash register or purchase location is tended
by a proprietor or employee of the business, which person shall be under a
duty to affirmatively and frequently ascertain that minors are not able to
and do not peruse, inspect or leaf through sexually explicit materials.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit any
other method of removing from minors the opportunity or ability to peruse,
inspect or leaf through sexually explicit materials that places materials
exclusively under the possession and control of the proprietor or employee of
the business until the time of sale of material to a person other than a
minor.



(1988 Code, § 13-90)



   (B)   It shall be a defense to division (A) that:



      (1)   A minor possessing or handling sexually explicit
materials is at the time under parental or parentally-approved adult
supervision;



      (2)   That the proprietor or other employee of the business
made a bona fide, good faith effort to determine the minor’s age and had
reasonable grounds to believe the minor was over 18 years of age.



(1988 Code, § 13-91) Penalty, § 10.99



§ 133.17  VIOLATIONS; DECLARED PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   Each violation of this subchapter constitutes a public nuisance. Each
item of sexually explicit material publicly displayed in violation of this
subchapter shall constitute a public nuisance.



(1988 Code, § 13-92)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 133.18  INTERPRETATION OF MULTIPLE DISPLAYS; VIOLATIONS.



   Each instance of public display of an item of sexually explicit
material shall constitute a separate violation of this subchapter, but
possession of multiple copies of a particular item of sexually explicit
material shall constitute a single violation of this subchapter. Each day of
public display of sexually explicit material shall constitute a separate
violation of this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 13-93)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 133.19  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violation of this subchapter is declared to be a misdemeanor.
The Chief of Police may seek from an appropriate official of the general
court of justice an arrest warrant or other process initiating criminal
charges against any person alleged to have violated this subchapter. No other
agent or employee of the town may in his or her official capacity seek an
arrest warrant or other criminal process without the prior written approval
of the Town Manager.



   (B)   The town may also enforce this subchapter by bringing suit
under G.S. § 160A-175 or any successor provision for the enforcement of town
ordinances to abate the public display of sexually explicit materials to
minors. No action shall be taken to abate the public display until the
alleged violator has been given an opportunity to be heard in an adversarial
judicial proceeding to determine whether the materials publicly displayed are
sexually explicit within the meaning of this subchapter. Any order of
abatement shall apply to material judicially determined to be sexually
explicit within the meaning of this subchapter, and shall direct the
abatement of the public display by removal, confiscation and destruction of
material judicially determined to be sexually explicit and to have been
publicly displayed in violation of this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 13-94)  Penalty, § 10.99



§ 133.20  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.



   The remedies provided under this subchapter are cumulative and not
exclusive and may be independently pursued against the same person for the
same activity constituting a violation of this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 13-95)  Penalty, § 10.99



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   FLOOD PREVENTION



      151.   BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



      152.   MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS



      152A.   STANDARDS FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



      153.   SUBDIVISIONS



      154.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:
FLOOD PREVENTION



Section




Generally




   150.01   Statutory authorization



   150.02   Findings of fact



   150.03   Statement of purpose



   150.04   Objectives



   150.05   Definitions



   150.06   Lands to which this chapter applies



   150.07   Establishing areas of special flood hazard



   150.08   Establishment of development permit



   150.09   Compliance



   150.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   150.11   Interpretation



   150.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability




Administration




   150.25   Designation of Administrator



   150.26   Development permit; requirements



   150.27   Duties and responsibilities of Administrator



   150.28   Administrative procedures



   150.29   Variance procedures




Flood Hazard Reduction




   150.40   General standards



   150.41   Specific standards



   150.42   Streams without established baseflood elevations and/or
floodways



   150.43   Subdivision proposals and major developments



   150.44   Prohibited uses



   150.45   Maintenance of ditches and drains



   150.46   Blocking and the like of drain



   150.47   Curb and gutter policy; maintenance




Legal Status Provisions




   150.60   Effect on rights and liabilities



   150.61   Effect upon outstanding building permits



 



   150.99   Penalty



GENERALLY



§ 150.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in G.S. §§
143B-452, 160A-193, 160A-198 and 160A-11 et seq., delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Fairmont, Robeson
County, North Carolina does ordain as follows.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the Town of Fairmont and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction are subject to periodic inundation which
results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of
flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in flood plains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood
proofed or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream
channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the
accommodation of flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which
may increase erosion or flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to
other lands.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.04  OBJECTIVES.



   The objectives of this chapter are:



   (A)   To protect human life and health;



   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects;



   (C)    To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in flood plains;



   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood prone areas in a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas; and



   (G)   To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that
property is in a flood area.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  Structures that are located on the same parcel
of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to
the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are
common urban accessory structures.



   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING) .   An extension or increase in the
floor area or height of a building or structure. ADDITIONS TO EXISTING
BUILDINGS shall comply with the requirements for new construction, unless the
addition, renovation or reconstruction to any building that was constructed
prior to the initial flood insurance study for that area, and the addition,
renovation or reconstruction does not equal 50% of the present market value
of the structure. Where a firewall is provided between the addition and the
existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building
and must comply with the standards for new construction.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  The land in the flood plain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of being flooded in any given
year.



   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.



   BASEMENT.  For flood plain management purposes, any area of the
building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for
any occupancy or storage.



   DEVELOPMENT.  For flood plain management purposes, any human-made
change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to,
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.



   ELEVATED BUILDING.  For flood plain management purposes, a
non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground
level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings or columns.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION .   For the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION.  A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before August 11, 1987, (the effective date of
original flood damage prevention chapter.)



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs).



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of
the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  The engineering study performed by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to identify flood hazard areas, flood insurance
risk zones and other flood data in a community. The study includes flood
boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), flood hazard boundary maps (FHBMs) and/or
flood insurance rate map (FIRMs).



   FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 1
foot.



   FLOOR.  The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including
basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood
flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a
garage used solely for parking vehicles.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales or service facilities.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places; and/or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
Interior, or directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved
programs.



   LOWEST FLOOR .   For flood plain management and flood insurance
purposes, the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building’s lowest floor provided that an enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle.”



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARKOR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a FIRM are referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  For flood plain management purposes, structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of
this chapter and includes any subsequent improvements to structures.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on
or after August 11, 1987, (the effective date of original flood damage
prevention chapter.)



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE.  Any legally existing building or use
which fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   POLE BARNS, HAY SHEDS AND THE LIKE.  Accessory structures on farms,
and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop
building.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle which is: built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
and, designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.



   REMEDY A VIOLATION.  To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local flood plain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of
the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations or reducing
federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured
home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of
piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  For flood plain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank or other
human-made facility or infrastructure that is principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. See definition of “substantial improvement.”



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either: any project of improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or, any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.



   SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKORSUBDIVISION. 
Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the
streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement
commenced.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community’s flood plain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications or other evidence of compliance required in §§ 150.25
through 150.44 is presumed to be in VIOLATION until a time as that
documentation is provided.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.06  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Fairmont.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.07  ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.



   (A)   The areas of special flood hazard are those identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood hazard boundary map
or flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map(s), for the Town of
Fairmont dated July 18, 1980, which with accompanying supporting data, and
any revision thereto, including letters of map amendment or revision, are
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The areas of
special flood hazard also include those defined through standard engineering
analysis for private developments or by governmental agencies, but which have
not yet been incorporated in the FIRM. This includes detailed flood
information generated as a requirement of § 150.27 of this chapter.



   (B)   In addition, upon annexation to the Town of Fairmont, or
inclusion in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the areas of special flood
hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood
hazard boundary map or flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map(s)
for unincorporated Robeson County, with accompanying maps and other
supporting data, and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



Editor’s note:



   If the community regulates other flood hazard areas not shown on the
FEMA maps, please modify this section to reference those additional areas and
the documents in which they are described.



§ 150.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.09  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.11  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions
shall be: considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed in favor of
the governing body; and, deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted under state statutes.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes.



   (B)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within those areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.



   (C)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Town of Fairmont and its extraterritorial jurisdiction or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 150.25  DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Zoning Officer, hereinafter referred to as the Administrator, is
hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.26  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application for a development November 22, 2005 permit shall
be made to the Administrator on forms furnished by the Administrator prior to
any development activities. The development permit shall include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures; and the location of fill materials, storage areas and drainage
facilities.



   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:



      (1)   A plot plan that shows the 100-year flood plain contour
or a statement that the entire lot is within the flood plain must be provided
by the development permit applicant when the lot is within or appears to be
within the flood plain as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
or the flood plain identified pursuant to either §§ 150.27(J) or 150.42 and
150.43. The plot plan must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of
a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.



      (2)   The plot plan required by § 150.26(A) must show the
floodway as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or pursuant
to either §§ 150.27(J) or 150.42, or the setback required for streams
without designated floodways as required by § 150.42(B).



      (3)   Where base flood elevation data is provided as set forth
in §§ 150.07 or 150.27(J), the application for a development permit within
the flood hazard area shall show:



         (a)   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved
structures; and



         (b)   If the non-residential structure will be
flood-proofed in accordance with § 150.41(B), the elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) to which the structure will be flood-proofed.



      (4)   Where the base flood elevation data is not provided, the
application for a development permit must show construction of the lowest
floor at least 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade.



      (5)   Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development, the application for a development permit
shall include: a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on
the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties
located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.



      (6)   When a structure is flood-proofed, the applicant shall
provide a flood-proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) from a registered
professional engineer or architect that the non-residential flood- proofed
structure meets the flood-proofing criteria in § 150.41(B).



      (7)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) or a
flood-proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) is required after the lowest
floor is completed. Within 21 calendar days of establishment of the lowest
floor elevation, or flood-proofing by whatever construction means, whichever
is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, or
flood-proofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to
mean sea level. The certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building,
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work done
within the 21 day calendar period and prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Administrator shall
review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by
review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to
further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the
survey or failure to make corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue
a stop-work order for the project.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.27  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:



   (A)   Review all development permits to assure that the requirements
of this chapter have been satisfied;



   (B)   Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may
be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that
copies of permits be provided and maintained on file with the development
permit;



   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department
of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency;



   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is
not diminished;



   (E)   Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the
certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §§ 150.40 through
150.44 are met;



   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, in accordance with § 150.26(G);



   (G)   Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to
which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed,
in accordance with § 150.26(B);



   (H)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure,
obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with § 150.41(B);



   (I)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal
the interpretation as provided in this subchapter;



   (J)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been
provided in accordance with § 150.07, obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, including data developed pursuant to § 150.43(D), in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter;



   (K)   When the exact location of boundaries of the areas special
flood hazards conflict with the current, natural topography information at
the site the property owner may apply and be approved for a Letter of Map
Amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. A copy of the Letter of Map Amendment issued from
FEMA will be maintained by the Administrator in the permit file;



   (L)   Make on-site inspections of projects in accordance with §
150.28;



   (M)   Serve notices of violations, issue stop-work orders, revoke
permits and take corrective actions in accordance with § 150.28; and



   (N)   Maintain all records pertaining to the administration of this
chapter and make these records available for public inspection.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.28  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a
permit progresses, the Administrator shall make as many inspections of the
work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to
the provisions of the local chapter and the terms of the permit. In
exercising this power, the Administrator has a right, upon presentation of
proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial
jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



   (B)   Stop-work orders. Whenever a building or part thereof is being
constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation of this chapter,
the Administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work
order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The
stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific
reasons for the stoppage and the conditions under which the work may be
resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Revocation of permits. The Administrator may revoke and
require the return of the development permit by notifying the permit holder
in writing stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked
for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans or
specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of
state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in
securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an
applicable state or local law may also be revoked.



   (D)   Periodic inspections. The Administrator and each member of his
or her Inspections Department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of
the Department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



   (E)   Violations to be corrected. When the Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law in the
property he or she owns.



   (F)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the
owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action,
the Administrator shall give him or her written notice, by certified or
registered mail to his or her last known address or by personal service:



      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the
flood damage prevention chapter;



      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than 10 days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and



      (3)   That following the hearing, the Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
appears appropriate.



   (G)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Administrator shall find that
the building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall
make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the
violation within the period, not less than 60 days, the Administrator may
prescribe; provided that where the Administrator finds that there is imminent
danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective action
be taken in a lesser period as may be feasible.



   (H)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective
action may appeal from the order to the local elected governing body by
giving notice of appeal in writing to the Administrator and the Clerk within
10 days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal,
the order of the Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.



   (I)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or
property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which
no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing
body following an appeal, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be punished in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.29  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the Town of
Fairmont, hereinafter referred to as the “Appeal Board,” shall hear and
decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may
appeal the decision to the court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.



   (C)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.



   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of damage on the individual owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject
to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets
and bridges.



   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.



   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the
purposes of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.



   (G)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (H)   Conditions for variances:



      (1)   Variances may not be issued when the variance will make
the structure in violation of other federal, state or local laws, regulations
or chapters.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that
the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or chapters.



      (4)   (a)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base
flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a
written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with
the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.



         (b)   Notification shall be maintained with a record of
all variance actions.



      (5)   The Administrator shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 150.40  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions
are required:



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure;



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;



      (3)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall
be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages;



      (4)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;



      (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system;



      (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;



      (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding; and



      (8)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements
to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this
chapter.



   (B)   Nonconforming buildings or uses may not be enlarged, replaced
or rebuilt unless enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Provided, however, nothing
in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction or replacement of a
building or structure existing on the effective date of this chapter and
located totally or partially within the floodway or stream setback, provided
that the bulk of the building or structure below base flood elevation in the
floodway or stream setback is not increased and provided that repair,
reconstruction or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
has been provided, as set forth in §§ 150.07 or 150.27(J), the following
provisions are required:



   (A)   New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated no lower than 1 foot above the base flood
elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a
structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood
waters shall be provided.



   (B)   New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or non-residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated no lower than 1 foot above the level of the base
flood elevation. Structures located in A Zones may be flood-proofed to the
flood protection level in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the
structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the standards of this division are satisfied.
Certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in § 150.26(G).



   (C)   (1)   Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved on sites: outside a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or, in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as the result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation
so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than 1
foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



      (2)   Manufactured homes that are to be placed or
substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision that are not subject to the provisions of division (C)(1) above
must be elevated on reinforced piers or other structural elements so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is no lower than 1 foot above the base
flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.



      (3)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement in accordance with the State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured/Mobile Homes, 1995 Edition, and any revision thereto adopted by
the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. §§ 143-143.15. Additionally,
when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or
less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height an
engineering certification is required.



      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of
all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas.
This plan shall be filed with and approved by the Administrator and the local
Emergency Management Coordinator.



   (D)   A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect
type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached
additions. Recreation vehicles placed on sites shall either:



      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be
fully licensed and ready for highway use; or



      (2)   Meet the requirements of §§ 150.26, 150.40 and
150.41(C).



   (E)   New construction or substantial improvements of elevated
buildings that include fully enclosed areas that are usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to preclude
finished living space and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood
waters.



      (1)   Designs for complying with this requirement must either
be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum criteria:



         (a)   Provide a minimum of 2 openings having a total net
area of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;



         (b)   The bottom of all required openings shall be no
higher than 1 foot above grade; and



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow
of flood waters in both directions.



      (2)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).



      (3)   The interior portion of the enclosed area shall not be
partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas.



   (F)   Prior to the issuance of a development permit for a temporary
structure the following requirements must be met:



      (1)   All applicants must submit to the Administrator prior to
the issuance of the development permit a plan for the removal of structure(s)
in the event of a hurricane or flash flood warning notification. The plan
must include the following information:



         (a)   A specified time period for which the temporary
use will be permitted;



         (b)   The name, address and phone number of the
individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



         (c)   The time frame prior to the event at which a
structure will be removed (i.e. minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a
hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification);



         (d)   A copy of the contract or other suitable
instrument with a trucking company to ensure the availability of removal
equipment when needed; and



         (e)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a
location outside the flood plain to which the temporary structure will be
moved.



      (2)   The above information shall be submitted in writing to
the Administrator for review and written approval.



   (G)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages and the
like) with a value of $3,000 or less are to be placed in the flood plain the
following criteria shall be met:



      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human
habitation (including work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);



      (2)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential;



      (3)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood
waters;



      (4)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with § 150.40(A);



      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be installed in accordance with § 150.40(D); and



      (6)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood
shall be provided below base flood elevation in conformance with § 150.41(E).



   (H)   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
150.07, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris and
potential projectiles and has erosion potential. The following provisions
shall apply within those areas:



      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless it
has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood. Certification and technical data shall be presented to the
Administrator.



      (2)   If § 150.41(H)(1) is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§ 150.40 through 150.44.



      (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured
home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision provided the anchoring and the elevation standards of §
150.41(C) and the encroachment standards of § 150.41(H)(1) are met.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.42  STREAMS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASEFLOOD ELEVATIONS AND/OR FLOODWAYS.



   (A)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established
in § 150.07, are small streams where no base flood data has been provided or
where no floodways have been identified.



   (B)   The following provisions apply within those areas:



      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a
distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or 5 times the width of the
stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical
data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.



      (2)   If § 150.42(A) is satisfied and base flood elevation
data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial
improvements within those areas shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
chapter provisions of §§ 150.40 through 150.44 and shall be elevated or
flood-proofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with §
150.27(J). When base flood elevation data is not available from a federal,
state or other source, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be
elevated at least 2 feet above the highest adjacent grade. (Two feet is the
minimum requirement.)



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.43  SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS AND MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Proposals for subdivisions and major developments shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (B)   Proposals for subdivisions and major developments shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   Proposals for subdivisions and major developments shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



   (D)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development, which is greater than the lesser of
50 lots or 5 acres.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.44  PROHIBITED USES.



   (A)   The following uses are strictly prohibited in the 100-year
flood plain except as authorized under division (B) of this section: new
solid waste disposal facilities; hazardous waste management facilities;
salvage yard; and chemical storage facilities.



   (B)   Uses prohibited under G.S. § 143-215.54 and division (A) of
this section may be granted a variance provided that the Town of Fairmont
notify the Secretary of its intention to grant a variance at least 30 days
prior to grant the variance and upon finding that all of the following apply:



      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community;



      (2)   No feasible location exists for the location of the use
outside the 100-year flood plain;



      (3)   The lowest floor of any structure is elevated above a
base flood elevation or is designed to be watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components capable of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and



      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable law and
regulations.



   (C)   A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to
a use that is allowed under this section or to the operation of a water
treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a 100-year
flood plain only if the structure or tank is either elevated above base flood
elevation or designed to be watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.45  MAINTENANCE OF DITCHES AND DRAINS.



   Ditches and drains on all property within the town shall provide for
the adequate disposal of surface water, as determined by an official of the
town designated by the Manager.



(1988 Code, § 6-1)



§ 150.46  BLOCKING AND THE LIKE OF DRAIN.



   No person shall block, obstruct or close any drainage ditch or drain.



(1988 Code, § 6-2)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.47  CURB AND GUTTER POLICY; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Curb and gutter policy. It shall be the policy of the town
that proper drainage of all property and of town streets is necessary and a
part of the Fairmont development objectives.



   (B)   Curb and gutter/drainage.



      (1)   Should be part of the town-wide system only;



      (2)   Cannot adversely affect any property in an adverse
manner;



      (3)   If not part of right-of-way, should be made so;



      (4)   Shall be considered on the basis of availability of
funds;



      (5)   Costs should be incurred on a 50/50 basis with up-front
money provided for by the petitioner;



      (6)   Estimates for cost of service should be:



         (a)   Requested by those petitioning the Board;



         (b)   By the (Town Engineer) Public Works Director with
costs to be incurred on a 50/50 basis if the project is to be done and 100%
by Public Works Director; and



      (7)   All work is to be inspected by the Town Engineer.



   (C)   Maintenance.



      (1)   The property owner shall petition to the Town Board on a
50/50 basis for costs incurred from the maintenance performed on curb and
gutters located on the property and that which is located on town-maintained
streets.



      (2)   The town shall repair any damages done at 100% costs for
damages incurred by any town employees(s) and/or vehicle(s) while carrying
out town duties.



      (3)   The owner of the property shall be assessed 100% of
costs from damages to the curbs and gutters which are located on the
owner’s property and located on town-maintained streets.



      (4)   Those wishing to participate in this policy may do so by
petitioning the Board of Commissioners by submitting their request in writing
to the office of the Town Manager, 4 days before the regular scheduled Board
meeting.



(1988 Code, § 6-3)



LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS



§ 150.60  EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   This subchapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of this chapter enacted August 11, 1987, (the original adoption
date) as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to
re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of existing provisions,
so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved
and may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any
action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of this
chapter of the Town of Fairmont enacted on August 11, 1987, (the original
adoption date), as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.61  EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING BUILDING PERMITS.



   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part
thereof for which a building permit has been granted by the Chief Building
Inspector or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of this
chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under an
outstanding permit within a period of 60 days subsequent to passage of this
chapter, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Fairmont from taking other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. passed 10-8-2002)



CHAPTER 151:
BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



Section




Generally




   151.01   Fire limits



   151.02   Permit and inspection fees




Unsafe Buildings and Structures




   151.15   Inspections



   151.16   Notification of owner of defects



   151.17   Notice posted on unsafe building



   151.18   Removing notice from dangerous building



   151.19   Hearing following failure of owner to correct defects



   151.20   Order to take corrective action



   151.21   Appeal



   151.22   Failure to comply with order



GENERALLY



§ 151.01  FIRE LIMITS.



   The following territory in the town is hereby declared the primary fire
limits: The territory included within the limits of 135 feet from the outer
or east edge of the sidewalk on the west side of South Main Street, 135 feet
from the centerline of the A.C.L. Railroad running in a straight line to the
property of the Baptist church, crossing Main Street with a line 90 feet on
the south side of Red Cross Street to and across Walnut Street, 90 feet on
the east side of the street, then up Walnut Street 90 feet on the east side
of the street to a point 135 feet from the centerline of the A.C.L. Railroad,
then in a straight line to the beginning.



(1988 Code, § 4-1)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-435



§ 151.02  PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   Building permit and inspection fees shall be as established by
ordinance.



(1988 Code, § 4-2)



Statutory reference:



   State building code, see G.S. § 143-138



UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES



§ 151.15  INSPECTIONS.



   The Department of Code Enforcement may make periodic inspections,
subject to the Board’s directions, for unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise
hazardous and unlawful conditions in buildings and structures within its
territorial jurisdiction. In addition, the Department of Code Enforcement is
authorized to make and shall make inspections when it has reason to believe
that conditions may exist in a particular building or structure. In
exercising this power, employees of the Department of Code Enforcement shall
have a right to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
Department at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials.



(1988 Code, § 4-61)



§ 151.16  NOTIFICATION OF OWNER OF DEFECTS.



   When a Department of Code Enforcement Inspector finds any defects in a
building or structure, or finds that the building or structure has not been
constructed in accordance with the applicable state and local laws or that a
building or structure, because of its condition, is dangerous or contains
fire hazardous conditions, it shall be his or her duty to notify the owner or
occupant of the building of its defects, hazardous conditions or failure to
comply with law. The owner or occupant shall each immediately remedy the
defects, hazardous conditions or violations of law in the property he or she
owns.



(1988 Code, § 4-62)



§ 151.17  NOTICE POSTED ON UNSAFE BUILDING.



   Every building or structure which shall appear to a Department of Code
Enforcement Inspector to be especially dangerous to life because of its
liability to fire or because of bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors,
defective construction, decay, unsafe wiring or heating system, inadequate
means of egress or other causes, shall be held to be unsafe, and the
Inspector shall affix a notice of the dangerous character of the structure to
a conspicuous place on the exterior wall of the building.



(1988 Code, § 4-63)



§ 151.18  REMOVING NOTICE FROM DANGEROUS BUILDING.



   If any person shall remove any notice that has been affixed to any
building or structure by a town Department of Code Enforcement Inspector and
that states the dangerous character of the building or structure, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1988 Code, § 4-64)



§ 151.19  HEARING FOLLOWING FAILURE OF OWNER TO CORRECT DEFECTS.



   (A)   If the owner of a building or structure that has been
condemned as unsafe pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-426 and 160A-463 shall fail to
take prompt corrective action, the Department of Code Enforcement shall give
him or her written notice, by certified or registered mail to his or her last
known address or by personal service that:



      (1)   The building or structure is in a condition that appears
to constitute a fire or safety hazard or to be dangerous to life, health or
other property;



      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Chief Inspector at a
designated place and time, not later than 10 days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and



      (3)   Following the hearing, the Chief Inspector may issue an
order to repair, close, vacate or demolish the building or structure as
appears appropriate.



   (B)   If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot after due
diligence be discovered, the notice shall be properly and adequately served
if a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building or structure in
question at least 10 days prior to the hearing and a notice of the hearing is
published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town at least once
not later than 1 week prior to the hearing.



(1988 Code, § 4-65)



§ 151.20  ORDER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   If upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed in G.S. §
160A-465, the Inspector shall find that the building or structure is in a
condition that constitutes a fire or safety hazard or renders it dangerous to
life, health or other property, he or she shall make an order in writing,
directed to the owner to remedy the defective conditions by repairing,
closing, vacating or demolishing the building or structure or taking other
necessary steps, within a period, not less than 60 days, as the Chief
Inspector may prescribe.



(1988 Code, § 4-66)



§ 151.21  APPEAL.



   Any owner who has received an order under G.S. § 160A-466 may appeal
from the order to the Board by giving notice of appeal in writing to the
Inspector and to the Town Clerk within 10 days following issuance of the
order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the Chief Inspector shall be
final. The Board shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may
affirm, modify or revoke the order.



(1988 Code, § 4-67)



§ 151.22  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.



   If the owner of a building or structure fails to comply with an order
issued pursuant to G.S. § 160A-466 from which no appeal has been taken or
fails to comply with an order of the Board following an appeal, he or she
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1988 Code, § 4-68)



CHAPTER 152:
MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS



Section




Generally




   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Findings and purpose



   152.03   Conflict with other provisions



   152.04   Violations; penalty



   152.05   Alternative remedies



   152.06   Powers and duties of Inspector



   152.07   Authority of Inspector to enter premises for inspection



   152.08   Authority of Inspector to inspect rental dwellings



   152.09   Authority of owner to enter premises to make repairs



   152.10   Compliance with minimum standards required



   152.11   Responsibilities of owners and occupants



   152.12   Structural condition



   152.13   Basic plumbing, heating and electrical equipment and
facilities



   152.14   Ventilation



   152.15   Space, use and location



   152.16   Safe and sanitary maintenance



   152.17   Control of insects, rodents and infestations



   152.18   Exceptions for rooming houses




Abatement Procedure




   152.30   Procedure for enforcement



   152.31   Housing Appeals Board



   152.32   Methods; service of complaints and orders



   152.33   Placarding



   152.34   Lien



GENERALLY



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASEMENT.  A portion of a dwelling which is located partly
underground, having direct access to light and air from windows located above
the level of the adjoining ground.



   CELLAR.  A portion of a dwelling which is located partly or wholly
underground having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.



   DETERIORATED.  A dwelling unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this subchapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value,
as determined by finding of the Code Enforcement Officer.



   DILAPIDATED.  A dwelling unfit for human habitation and cannot be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this subchapter except at a cost in excess of 50% of its
value, as determined by finding of the Code Enforcement Officer.



   DWELLING.  Any building, structure or part thereof which is wholly or
partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping or habitation by
human occupants, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging
thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. Temporary housing shall not be regarded
as a dwelling. The term shall include within its meaning the terms ROOMING
HOUSE and ROOMING UNIT.



   DWELLING UNIT .   Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   EXTERMINATION .   The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as
their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer.



   GARBAGE .   The organic waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   HABITABLE ROOM .   A room or enclosed floor space used for living,
sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating corridors,
closets and storage spaces.



   INFESTATION .   The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests in a number as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.



   INSPECTOR .   The Code Enforcement Officer of the town or any
authorized agent thereof.



   MULTIPLE DWELLING .   Any dwelling containing more than 2 dwelling
units.



   OCCUPANT .   Any person over 1 year of age, living, sleeping, cooking
or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit.



   OPERATOR .   Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   OWNER .   Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others:



      (1)   Has title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;



      (2)   Is a mortgagee of record for any dwelling, dwelling unit
or rooming unit; or



      (3)   Has charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit, as owner or agent of the actual owner, or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate
of the actual owner. Any person thus representing the actual owner shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this subchapter, and of rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he or she were
the owner.



   PARTY IN INTEREST.  Any person who has interests of record in a
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and any person who is in possession
thereof.



   PLUMBING.  All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units
(mechanical sink grinders), sewage disposal pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes
washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied
fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  The town housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the town or of the
county or the state relating to health, fire, building regulations or other
activities concerning dwellings in the town.



   ROOMING HOUSE.  Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling containing 1
or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or operator to 3 or
more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father
or sister or brother of the owner or operator.



   ROOMING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.



   RUBBISH.  Non-organic waste materials. The term shall include paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass and dust.



   SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished, provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.



   TEMPORARY HOUSING.  Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached
to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.



   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.  Conditions exist in a dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming house or rooming unit which violate or do not comply with 1 or
more of the minimum standards of fitness or 1 or more of the requirements
established by this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 4-16)



Statutory reference:



   Minimum housing standards, see G.S. §§ 160A-441 et seq.



§ 152.02  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby declared that there
exist in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other
calamities; lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities; and other
conditions rendering dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous and
detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the town.



(1988 Code, § 4-17)



   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the town as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-441 et seq., it is the
purpose of this chapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the
initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation.



(1988 Code, § 4-18)



§ 152.03  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   If any provision, standard or requirement of this chapter is found to
be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the town,
the provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent
requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
residents of the town shall prevail.



(1988 Code, § 4-19)



§ 152.04  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling
unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to
vacate and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the Code
Enforcement Officer duly made and served as provided in this subchapter
within the time specified in each order. Each day that any failure, neglect
or refusal to comply with an order continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to § 152.30 to
occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed in the
order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and closing.
Each day that occupancy continues after the prescribed time shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.



   (C)   The violation of any provision of this subchapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor.



   (D)   In addition to the penalty established by division (C) above,
and the remedies provided by other provisions of this subchapter, this
subchapter may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.



(1988 Code, § 4-20)



§ 152.05  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Neither this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed,
to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this subchapter by criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and
this subchapter. The enforcement of any remedy provided in this subchapter
shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy provided in this
subchapter or in other ordinances or laws.



(1988 Code, § 4-21)



§ 152.06  POWERS AND DUTIES OF INSPECTOR.



   (A)   The Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to enforce
the provisions of this subchapter and to exercise the duties and powers
prescribed in this subchapter. The Inspector is authorized to exercise powers
as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Inspector shall have the power and duty to:



      (1)   Investigate the dwelling conditions and inspect
dwellings and dwelling units located in the town in order to determine which
dwellings and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the
purpose of carrying out the objectives of this subchapter with respect to the
repair, closing or demolition of dwellings and dwelling units;



      (2)   Take action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect
rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated;



      (3)   Keep a record of the results of inspections made under
this subchapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the
minimum standards of fitness prescribed in this chapter;



      (4)   Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence;



      (5)   Enter upon premises for the purpose of making
examinations and inspections; provided, that entries shall be made in
accordance with § 152.07 and state law, and shall be made in a manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;



      (6)   Appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents and
employees as he or she deems necessary to assist in carrying out the purposes
of this subchapter and delegate any of his or her functions and powers to
officers, agents and employees; and



      (7)   Perform other duties as may be prescribed in this
subchapter or by the Board of Commissioners.



(1988 Code, § 4-22)



§ 152.07  AUTHORITY OF INSPECTOR TO ENTER PREMISES FOR INSPECTION.



   For the purpose of making inspections, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and the premises
associated therewith. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house or rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give
the Inspector free access to the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of
inspection, examination and survey.



(1988 Code, § 4-23)



Editor’s note:



   When permission to inspect a dwelling or its premises is denied, the
Inspector must obtain a warrant to inspect. G.S. § 15-27.2 provides for the
issuance of warrants for the conduct of inspections authorized by law. In In
Re Dwelling, 24 N.C. App. 17 (1974), it was held that the consent of the
tenant-occupant who was in actual possession and control of the premises was
sufficient to authorize an inspection without a warrant, notwithstanding the
fact that the owner had objected to the warrantless search. When faced with a
situation where permission to inspect is denied, inspectors are advised to
seek the advice of the Town Attorney.



§ 152.08  AUTHORITY OF INSPECTOR TO INSPECT RENTAL DWELLINGS.



   Whenever application is made to the town for water and sewer connection
to a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit the Inspector shall inspect the
unit and its premises to insure compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. Inspection shall be made prior to water and sewer connections. If
the Inspector should find that the premises are unsafe for human habitation,
then the Inspector shall delay water and sewer connection until a time as the
unsafe conditions are made safe. If the Inspector should find that the
premises are unfit for human habitation, fail to meet the minimum standards
of fitness as set out in this chapter or are otherwise in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, he or she shall not permit water and sewer
connections and proceed as provided in this chapter.



(1988 Code, § 4-23)



§ 152.09  AUTHORITY OF OWNER TO ENTER PREMISES TO MAKE REPAIRS.



   Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming
unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to
any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making repairs or alterations as are necessary to
effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful
order issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



(1988 Code, § 4-24)



§ 152.10  COMPLIANCE WITH MINIMUM STANDARDS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation or
held out for use as a human habitation shall comply with all of the minimum
standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the requirements of this
chapter other than § 152.18.



   (B)   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another
for occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit
which does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human
habitation and all of the requirements of this chapter other than § 152.18.



(1988 Code, § 4-25)



§ 152.11  RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   (A)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing 2 or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof.



   (B)   Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and premises thereof which he or she occupies and controls.



   (C)   Rubbish and garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling
unit shall dispose of all his or her rubbish and garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing it in the supplied storage facilities. In all
cases, the owner shall be responsible for the availability of rubbish and
garbage storage facilities.



   (D)   Supplies plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit
shall keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the
proper use and operation of same.



   (E)   Care of facilities, equipment, structure. No occupant shall
willfully destroy, deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment or any
part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.



(1988 Code, § 4-26)



§ 152.12  STRUCTURAL CONDITION.



   The following standards shall constitute the minimum standards for
structural condition of a dwelling or dwelling unit:



   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists,
rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall
not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks
which might admit rodents;



   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;



   (C)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation
supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged;



   (D)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in a condition that they will not fail or
collapse;



   (E)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall
be provided;



   (F)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways
shall be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable
household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be
maintained in a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable
privacy between various spaces;



   (G)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors
and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be weathertight and watertight;



   (H)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are
defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling or in a condition or location
as to constitute a fire hazard; and



   (I)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors or wood floors
on the ground.



(1988 Code, § 4-27)



§ 152.13  BASIC PLUMBING, HEATING AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.



   (A)   Plumbing system.



      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water
supply and to a public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.



      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen
sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and adequate supply of both cold
water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.



      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the
State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in
good working order.



      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within
the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water
closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room affording privacy to the
user.



   (B)   Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have
facilities for providing heat in accordance with the following:



      (1)   Central and electric heating systems. Every central or
electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity to heat all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to
which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured 3 feet
above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.



      (2)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric
heating system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be
provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, gas vents or other
facilities to which heating appliances may be connected to heat all habitable
rooms with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured 3 feet above the floor
during ordinary winter conditions.



   (C)   Electrical system.



      (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for
electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall
contain at least 2 floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles,
connected in a manner as determined by the state electrical code. There shall
be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace
room at least 1 supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. If wall
or ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then each
habitable room shall contain at least 3 floor or wall-type electric
convenience receptacles.



      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when
natural daylight is not sufficient.



      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall
be: maintained in a state of good repair; safe; capable of being used; and
installed in accordance with the state electrical code.



(1988 Code, § 4-28)



§ 152.14  VENTILATION.



   (A)   General. Every habitable room shall have at least 1 window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor
area of a room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window
or any room and light obstructing structures are located less than 5 feet
from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not
be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of a
room, the total window area of a skylight shall equal at least 15% of the
total floor area of the room.



   (B)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least 1
window or skylight which can easily be opened, or another device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size
or minimum skylight-type window size as required or shall have other
approved, equivalent ventilation.



   (C)   Bathroom and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water
closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements
for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped within an
approved ventilation system.



(1988 Code, § 4-29)



§ 152.15  SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.



   (A)   Room sizes. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the
minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the State Residential
Building Code.



      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square
feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet
of additional habitable area for each of the next 3 occupants, and at least
75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional
occupant.



      (2)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by 1 occupant shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than 1 occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for
each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor
area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (B)   Ceiling height. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet, 6 inches.



   (C)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the
basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the
dwelling unit may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable floor
area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less
than 4-1/2 feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area for the
purpose of determining maximum permissible occupancy.



   (D)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.



   (E)   Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes
unless:



      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;



      (2)   The total window area, total openable window area and
ceiling height are equal to those required for habitable rooms;



      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room
is entirely above the grade adjoining the window area, except where the
window or windows face a stairwell, window well or accessway.



(1988 Code, § 4-30)



§ 152.16  SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall,
exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight and
rodent-proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be
capable of affording privacy; and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use would cause to be placed thereon. Every
exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to
prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the weather.



   (B)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior
wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent-proof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use would cause to be placed thereon.



   (C)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or
cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and
rodent-proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.



   (D)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every outside and inside
stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use would cause to be placed thereon and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (E)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so that it will
be reasonably impervious to water and will permit the floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.



   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this subchapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (G)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded in order to
obtain thorough drainage and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.



   (H)   Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property areas
shall be kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or
detrimental to health.



   (I)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate
means of egress as required by the State Residential Building Code.



(1988 Code, § 4-31)



§ 152.17  CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS AND INFESTATIONS.



   (A)   Screens. In every dwelling unit, for protection against
mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a
dwelling unit to outdoor space shall be equipped with screens and
self-closing devices. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor
space used or intended to be used for ventilation shall likewise be equipped
with screens.



   (B)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or
intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be equipped with screens or
other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.



   (C)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a
dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than 1 dwelling unit shall be
responsible for extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only
one infested. Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to
maintain a dwelling in a rodent-proof or reasonably insect-proof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation
exists in 2 or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or
public parts of any dwelling containing 2 or more dwelling units,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.



   (D)   Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for
storage of rubbish as required by town ordinances, and the owner, operator or
agent in control of that dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the removal of rubbish.



   (E)   Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every
dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility,
which may be an adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink
grinder) in each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can as
required by town ordinances.



(1988 Code, § 4-32)



§ 152.18  EXCEPTIONS FOR ROOMING HOUSES.



   All of the provisions of this subchapter and all of the minimum
standards and requirements of this subchapter shall be applicable to rooming
houses and to every person who operates a rooming house or who occupies or
lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except
as provided in the following divisions:



   (A)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least 1
water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an
approved water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be
supplied for each 4 rooms within a rooming house wherever these facilities
are shared. All facilities shall be located within the residence building
served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and
shall be not more than 1 story removed from any of the persons sharing
facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with
hot and cold water at all times.



   (B)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by 1 occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than 1
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area
for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (C)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall
be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and
ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming
house. He or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of
the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the
rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.



   (D)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by division (A) of this section
shall be located within the rooming house and within a room which affords
privacy, is separate from the habitable rooms, is accessible from a common
hall and is accessible without going outside the rooming house or through any
other room therein.



(1988 Code, § 4-33)



ABATEMENT PROCEDURE



§ 152.30  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a
petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority or by at least 5
residents of the town charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit
for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Inspector, upon
inspection, that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation,
he or she shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis of
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in the dwelling or dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector at a
place therein fixed, not less than 10 nor more than 30 days after the serving
of the complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to
file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and
give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of the
hearing shall also be given to at least 1 of the persons signing a petition
relating to the dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend the hearing
and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Inspector.



   (B)   Procedure after hearing. After the notice and hearing pursuant
to division (A) of this section, the Inspector shall state in writing his or
her determination whether the dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, and, if so, whether it is deteriorated or dilapidated. The
following provisions are applicable:



      (1)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling or
dwelling unit is deteriorated, he or she shall state in writing his or her
findings of fact in support of the determination, and shall issue and cause
to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing and requiring the
owner to repair, alter or improve dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with
the minimum standards of fitness established by this subchapter within a
specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days. The order may also direct
and require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling or dwelling unit until
repairs, alterations and improvements have been made. The order shall be
issued only if the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling.



      (2)   If the Inspector determines that the dwelling is
dilapidated, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact to
support determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof an order directing and requiring the owner either to repair, alter or
improve that dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum standards
of fitness established by this subchapter, or else to vacate and remove or
demolish the same within a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.
The order shall be issued only if the repair, alteration or improvement of
the dwelling cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of
the dwelling.



   (C)   Failure to comply with order.



      (1)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated
dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector
to repair, alter or improve or to vacate and close the same within the time
specified therein, or if the owner of a dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit
shall fail to comply with an order of the Inspector to repair, alter or
improve or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same within the
time specified therein, the Inspector shall submit to the Board of
Commissioners at its next regular meeting a resolution directing the Town
Attorney to petition the superior court for an order directing the owner to
comply with the order of the Inspector.



      (2)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a
deteriorated or dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an order
of the Inspector within the time specified therein, if injunctive relief has
not been sought or has not been granted as provided in the above division
(C)(1), the Inspector shall submit to the Board of Commissioners an ordinance
ordering the Inspector to cause the dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired,
altered, improved, vacated, closed, removed or demolished, as provided in the
original order of the Inspector, and pending removal or demolition, to place
a placard on the dwelling as provided by G.S. §§ 160A-443 and 160A-444.



   (D)   Appeals from orders of Inspector. An appeal from any decision
or order of the Inspector may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Any
appeal from the Inspector shall be taken within 10 days from the rendering of
the decision or services of the order, and shall be taken by filing with the
Inspector and with the Housing Appeals Board a notice of appeal which shall
specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any
notice of appeal, the Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was
made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Inspector refusing to allow
the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her decision shall remain
in force until modified or reversed. When an appeal is from a decision of the
Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have
the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board,
unless the Inspector certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal is
filed with him or her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate,
a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant, a suspension of the
requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order. A
restraining order may be granted by the Board or by a court of record upon
petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160A-446(f) and division (E) below for due
cause shown upon not less than 1 day’s written notice to the Inspector. The
Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals, shall give
due notice to all the parties, and shall render its decision within a
reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The
Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or
order appealed from, and may make a decision and order as in its opinion
ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all the power
of the Inspector, but the concurring vote of 4 members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the Inspector. The
Board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where there
are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of this subchapter, to adapt the application of this
subchapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of this
subchapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done. Every decision of the Board shall be subject to
review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days
of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



   (E)   Petition to superior court by owner. Any person aggrieved by
an order issued by the Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board shall
have the right, within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of
the decision, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction
restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as
provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



(1988 Code, § 4-41)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-443(2) through (5)



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-446(c) through (g)



§ 152.31  HOUSING APPEALS BOARD.



   There is hereby created a Housing Appeals Board to which appeals may be
taken from decisions or orders of the Inspector, as provided by § 152.30(D).
The Board shall consist of 5 members to serve for 3-year staggered terms. The
Board shall have the power to elect its own officers, to fix the times and
places of its meetings, to adopt necessary rules of procedure and to adopt
other rules and regulations for the proper discharge of its duties. The Board
shall perform the duties prescribed by § 152.30(D) and shall keep an
accurate record of all its proceedings.



(1988 Code, § 4-42)



Statutory reference:



   Housing Appeals Board, see G.S. § 160A-446(a), (b)



§ 152.32  METHODS; SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the
whereabouts of persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the
Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the Inspector shall make
an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of the complaint or order upon
that person may be made by publishing the same at least once no later than
the time at which personal service would be required under the provisions of
this chapter in a newspaper having general circulation in the town. Where
service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or
order.



(1988 Code, § 4-43)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-445



§ 152.33  PLACARDING.



   (A)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to
comply with an order of the Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of
this division, and upon adoption by the Board of Commissioners of an
ordinance authorizing and directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S.
§ 160A-443(5) and § 152.30(C), the Inspector shall proceed to cause that
dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with
the minimum standards of fitness established by this subchapter, or to be
vacated and closed and removed or demolished, as directed by ordinance of the
Board of Commissioners, and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of
the dwelling unit a placard with the following words: “This building is
unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human
habitation is prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted
shall constitute a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds in the county wherein the property is located, and shall be indexed
in the name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S.
§ 160A-443(5).



(1988 Code, § 4-44)



§ 152.34  LIEN.



   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Inspector under this
subchapter shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was
incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected
as the lien for special assessment provided in Article 10 of G.S. Chapter
160A [G.S. §§ 160A-216 et seq.]. If the dwelling is removed or demolished
by the Inspector, he or she shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any
personal property, fixtures or appurtenances found in or attached to the
dwelling, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the
removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the
superior court by the Inspector, shall be secured in a manner directed by the
court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be
entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court.



(1988 Code, § 4-45)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-443(6)



CHAPTER 152A:  STANDARDS FOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Section




General Provisions




   152A.001 - 152A.050 Reserved




Abandoned and Substandard Structures; Nuisance Abatement: Abandoned and
Substandard Residential Structures




   152A.051   Findings



   152A.052   Intent



   152A.053   Scope



   152A.054   Definitions



   152A.055   Enforcement generally



   152A.056   Hazardous structures



   152A.057   Reports by employees of Fire and Police Departments



   152A.058   General powers of Inspector



   152A.059   Inspections



   152A.060   Conditions for enforcement



   152A.061   Abatement; petition; investigation; hearing



   152A.062   Order - contents



   152A.063   Same - failure to comply



   152A.064   Violations



   152A.065   Methods of service



   152A.066   Right of appeal



   152A.067   Contract for repairs



   152A.068   Conflict with other provisions



Nonresidential Maintenance and Safety



   152A.075   Purpose



   152A.076   General interpretations



   152A.077   Definitions



   152A.078   Applicability and compliance



   152A.079   Duty to comply



   152A.080   Maintenance standards for nonresidential buildings and
structures



   152A.081   Demolition of nonresidential buildings



   152A.082   Duties of Code Enforcement Official



   152A.083   Powers of the Code Enforcement Official



   152A.084   Inspections



   152A.085   Procedure for enforcement



   152A.086   Limitations on orders and ordinances: historic landmark
or historic district



   152A.087   Limitations on orders and ordinances: vacant
manufacturing facility or vacant industrial warehouse



   152A.088   Vacated and closed nonresidential buildings or structures



   152A.089   Methods of service of complaints and orders



   152A.090   In rem action by the Code Enforcement Official



   152A.091   Costs a lien on premises



   152A.092   Filing of ordinances



   152A.093   Alternative remedies



   152A.094   Board of Adjustment to hear appeals



   152A.095   Temporary injunction remedy for aggrieved person



   152A.096   Conflict with other provisions



   152A.097   Violations; penalty




Abatement of Nuisances - Abandoned and Substandard Nonresidential Structures




   152A.101   Authority



   152A.102   Definitions



   152A.103   Investigations



   152A.104   Complaint and hearing



   152A.105   Order



   152A.106   Limitations on orders



   152A.107   Action upon failure to comply



   152A.108   Action by Board upon abandonment of intent to repair



   152A.109   Service of complaints and orders



   152A.110   Liens



   152A.111   Ejectment



   152A.112   Civil penalty



   152A.113   Powers supplemental



   152A.114   Appeals



   152A.115   Compensation for taking by eminent domain



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§§ 152A.001 - 152A.050.  RESERVED.



ABANDONED AND SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES; NUISANCE ABATEMENT:  ABANDONED AND
SUBSTANDARD RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES



§ 152A.051  FINDINGS.



   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared that
there exist in the town abandoned residential structures which the Town
Commission finds to be health or safety hazards as a result of the attraction
of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous
conditions constituting a threat to the public and adjacent properties and
frequent use by persons as living quarters in the absence of sanitary
facilities, or other conditions or uses not in keeping with the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.052  INTENT.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. § 160A-441, it is the intent
of this subchapter to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of any
abandoned structures in accordance with the same provisions and procedures
set forth for the repair, closing or demolition of dwellings unfit for human
habitation in G.S. § 160A-443.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.053  SCOPE.



   This subchapter is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be
construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are
public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength,
stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and
property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of existing
structures. The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all existing
structures within the town. Portable, mobile or demountable structures when
used or intended for use within the town shall be subject to applicable
provisions of this subchapter. This subchapter establishes minimum
requirements for the initial and continued use of all structures and does not
replace or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction,
repair, demolition, removal or use of structures, equipment or facilities
except as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.054  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED OR SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.  Any structure, residential or
nonresidential, found to be in violation of this subchapter except an
involuntary vacancy as defined herein.



   ALTER OR ALTERATION.  Any change or modification in construction.



   APPROVED.  Approved by the Housing Inspector or other authority having
jurisdiction.



   AREA (BUILDING).  The maximum horizontally projected area of the
building at or above grade, exclusive of court and vent shafts.



   AREA (GROSS FLOOR).  The area within the inside perimeter of the
exterior walls with no deduction for corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of
walls, columns or other features, exclusive of court and vent shafts.



   AREA (NET FLOOR).  The area actually occupied not including accessory
unoccupied areas such as corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls,
columns, toilet room, mechanical area or other features.



   BASEMENT.  A story of a building or structure having 1/2 or more of
its clear height below grade.



   BOARD.  The Building Appeals Board.



   BUILDING.  Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure
of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind which has enclosing
walls for 50% or more of its perimeter. The term BUILDING shall be construed
as if followed by the words "or part thereof." For the purpose of this
subchapter, each portion of a building separated from other portions by a
fire wall shall be considered as a separate building. For the purpose of area
and height limitations, this definition shall be applicable to sheds and open
sheds.



   CELLAR.  That portion of a building, the ceiling of which is entirely
below grade or less than 4 feet 6 inches above grade.



   CERTIFIED.  Certified or confirmed by the Codes Enforcement Officer or
his or her designee.



   CODES ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OR HIS OR HER DESIGNEE.  The Fairmont Codes
Enforcement Officer or his or her designee.



   DETERIORATED.  A structure that can be repaired, altered or improved
to comply with all the minimum standards established by this subchapter at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure.



   DILAPIDATED.  A structure that cannot be repaired, altered or improved
to comply with all the minimum standards established by this subchapter, at a
reasonable cost in relation to the value of the structure.



   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Housing Inspector.



   GARBAGE.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   HEARING OFFICER.  The Codes Enforcement Officer or other inspector or
person charged with conducting hearings, including administering oaths and
affirmations, examining witnesses, receiving evidence, making findings of
fact and issuing orders as provided in the requirements of this subchapter.
Reference to one title herein shall also mean the other.



   HOUSING INSPECTOR.  The town employee designated as the Codes
Enforcement Officer.



   INFESTATION.  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests in such numbers as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public.



   INVOLUNTARY VACANCY.  An unoccupied building, residential or
nonresidential, structurally damaged as a result of fire, wind or other
perils, through no fault of the owner, for which an insurance claim has been
filed, if insured; provided that said vacancy shall not exceed 180 days from
the date that such damage occurred, after which said structure will be deemed
an abandoned building as defined herein.



   OCCUPANCY.  The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used
or intended to be used.



   OPENABLE AREA.  That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



   OWNER.  Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST.  All individuals, associations and corporations
that have interests of record in a structure or any that are in possession
thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any structure as owner or
agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the
actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this subchapter,
and rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if
he or she were the owner.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership, or any other legal entity.



   PLUMBING.  The practice, materials and fixtures used in the
installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures,
appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following:
sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and public
or private water supply system, within or adjacent to any building, structure
or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation,
maintenance, extension or alteration of storm water, liquid waste or sewerage
and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point
of public disposal, or other acceptable terminal.



   PREMISES.  A lot, plot or parcel of land including the building or
structure thereon and any appurtenances thereto.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except
garbage, and the term shall include, but not be limited to, ashes, paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.



   STAIRWAY.  One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings
and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage
from one story to another in a building or structure.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above. The
basement of a building shall be considered a story if it is used for purposes
other than storage or heating.



   STRUCTURE.  That which is built or constructed.



   SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under control of the
owner or operator.



   VENTILATION.  The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space.



   YARD.  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
extending along the entire length of a street or rear or interior lot line.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.055  ENFORCEMENT GENERALLY.



   The Hearing Officer shall be the officer to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter and exercise the duties and powers herein prescribed.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.056  HAZARDOUS STRUCTURES.



   Every abandoned structure within the town shall be deemed in violation
of this subchapter whenever such structure constitutes a health or safety
hazard as a result of:



   (A)   The attraction of insects, rodents;



   (B)   Conditions creating a fire hazard;



   (C)   Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children; and/or



   (D)   Frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in absence of
sanitary facilities.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.057  REPORTS BY EMPLOYEES OF FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS.



   The employees of the Fire Department and the Police Department shall
make a report in writing to the Housing Inspector of each structure which
they know or suspect to be an abandoned structure and dangerous within the
scope of this subchapter. Any such report shall be delivered to the Codes
Enforcement Officer within 48 hours of the discovery of such structure by
such employee. All identified violations of the Fire Prevention Code shall be
certified to the Hearing Officer by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.058  GENERAL POWERS OF INSPECTOR.



   The Hearing Officer shall have such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this
subchapter, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, in
addition to others herein granted, the following powers:



   (A)   Investigations.  To investigate abandoned structures and
structural conditions in the town in order to determine which structures
therein are constituting hazards to public safety, conditions creating a fire
hazard and conditions threatening surrounding properties, being guided in
such examination of dwellings and buildings by the requirements set forth in
this subchapter.



   (B)   Oaths, witnesses, and the like.  To administer oaths and
affirmations and to examine witnesses and receive evidence.



   (C)   Right of entry.  To enter upon and within premises and
structures for the purpose of making examinations and investigations;
provided, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession and shall otherwise
be in accordance with provisions of applicable law.



   (D)   Delegation of functions.  To delegate any of his or her
functions and powers under this subchapter to such officers and agents as he
or she may designate.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.059  INSPECTIONS.



   The Codes Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections in compliance with this subchapter, to determine the condition of
abandoned structures located within the town in order that he or she may
perform his or her duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the general
public and property. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Housing
Inspector is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable
times all abandoned structures.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.060  CONDITIONS FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   In making the preliminary determination of whether or not a
structure is in violation of this subchapter, the Housing Inspector may
consider the presence or absence of the following conditions:



      (1)   Deterioration of the structure's foundation, floors,
walls, ceilings or roof which may be decayed or damaged to the extent that
the structure's strength and soundness are questionable.



      (2)   Possible violations of the North Carolina State Building
Code, General Construction, Volume 1; National Electrical Code; North
Carolina State Plumbing Code, Volume II; and North Carolina State Heating,
Air Conditioning, Refrigeration and Ventilation Code, Volume III.



      (3)   Possible violations of the town Fire Prevention Code or
otherwise exhibits conditions constituting a fire hazard in such structure
such as, by way of example and not limitation, the collection of garbage,
rubbish or other combustible material.



      (4)   The collection of unreasonable or excessive amounts of
garbage or rubbish in or near the structure which may attract rodents and
insects or become breeding places for rodents and insects.



      (5)   The use of such abandoned structure or nearby grounds or
facilities by children as a play area, or for any other use, such that the
health and safety of the children are threatened or endangered.



      (6)   Repeated use of such structure by transients, vagrants
or other similar persons in the absence of sanitary facilities, which use
includes, but is not limited to, living, sleeping, cooking or eating.



   (B)   All determinations made by any designee of the Codes
Enforcement Officer that a structure is in violation of this chapter shall be
certified by the Codes Enforcement Officer in writing.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.061  ABATEMENT; PETITION; INVESTIGATION; HEARING.



   Whenever a petition is filed with the Housing Inspector charging that
any structure is abandoned and in violation of this subchapter, or whenever
it appears to the Housing Inspector by his or her own motion that any
structure is abandoned and in violation of this subchapter, the Housing
Inspector, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and the parties
in interest in such structures and including lien holders, if any, as shown
by the records of the Robeson County Register of Deeds, a complaint stating
the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be
held before the Hearing Officer or his or her designee at a designated place
not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of such
complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to
file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and
give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that rules
of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Hearing Officer.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.062  ORDER - CONTENTS.



   If, after notice and hearing, the Hearing Officer determines that the
structure under consideration is an abandoned structure and in violation of
this subchapter in accordance with the standards herein set forth, he or she
shall state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of such
determination, stating whether said abandoned structure is deteriorated or
dilapidated, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order:



   (A)   If the repair to correct unsafe conditions of said abandoned
structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value
of the structure, the order shall require the owner, within a specified
period of time, to repair such a structure so as to render it in compliance
with the order of the Hearing Officer. Such order may also direct and require
the owner to vacate and close the structure until the repairs have been made
and/or the unsafe and dangerous character of such structure has been
corrected. The order may require that the property be vacated and closed only
if continued occupancy during the time allowed for repair will present a
significant threat of bodily harm, taking into account the nature of the
necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements; the current state of the
property; and any additional risks due to the presence and capacity of minors
under the age of 18 or occupants with physical or mental disabilities. The
order shall state that the failure to make timely repairs as directed in the
order shall make the dwelling subject to the issuance of an order allowing
the town to make the repairs or cause the property to be vacated and closed.



   (B)   If the repair of said abandoned structure bringing it up to
the standards described in the North Carolina State Building Code cannot be
made at a reasonable cost of the present value of the structure, the order
shall require the owner, within a specified period of time either to repair
such structure so as to bring it into compliance with the standards described
in the North Carolina State Building Code or to demolish and remove such
structure. However, notwithstanding any other provision of law, if such
abandoned structure is located in the historic district of the town and the
historic district commission determines after a public hearing as provided by
ordinance, that the abandoned structure is of particular significance or
value toward maintaining the character of the district, and such abandoned
structure has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that such
abandoned structure be vacated and closed consistent with town codes.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009; Am. Ord. 09-126, passed 10-20-2009)



§ 152A.063  SAME - FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair the
structure, the Hearing Officer may:



      (1)   Cause such structure to be repaired, and pending such
repairs, may order such structure vacated and closed.



      (2)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any structure
so closed, a placard with the following words: "Notice is hereby given that
this building is in an unsafe and dangerous condition; may constitute a fire
hazard by reason of structural defects and general state of decay,
deterioration and disrepair; may be hazardous or dangerous to children or
members of the public generally; and may be dangerously infested with rodents
or insects. Said building has been condemned under the building laws of the
State of North Carolina and the Town of Fairmont."



   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the structure, the Inspector may:



      (1)   Cause such structure to be removed or demolished.



      (2)   Cause to be posted, pending removal or demolition, on
the main entrance of any structure a placard with the following words:
"Notice is hereby given that this building is in an unsafe and hazardous
condition; may constitute a fire hazard by reasons of structural defects and
general state of decay, deterioration and disrepair; may be hazardous or
dangerous to children or members of the public generally; and may be
dangerously infested with rodents or insects. Said building has been
condemned under the building laws of the State of North Carolina and the Town
of Fairmont."



   (C)   The duties of the Hearing Officer set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) shall not be exercised until the Town Commission, by ordinance, shall
have ordered the Hearing Officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this
subchapter with respect to the particular structure which the officer shall
have found to be in violation of this subchapter. No such ordinance shall be
adopted to require demolition of a structure until the owner has first been
given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with this
subchapter. Such ordinances shall be recorded in the Office of the Robeson
County Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property
owner in the grantor index.



   (D)   The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements or vacating and closing, or demolition and removal by the
Inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred; which lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be collected
as provided by Article 10, §§ 160A-216 et seq., G.S. Chapter 160A. If the
structure is demolished and removed by the town, it may sell the materials of
such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of
the demolition and removal and any balance remaining shall be deposited in
the superior court by the town, and shall be secured in such manner as may be
directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court (in a
special proceeding brought before the clerk of superior court for said
purpose).



   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit
in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor shall
enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of the
other remedies provided herein.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit
in any way the power of the Codes Enforcement Officer or his or her designee
in the proper enforcement of the duties of his or her office, as assigned,
nor shall the enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the
enforcement of other remedies provided, referenced or cited herein.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.064  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any structure to fail, neglect or
refuse to repair or to vacate and close and demolish and remove the same,
upon order of the Hearing Officer duly made and served as herein provided,
within the time specified in such order.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152A.065  METHODS OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Complaints issued by an inspector or orders issued by a
hearing officer under this subchapter shall be served upon persons either
personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by
registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be
sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or
certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned
by the post office within 10 days after the mailing. If regular mail is used,
a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises affected. If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of
persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Housing Inspector in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but have
refused to accept service by registered or certified mail, and he or she
shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or
order upon such owners or other persons may be made by publishing the same at
least once in a newspaper having general circulation in the town, and no
later than the time at which personal service would be required under
provisions of this subchapter. When service is made by publication, a copy of
such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order.



   (B)   Failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to
receive or have served upon him or her any complaint, notice or order herein
provided for shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to
any other owner or party in interest or any other person.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.066  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   Any owner or person who is aggrieved by the ruling or decision of the
Hearing Officer in any matter relative to the interpretation or enforcement
of any of the provisions of this subchapter may appeal to the Board of Zoning
Adjustment from any such decision by following the appeals procedure as
outlined in § 152A.114 of this chapter.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.067  CONTRACT FOR REPAIRS.



   Repairs or demolitions may be made under the supervision of the Housing
Inspector; the town may let the same to contract on competitive bids or by
private contract if no bids are received. Vacating and closing structures
shall also be done under the supervision of the Housing Inspector.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.068  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In any case where a provision of this subchapter is found to be in
conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
provision of this code or ordinances or codes of the town, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



NONRESIDENTIAL MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY



§ 152A.075  PURPOSE.



   In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the town and its
citizens, it is the purpose of this subchapter to establish minimum standards
of maintenance, sanitation, and safety relating to nonresidential buildings
or structures, as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-439. This subchapter
provides for the repair, closing, or demolition of nonresidential buildings
or structures as a result of a public necessity caused by conditions that are
dangerous to the public health, safety, and welfare. It is the further
purpose of this subchapter to preserve the character and integrity of the
community and to promote the comfort, happiness, and safety of community
residents.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)



§ 152A.076  GENERAL INTERPRETATIONS.



   (A)   Unless specifically defined in § 152A.077, words used in this
subchapter shall have their respective customary dictionary definitions. For
the purpose of these regulations certain words, terms, or phrases used herein
are interpreted and defined as follows.



   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.



   (C)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words
used in the plural shall include the singular.



   (D)   The words SHALL and WILL always indicate mandatory.



   (E)   The words SHOULD and MAY always indicate optional.



   (F)   The word LOT includes the words PLOT and/or PARCEL.



   (G)   The word BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE.



   (H)   The word PERSON includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation, and/or individual.



   (I)   The word USE includes the terms ARRANGED, DESIGNED, and/or
INTENDED for a use, activity, and/or purpose.



   (J)   The term ZONING MAP shall always indicate the official zoning
map of the town.



   (K)   The term TOWN BOARD shall always indicate the Town Board of
Commissioners.



   (L)   The BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT or BOA shall always indicate the City
Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)



§ 152A.077  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASIC STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS.  The parts of a building which provide the
principal strength, stability, integrity, shape, and safety of the building,
including, but not limited to, plates, studs, joists, rafters, stringers,
stairs, sub-flooring, flooring, sheathing, lathing, roofing, siding, window
frames, door frames, porches, railings, eaves, chimneys, flashing, masonry,
and all other essential components.



   BUILDING.  Any structure, place, or any other construction built for
the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any
kind, or any part of such structure, shelter, or property.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.  A code enforcement coordinator or officer
of the town or any agent of the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL who is authorized
by the CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL to enforce the provisions of this code.



   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS.  Any business or enterprise which produces and/or
offers for sale products and/or services which, in any manner, conducts
commerce within the town limits.



   DETERIORATION.  The condition of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, rusting, peeled or peeling
paint, or other evidence of physical decay or loss of structural integrity.



   MIXED OCCUPANCY.  Any building that is used for 2 or more occupancies
classified by different occupancy use groups.



   NONRESIDENTIAL.  Any building or structure, or portion of a building
or structure, occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part, for a
use other than a dwelling, home, residing, place, living space, or sleeping
space for 1 or more human beings, either permanently or transiently.



   NUISANCE.



      (1)   Any public NUISANCE known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence, as provided by the state, or this code; or



      (2)   Any condition including an attractive nuisance which may
prove detrimental to human health or safety whether in a building, on the
premises of a building, or part of a building, or upon an occupied lot; or



      (3)   Physical conditions dangerous to human life or
detrimental to health of persons in, on, or near the premises where the
condition exists; or



      (4)   Unsanitary conditions or conditions that are dangerous
to public health, well being, or the general welfare; or



      (5)   Fire hazards or other safety hazards.



   OCCUPANT.  Any person who is a tenant or has actual possession of a
nonresidential building or structure, or part thereof.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care, or control of premises or
a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the
owner, or any person, individually or jointly, entitled to possession
regardless of whether the premises are actually occupied or not.



   OWNER.  Any person who alone, jointly, or severally with others:



      (1)   Shall have title in fee simple to any nonresidential
building or structure, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof; or



      (2)   Shall have charge, care, or control of any
nonresidential building or structure as owner or agent of the owner, or as
executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of
the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this subchapter and of the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if
he/she were the owner.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST.  All individuals, associations, and corporations
that have interests of record in a building or any that are in possession
thereof; or shall have charge, care, or control of any building, as owner or
agent of the owner, operator, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this subchapter, and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
to the same extent as if he/she were the owner.



   PHYSICAL VALUATION.  The estimated cost to replace the building in
kind.



   PREMISES.  Any lot or parcel of land inclusive of any building,
structures, or improvements located thereon, under control by the same owner
or operator.



   SAFE.  A condition which is not likely to do harm to humans or to real
or personal property.



   STORY.  That portion of a building between the surface of any interior
floor and the ceiling next above. A basement is considered a STORY only when
its ceiling is over 6 feet above the average level of the finished ground
surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the front entrance and/or side
street entrance of the building.



   STRUCTURALLY SOUND.  Substantially free from flaw, defect, decay, or
deterioration to the extent that the building or structure or structural
member is capable of adequately or safely accomplishing the purpose for which
it was intended or designed.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or placed upon a property which is
supported by the ground or which is supported by any other STRUCTURE, except
a currently operable licensed vehicle.



   STRUCTURE, ABANDONED.  Any structure, whether designed and intended
for nonresidential or other uses, which is vacant or not in active use,
regardless of purpose or reason, for the past two-year period and which is
determined by the Code Enforcement Official to be unfit for occupancy based
upon the standards as set forth in this subchapter.



   UNSAFE.  A condition which is reasonably likely to do harm to humans
or to real or personal property if not corrected or stopped.



   VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE.  Any building or structure designed for
the storage of goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes,
which has not been used for that purpose for at least 1 year and has not been
converted to another use.



   VACANT MANUFACTURING FACILITY.  Any building or structure previously
used for the lawful production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been
used for that purpose for at least 1 year and has not been converted to
another use.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)



§ 152A.078  APPLICABILITY AND COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all
nonresidential buildings or structures which are now in existence or which
may be built within the corporate limits of the town.



   (B)   Every nonresidential building or structure and the premises on
which it is situated shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter,
whether or not such building or structure shall have been constructed,
altered, or repaired before or after the enactment of this subchapter, and
irrespective of any permits or licenses which have been issued for the use or
occupancy of the building or structure or for the installment or repair of
equipment or facilities. This subchapter establishes minimum standards for
all nonresidential buildings and structures and does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration, or
use of the building or structure, equipment, or facilities contained therein.
Where there is mixed occupancy, any commercial business use therein shall be
nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.079  DUTY TO COMPLY.



   It shall be the duty of each and every owner, operator, or other party
in interest of a commercial building or premises within the town, where
applicable, to comply with the regulations and requirements set forth in this
subchapter. No license, permit, or certification of occupancy shall be issued
unless and until all applicable sections of this subchapter have been
complied with. No land or building, or combination thereof, shall be used in
a manner inconsistent with or in conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.080  MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES.



   All nonresidential buildings and structures shall be free of all
conditions that are dangerous and injurious to the public health, safety, and
welfare of occupants or members of the general public. Without limitation of
the foregoing requirement, the existence of any of the following conditions
shall be deemed to be dangerous to the public health, safety, and welfare for
which a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of
such building or structure and must be corrected in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (A)   Interior walls, vertical studs, partitions, supporting
members, sills, joists, rafters, or other basic structural members that list,
lean, or buckle to such an extent as to render the building unsafe, that are
rotted, deteriorated, or damaged, and that have holes or cracks which might
admit rodents.



   (B)   Exterior walls that are not structurally sound, free from
defects and damages, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. Where a
wall of a building has become exposed as a result of demolition of adjacent
buildings, such wall must have all doors, windows, vents, or other similar
openings closed with material of the type comprising the wall. The exposed
wall shall be painted, stuccoed, or bricked and sufficiently weatherproofed
to prevent deterioration of the wall.



   (C)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which
are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for
the purpose used. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and
strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. Roofs shall be kept
structurally sound and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to prevent
rain or other objects from penetrating into the interior of the building.



   (D)   Such damage by fire, wind, or other causes as to render the
building unsafe.



   (E)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions, or disrepair,
which is dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants
or members of the general public.



   (F)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating, or sanitary
facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety, or general
welfare of the occupants or members of the general public.



   (G)   Buildings and structures including their environs that have
accumulations of garbage, trash, or rubbish, which creates health and
sanitation problems. All garbage and solid waste shall be in approved
containers or stored in a safe and sanitary manner.



   (H)   Buildings and structures that have loose and insufficiently
anchored overhanging objects, which constitute a danger of falling on persons
or property.



   (I)   Buildings and structures including their environs that have
insufficiently protected holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, and other such dangerous impediments on and around walks,
driveways, parking lots, alleyways, and other areas which are accessible to
and generally used by persons on or around the premises.



   (J)   Buildings and structures that have cracked or broken glass,
loose shingles, loose wood, crumbling stone or brick, loose or broken
plastic, or other dangerous objects or similar hazardous conditions. Exterior
surfaces shall be maintained in such material or treated in such a manner as
to prevent deterioration and repaired or replaced with like or similar
material according to its original use.



   (K)   Buildings and structures that have objects and elements
protruding from building walls or roofs, which are unsafe or not properly
secured or which can create a hazard such as abandoned electrical boxes and
conduits, wires, sign brackets and other brackets, and similar objects.



   (L)   Chimneys, flues, and vent attachments thereto which are not
structurally sound. Chimneys, flues, gas vents, or other draft-producing
equipment which are in use shall provide sufficient draft to develop the
rated output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoke-tight, and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases.



   (M)   Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, or fire escapes
which are not structurally sound. All exterior porches, landings, balconies,
stairs, and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings
properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the
same shall be kept sound, in good repair, and free of defects.



   (N)   Cornices which are not structurally sound. Rotten or weakened
portions shall be repaired and/or replaced. All exposed wood shall be treated
or painted.



   (O)   Improperly attached gutters or down-spouts that are located so
as to cause a hazard to pedestrian, vehicular traffic, or adjacent property.



   (P)   Advertising sign structures, attached or freestanding awnings,
marquees and their supporting members, and other similar attachments and
structures that cause a safety hazard to the occupants or members of the
general public.



   (Q)   All exterior surfaces that may cause unsafe conditions due to
a lack of maintenance. Exterior surfaces shall be painted or sealed in order
to protect the underlying surface from deterioration. All exterior surfaces
that have been painted shall be maintained generally free of peeling and
flaking. Where 50% or more of the aggregate of any painted surface shall have
peeling or flaking or previous paint worn away, the entire surface shall be
repainted in order to prevent further deterioration.



   (R)   Windows containing broken or cracked glass that could be in
danger of falling or shattering. All windows must be tight-fitting and have
sashes of proper size and design and free from rotten wood, broken joints, or
broken or loose mullions.



   (S)   All openings originally designed as windows, doors, loading
docks, or other means of egress or ingress which have been temporarily closed
by boarding or other manner in a non-secure manner so as to allow
unauthorized admittance. If an opening is temporarily closed by boarding to
secure the building or structure, the boarding shall be trim fit, sealed to
prevent water intrusion, and painted or stained to properly conform with the
other exterior portions of the building and the building or structure shall
be maintained in a state that secures the building or structure from any
unauthorized admittance from humans, animals, or birds.



   (T)   Any combination of conditions which in the judgment of the
Code Enforcement Official renders any building or structure dangerous or
injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of occupants or members
of the general public.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.081  DEMOLITION OF NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.



   Where a building is under the jurisdiction of this subchapter, the
building may be demolished by the owner provided that the following
requirements are met:



   (A)   Obtain a certificate of appropriateness to demolish from the
Town Planning Department;



   (B)   Obtain an asbestos inspection from a licensed asbestos
services company;



   (C)   Remove and properly dispose of all asbestos containing
materials (ACM's) by a licensed asbestos removal company;



   (D)   Properly close off and disconnect all sewer, gas, water, and
similar taps or connections;



   (E)   Grade the lot to a smooth, even, finished grade, free from
building material, debris, holes, and/or depressions. Where building debris
remains on the site below street level, the owner must back fill the lot with
no less than 12 inches of clean fill which shall be graded to a smooth, even
finished grade over any remaining debris;



   (F)   Where walls of adjacent buildings become exposed as a result
of the demolition, said walls must have all doors, windows, vents, or other
similar openings closed with material of the type comprising the wall. No
protrusions or loose material shall be in the wall. The exposed wall shall be
painted, stuccoed, or bricked by such building's owner so as not to detract
from the aesthetics and value for the adjacent property and weatherproofed if
necessary to prevent deterioration of the wall;



   (G)   Evidence (for example, copies of trip or weight tickets or
receipts) must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Official showing that all
demolition debris has been deposited in a regulated landfill equipped to
handle demolition or construction debris.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.082  DUTIES OF CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.



   The Code Enforcement Official is hereby designated as the public
officer to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and to exercise the
duties and powers herein prescribed. It shall be the duty of the Code
Enforcement Official:



   (A)   To investigate the conditions of nonresidential buildings and
structures in the town and to inspect nonresidential buildings and structures
located in the town in order to determine which nonresidential buildings and
structures are not being maintained so that the health and safety of its
occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized and for the
purpose of carrying out the objectives of this subchapter with respect to
such nonresidential buildings and structures;



   (B)   To take such action, together with other appropriate
departments and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to affect
the repair or demolition of nonresidential buildings and structures which
have not been properly maintained in compliance with minimum standards
established by this subchapter;



   (C)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
subchapter and an inventory of those nonresidential buildings and structures
which have not been properly maintained in compliance with the minimum
standards established by this subchapter; and



   (D)   To perform such other duties as may be herein prescribed.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.083  POWERS OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.



   The Code Enforcement Official shall first take all reasonable
non-formal actions to correct a violation of this subchapter prior to
exercising any of the powers listed herein. All non-formal attempts of
communication shall be documented in detail. The Code Enforcement Official is
authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry
out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this subchapter, including
the following powers in addition to others herein granted:



   (A)   To investigate nonresidential buildings and structures in the
town to determine whether they have been properly maintained in compliance
with the minimum standards established by this subchapter so that the safety
or health of the occupants or members of the general public are not
jeopardized;



   (B)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and
receive evidence;



   (C)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations
and inspections provided that such entries shall be made in accordance with
law and in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession; and



   (D)   To appoint and fix duties of such officers, agents, and
employees as the Code Enforcement Official deems necessary to carry out the
purposes of this subchapter.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.084  INSPECTIONS.



   For the purpose of making inspections, the Code Enforcement Official is
hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times,
nonresidential buildings and structures. If entry upon the premises for
purposes of investigation is necessary, such entry shall be made with
permission of the owner, the owner's agent, a tenant, or other person legally
in possession of the premises or pursuant to a duly issued administrative
search warrant in accordance with G.S. § 15-27.2.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.085  PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation. Whenever it appears to the Code
Enforcement Official that any nonresidential building or structure has not
been properly maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or
members of the general public are jeopardized for failure of the property to
meet the minimum standards established by this subchapter, the Code
Enforcement Official shall undertake a preliminary investigation.



   (B)   Complaint and hearing. If the preliminary investigation
discloses evidence of a violation of the minimum standards established by
this subchapter, the Code Enforcement Official shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of, and parties in interest in the nonresidential
building or structure, a complaint. The complaint shall state the charges and
contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the Code Enforcement
Official at a place therein fixed, not less than 10 days nor more than 30
days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in
interest shall be given the right to answer the complaint and to appear in
person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or
equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Code Enforcement
Official.



   (C)   Procedure after hearing.



      (1)   If, after notice and hearing, the Code Enforcement
Official determines that the nonresidential building or structure has been
maintained, in that the property meets the minimum standards established by
this subchapter, the Code Enforcement Official shall state in writing
findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause
to be served upon the owner thereof a copy of said determination.



      (2)   If, after notice and hearing, the Code Enforcement
Official determines that the nonresidential building or structure has not
been properly maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or
members of the general public is jeopardized for failure of the property to
meet the minimum standards established by this subchapter, the Code
Enforcement Official shall state in writing findings of fact in support of
that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof an order in accordance with the provisions of divisions (C)(3) and
(C)(4) of this section and subject to the limitations set forth in §§
152A.086 and 152A.087.



      (3)   If the Code Enforcement Official determines that the
cost of repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or structure would
not exceed 50% of its then current value, then the Code Enforcement Official
shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination
and issue an order that requires the owner, not less than 15 and not more
than 180 days, without an extension, as specified in the order, to take
reasonable precaution in order to protect the safety and well being of the
public and to either:



         (a)   Repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential
building or structure in order to bring it into compliance with the minimum
standards established by this subchapter; or



         (b)   Vacate and close the nonresidential building or
structure for any use.



      (4)   If the Code Enforcement Official determines that the
cost of repair, alteration, or improvement of the building or structure would
exceed 50% of its then current value, then the Code Enforcement Official
shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination
and issue an order that requires the owner, not less than 15 and not more
than 180 days, without an extension, as specified in the order, to take
reasonable precaution in order to protect the safety and well being of the
public and to either:



         (a)   Remove or demolish the nonresidential building or
structure; or



         (b)   Repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential
building or structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards
established by this subchapter.



   (D)   Failure to comply with orders and ordinances.



      (1)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to either
repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure; or vacate
and close the nonresidential building or structure, then the Code Enforcement
Official shall submit to the Town Council an ordinance ordering the Code
Enforcement Official to cause such nonresidential building or structure to be
repaired, altered, or improved in order to bring it into compliance with the
minimum standards established by this subchapter or to be vacated and closed
for any use. The property shall be described in the ordinance. If the Town
Council adopts the ordinance, the Code Enforcement Official shall cause the
building or structure to be vacated and closed for any use.



      (2)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to either
remove or demolish the nonresidential building or structure; or repair,
alter, or improve the non-residential building or structure, then the Code
Enforcement Official shall submit to the Town Council an ordinance ordering
the Code Enforcement Official to cause such nonresidential building or
structure to be removed or demolished. No ordinance shall be adopted to
require removal or demolition of a nonresidential building or structure until
the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into
conformity with the minimum standards established by the Town Council. The
property shall be described in the ordinance. If the Town Council adopts the
ordinance, the Code Enforcement Official shall cause the building or
structure to be removed or demolished.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.086  LIMITATIONS ON ORDERS AND ORDINANCES: HISTORIC LANDMARK OR
HISTORIC DISTRICT.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, if the
nonresidential building or structure is designated as a local historic
landmark, listed in the National Register of Historic Places, or located in a
locally designated historic district or in a historic district listed in the
National Register of Historic Places, and the Town Council determines, after
a public hearing, that the nonresidential building or structure is of
individual significance or contributes to maintaining the character of the
district, and the nonresidential building or structure has not been condemned
as unsafe, an order issued by the Code Enforcement Official pursuant to §
152A.085 and an ordinance approved by the Town Council pursuant to §
152A.085(D) may only require that the nonresidential building or structure be
vacated and closed until it is brought into compliance with the minimum
standards established by this subchapter.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.087  LIMITATIONS ON ORDERS AND ORDINANCES: VACANT MANUFACTURING
FACILITY OR VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, an order
issued by the Code Enforcement Official pursuant to § 152A.085 and an
ordinance approved by the Town Council pursuant to § 152A.085(D) may not
require repairs, alterations, or improvements to be made to a vacant
manufacturing facility or a vacant industrial warehouse to preserve the
original use. The order and ordinance may require such building or structure
to be vacated and closed, but repairs may be required only when necessary to
maintain structural integrity or to abate a health or safety hazard that
cannot be remedied by ordering the building or structure closed for any use.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.088  VACATED AND CLOSED NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   (A)   If the Town Council has adopted an ordinance or the Code
Enforcement Official has issued an order requiring the building or structure
to be repaired, altered, or improved or vacated and closed and the building
or structure has been vacated and closed for a period of 2 years pursuant to
the ordinance or order, then if the Town Council finds that the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the building or
structure and that the continuation of the building or structure in its
vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and
welfare of the town in that it would continue to deteriorate, would create a
fire or safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would
attract persons intent on criminal activities, or would cause or contribute
to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, then the Town
Council may, after the expiration of the 2- year period, adopt an ordinance
and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following.



      (1)   The ordinance shall require that the owner either
demolish and remove the nonresidential building or structure within 90 days,
or repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure to
bring it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this
subchapter within 90 days.



      (2)   The ordinance shall require that if the owner does not
either demolish and remove the nonresidential building or structure within 90
days, or repair, alter, or improve the nonresidential building or structure
to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards established by this
subchapter within 90 days, then the Code Enforcement Official shall demolish
and remove the nonresidential building or structure.



   (B)   In the case of a vacant manufacturing facility or a vacant
industrial warehouse, the building or structure must have been vacated and
closed pursuant to an order or ordinance for a period of 5 years before the
Town Council may take action under this section.



   (C)   If the owner fails to comply with the requirements of the
ordinance within 90 days, the Code Enforcement Official shall demolish and
remove the nonresidential building or structure.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.089  METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Code Enforcement Official
under this subchapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by
registered or certified mail, and, in conjunction therewith, may be served by
regular mail. When the manner or service is by regular mail in conjunction
with registered or certified mail, and the registered or certified mail is
unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office
within 10 days after mailing, service shall be deemed sufficient. The person
mailing the complaint or order by regular mail shall certify that fact and
the date thereof, and such certificate shall be conclusive in the absence of
fraud. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.



   (B)   If the identities of any owner or the whereabouts of persons
are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Code Enforcement Official in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Code Enforcement Official makes an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the
unknown owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper
having general circulation in the town at least once, no later than the time
at which personal service would be required under the provisions of this
subchapter. When service is made by publication, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby
affected.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.090  IN REM ACTION BY THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.



   After failure of an owner of a nonresidential building or structure to
comply with an order of the Code Enforcement Official issued pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter and upon adoption by the Town Council of an
ordinance authorizing and directing the owner to do so, as provided by G.S.
§ 163A-439(f) and § 152A.085(D) of this code, the Code Enforcement Official
shall proceed to cause such nonresidential building or structure to be
repaired, altered, or improved to comply with the minimum standards
established by this subchapter, or to be vacated and closed, or to be removed
or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the Town Council. The Code
Enforcement Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
nonresidential building or structure which is to be vacated and closed a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for any use; the
use or occupation of this building for any purpose is prohibited and
unlawful." Any person who occupies or knowingly allows the occupancy of a
building or structure so posted shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.091  COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.



   (A)   The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations, or
improvements, vacating and closing, or demolition and removal by the Code
Enforcement Official shall be a lien against the real property upon which
such cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority,
and be collected as provided by G.S. §§ 160A-216 et seq. If the structure
is demolished and removed by the town, the town may sell the marketable
materials of such structure and shall credit the proceeds of such sale
against the cost of the demolition and removal, and any balance remaining
shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the town, and shall be secured in
such manner as may be directed by such Court, and shall be disbursed by such
Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of
such Court (in a special proceeding brought before the Clerk of Superior
Court for said purpose).



   (B)   If the nonresidential building or structure is removed or
demolished by the Code Enforcement Official, the Code Enforcement Official
shall offer for sale the recoverable materials of the building or structure
and any personal property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to
the building or structure, and shall credit the proceeds of the sale, if any,
against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining
shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Code Enforcement Official,
shall be secured in a manner directed by the Court, and shall be disbursed by
the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
decree of the Court.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit
in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor shall
enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of the
other remedies provided herein.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit
in any way the power of the Code Enforcement Official in the proper
enforcement of the duties of his office, as assigned, nor shall the
enforcement of one remedy provided herein prevent the enforcement of other
remedies provided or cited herein



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.092  FILING OF ORDINANCES.



   An ordinance adopted by the Town Council pursuant to §§ 152A.085(D)
or 152A.088 of this code shall be recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds of Robeson County and shall be indexed in the name of the property
owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. §§ 160A-439(f) and (g).



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.093  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Neither this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this code by criminal process as authorized by G.S. § 14-4 and §
152A.097 of this code, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein or
in other ordinances or laws.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.094  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT TO HEAR APPEALS.



   (A)   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the
Code Enforcement Official pursuant to this subchapter shall be heard and
determined by the Board of Adjustment. As the appeals body, the Board shall
have the power to fix the times and places of its meetings, to adopt
necessary rules of procedure and any other rules and regulations which may be
necessary for the proper discharge of its duties.



   (B)   Appeals shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Code
Enforcement Official may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby. Any appeal
from the Code Enforcement Official shall be taken within 10 days from the
rendering of the decision or service of the order, and shall be taken by
filing with the Code Enforcement Official and with the Board of Adjustment a
notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is
based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Code Enforcement Official
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the decision appealed from was made. When the appeal is from a
decision of the Code Enforcement Official refusing to allow the person
aggrieved thereby to do any act, the Code Enforcement Official's decision
shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a
decision of the Code Enforcement Official requiring the person aggrieved to
do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement
until the hearing by the Board, unless the Code Enforcement Official
certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished
the appellant) a suspension of the requirement would cause imminent peril to
life or property, in which case the requirement shall not be suspended except
by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown, upon not
less than 1 day's written notice to the Code Enforcement Official, by the
Board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. §
160A-446(f) and this section.



      (2)   The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
all appeals, shall give notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and order as
in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have
all the powers of the Code Enforcement Official, but the concurring vote of
4/5 of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any
decision or order of the Code Enforcement Official. The Board shall have
power also in passing upon appeals, in any case when practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of
this subchapter, to adapt the application of this subchapter to the
necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of this subchapter shall
be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.



      (3)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review
by the Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted
within 15 days of the decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.095  TEMPORARY INJUNCTION REMEDY FOR AGGRIEVED PERSON.



   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Code Enforcement
Coordinator and Officer, or a decision rendered by the Board of Adjustment
shall have the right, within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering
of the decision, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction
restraining the Code Enforcement Official pending a final disposition of the
cause, as provided by G.S. § 160A-446(f).



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.096  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this subchapter
is found to be in conflict with any other ordinance or code of the town, the
provisions which establish the higher standard or more stringent requirement
for the promotion and protection of health and safety of the citizens of the
town shall prevail.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)  Penalty, see § 152A.097



§ 152A.097  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential
building or structure to fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or
improve the same, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the same,
upon order of the Code Enforcement Coordinator and Officer duly made and
served in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, within the time
specified in such order, and each day that any such failure, neglect, or
refusal to comply with such order continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any nonresidential
building or structure, with respect to which an order has been issued
pursuant to § 152A.085 of this code, to occupy or permit the occupancy of
the same after the time prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration,
improvement, or its vacation and closing, and each day that such occupancy
continues after such prescribed time shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.



   (B)   The violations of any provision of this subchapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.



   (C)   In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies provided by
this subchapter, any owner of a nonresidential building or structure that
fails to comply with an order of the Code Enforcement Official within the
time specified therein, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of
$50 for the first offense, $100 for the second offense in the calendar year,
and $250 for the third and subsequent offenses in the calendar year. Each
subsequent offense after the third will be subject to a civil penalty of
$250. Each 30-day period or part thereof in which a violation is allowed to
persist will constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 16-163, passed 5-17-2016)



ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES - ABANDONED AND SUBSTANDARD NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES



§ 152A.101  AUTHORITY.



   The minimum standards of this subchapter shall address only conditions
that are dangerous and injurious to public health, safety, and welfare and
identify circumstances under which a public necessity exists for the repair,
closing, or demolition of such buildings or structures. This subchapter is
applicable only within the corporate limits of the town.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.102  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST.  All individuals, associations, and corporations
who have interests of record in a nonresidential building or structure and
any who are in possession thereof.



   VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE.  Any building or structure designed for
the storage of goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes,
which has not been used for that purpose for at least 1 year and has not been
converted to another use.



   VACANT MANUFACTURING FACILITY.  Any building or structure previously
used for the lawful production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been
used for that purpose for at least 1 year and has not been converted to
another use.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.103  INVESTIGATIONS.



   Whenever it appears to the Codes Enforcement Officer that any
nonresidential building or structure has not been properly maintained so that
the safety or health of its occupants or members of the general public are
jeopardized for failure of the property to meet the minimum standards
established by the Board of Commissioners, the Codes Enforcement Officer
shall undertake a preliminary investigation. If entry upon the premises for
purposes of investigation is necessary, such entry shall be made pursuant to
a duly issued administrative search warrant in accordance with G.S. §
15-27.2 or with permission of the owner, the owner's agent, a tenant, or
other person legally in possession of the premises.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.104  COMPLAINT AND HEARING.



   If the preliminary investigation discloses evidence of a violation of
the minimum standards, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall issue and cause to
be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in the nonresidential
building or structure a complaint. The complaint shall state the charges and
contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the Codes Enforcement
Officer (or his or her designated agent) at a place within the county
scheduled not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of
the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the
right to answer the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Codes Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.105  ORDER.



   If, after notice and hearing, the Codes Enforcement Officer determines
that the nonresidential building or structure has not been properly
maintained so that the safety or health of its occupants or members of the
general public is jeopardized for failure of the property to meet the minimum
standards established by this subchapter, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall
state in writing findings of fact in support of that determination and shall
issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order. The order may
require the owner to take remedial action, within a reasonable time
specified, subject to the procedures and limitations herein.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.106  LIMITATIONS ON ORDERS.



   (A)   An order may require the owner to repair, alter, or improve
the nonresidential building or structure in order to bring it into compliance
with the minimum standards established by the Board of Commissioners or to
vacate and close the nonresidential building or structure for any use.



   (B)   An order may require the owner to remove or demolish the
nonresidential building or structure if the cost of repair, alteration, or
improvement of the building or structure would exceed 50% of its then current
value. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the nonresidential
building or structure is designated as a local historic landmark, listed in
the National Register of Historic Places, or located in a locally designated
historic district or in a historic district listed in the National Register
of Historic Places and the Board of Commissioners determines, after a public
hearing as provided by ordinance, that the nonresidential building or
structure is of individual significance or contributes to maintaining the
character of the district, and the nonresidential building or structure has
not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the nonresidential
building or structure be vacated and closed until it is brought into
compliance with the minimum standards established by the Board of
Commissioners.



   (C)   An order may not require repairs, alterations, or improvements
to be made to vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse
facilities to preserve the original use. The order may require such building
or structure to be vacated and closed, but repairs may be required only when
necessary to maintain structural integrity or to abate a health or safety
hazard that cannot be remedied by ordering the building or structure closed
for any use.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.107  ACTION UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter,
or improve or to vacate and close the nonresidential building or structure,
the Board of Commissioners may adopt an ordinance ordering the Codes
Enforcement Officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this section with
respect to the particular property or properties that the Codes Enforcement
Officer found to be jeopardizing the health or safety of its occupants or
members of the general public. The property or properties shall be described
in the ordinance. The ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the
Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner or
owners in the grantor index. Following adoption of an ordinance, the Codes
Enforcement Officer may cause the building or structure to be repaired,
altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed. The Codes Enforcement
Officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any nonresidential
building or structure so closed a placard with the following words: "This
building is unfit for any use; the use or occupation of this building for any
purpose is prohibited and unlawful." Any person who occupies or knowingly
allows the occupancy of a building or structure so posted shall be guilty of
a Class 3 misdemeanor.



   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the nonresidential building or structure, the Board of Commissioners
may adopt an ordinance ordering the Codes Enforcement Officer to proceed to
effectuate the purpose of this section with respect to the particular
property or properties that the Codes Enforcement Officer found to be
jeopardizing the health or safety of its occupants or members of the general
public. No ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a
nonresidential building or structure until the owner has first been given a
reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the minimum standards
established by this subchapter. The property or properties shall be described
in the ordinance. The ordinance shall be recorded in the Office of the
Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner or
owners in the grantor index. Following adoption of an ordinance, the Codes
Enforcement Officer may cause the building or structure to be removed or
demolished.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.108  ACTION BY BOARD UPON ABANDONMENT OF INTENT TO REPAIR.



   If the Board of Commissioners has adopted an ordinance or the Codes
Enforcement Officer has issued an order requiring the building or structure
to be repaired or vacated and closed and the building or structure has been
vacated and closed for a period of 2 years pursuant to the ordinance or
order, the Board of Commissioners may make findings that the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the building or
structure and that the continuation of the building or structure in its
vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and
welfare of the municipality in that it would continue to deteriorate, would
create a fire or safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants,
would attract persons intent on criminal activities, or would cause or
contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in the area.
Upon such findings, the Board of Commissioners may, after the expiration of
the 2-year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner,
setting forth the following:



   (A)   If the cost to repair the nonresidential building or structure
to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards is less than or equal
to 50% of its then current value, the ordinance shall require that the owner
either repair or demolish and remove the building or structure within 90
days; or



   (B)   If the cost to repair the nonresidential building or structure
to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards exceeds 50% of its
then current value, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and
remove the building or structure within 90 days. In the case of vacant
manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse facilities, the
building or structure must have been vacated and closed pursuant to an order
or ordinance for a period of 5 years before the Board of Commissioners may
take action under this section. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office
of the Robeson County Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the name of
the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with
the ordinance, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall effectuate the purpose of
the ordinance.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.109  SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   Complaints or orders issued by a Codes Enforcement Officer pursuant to
an ordinance adopted under this section shall be served upon persons either
personally or by registered or certified mail so long as the means used are
reasonably designed to achieve actual notice. When service is made by
registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be
sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or
certified mail is refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post
office within 10 days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of
the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected. If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of
persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Codes Enforcement
Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Codes Enforcement
Officer makes an affidavit to that effect, the serving of the complaint or
order upon the owners or other persons may be made by publication in a
newspaper having general circulation in the town at least once no later than
the time that personal service would be required under this section. When
service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.110  LIENS.



   (A)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations, or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Codes
Enforcement Officer shall be a lien against the real property upon which the
cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be
collected as the lien for special assessment provided in Article 10 of
Chapter 160A of the General Statutes.



   (B)   If the real property upon which the cost was incurred is
located within the town limits, the amount of the costs is also a lien on any
other real property of the owner located within the town limits except for
the owner's primary residence. The additional lien provided in this division
is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment.



   (C)   If the nonresidential building or structure is removed or
demolished by the Codes Enforcement Officer, he or she shall offer for sale
the recoverable materials of the building or structure and any personal
property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the building or
structure and shall credit the proceeds of the sale, if any, against the cost
of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in
the superior court by the Codes Enforcement Officer, shall be secured in a
manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the Board of Commissioners to define and declare nuisances and to
cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.111  EJECTMENT.



   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
nonresidential building or structure, the Codes Enforcement Officer may file
a civil action in the name of the town to remove the occupant. The action to
vacate shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by
filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying the
nonresidential building or structure. The clerk of superior court shall issue
a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain
time, date, and place not to exceed 10 days from the issuance of the summons
to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as
provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its
tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served and if at the
hearing the Codes Enforcement Officer produces a certified copy of an
ordinance adopted by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to this section to
vacate the occupied nonresidential building or structure, the magistrate
shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and all persons be
removed. The judgment ordering that the nonresidential building or structure
be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary
ejectment entered under G.S. § 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered
under this section by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. §
7A-228, and the execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S.
§ 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a nonresidential building or
structure who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary
ejectment proceeding pursuant to this section unless the occupant was served
with notice, at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment
proceeding, that the Board of Commissioners has ordered the Codes Enforcement
Officer to proceed to exercise his or her duties under this section to vacate
and close or remove and demolish the nonresidential building or structure.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.112  CIVIL PENALTY.



   (A)   Following a hearing before the Codes Enforcement Officer, as
required by this chapter, and upon at least 30 days written notice, served
pursuant in the same manner as an order under § 152A.109, which notice may
be combined with any other notice, complaint, or order, the Codes Enforcement
Officer shall impose a civil penalty upon any party upon failure to remedy a
violation within 30 days of an order directing said remedy. The notice shall
state: (a) the nature of the violation, (b) that the violation is continuing,
(c) that a daily penalty of $50 will be imposed and that the maximum civil
penalty is $3,000, (d) the date the penalty will begin, (e) that the penalty
will stop when satisfactory evidence that the violation has been corrected is
received by the Codes Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   The civil penalty shall be administered as follows:



      (1)   It shall be invoked by the use of a citation stating:
(a) the nature of the violation, (b) that the violation is continuing, (c)
that a daily penalty of $50.00 is being imposed and that the maximum civil
penalty is $3,000, (d) the date the penalty begins (which shall be the date
the citation is issued), (e) that the penalty will stop when satisfactory
evidence that the violation has been corrected is received by the Codes
Enforcement Officer, (f) where to pay the civil penalty, (g) that the civil
penalty must be paid within 10 days from imposition of each day’s penalty,
and (h) that if any penalty is not timely paid the Codes Enforcement Officer
may recover the penalty in a civil action in the nature of a debt.



      (2)   The citation shall be served in the same manner as the
notice referenced at the beginning of this section.



      (3)   No appeal shall be allowed from the citation if the
notice was provided with or before the order upon which it is based. If an
appeal is allowed, it shall be available pursuant to the provisions of §
152A.114.



      (4)   The civil penalty shall be in the amount of $50 per day,
with the maximum amount of the penalty being $3,000.



      (5)   The Town Manager shall have the duty and authority to
bring judicial actions on behalf of the town, directly or through the
services of the Town Attorney as the Manager may determine, to recover any
civil penalties which are not timely paid, but only after 30 days after the
penalties have stopped accruing on any single property.



   (C)   The imposition of civil penalties shall not limit the use of
any other lawful remedies available to the Board of Commissioners for the
enforcement of any ordinances adopted pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009; Am. Ord. 09-125, passed 10-20-2009)



§ 152A.113  POWERS SUPPLEMENTAL.



   The powers conferred by this section are supplemental to the powers
conferred by any other law. The Codes Enforcement Officer is authorized to
exercise any powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purpose and provisions of this section, including the following powers in
addition to others herein granted:



   (A)   To investigate nonresidential buildings and structures in the
town to determine whether they have been properly maintained in compliance
with the minimum standards so that the safety or health of the occupants or
members of the general public are not jeopardized.



   (B)   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses, and
receive evidence.



   (C)   To enter upon premises pursuant to division (B) of this
section for the purpose of making examinations in a manner that will do the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.



   (D)   To appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents, and
employees necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances adopted by
the Board of Commissioners.



   (E)   To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the
ordinance to other officers and agents.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.114  APPEALS.



   Appeals may be taken from any decision or order of the Codes
Enforcement Officer to the town's Zoning Board of Adjustment. Any person
aggrieved by a decision or order of the Codes Enforcement Officer shall have
the remedies provided in G.S. § 160A-446.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



§ 152A.115  COMPENSATION FOR TAKING BY EMINENT DOMAIN.



   Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the owner or
owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of
property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state, nor as
permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance
with the police power of the state.



(Ord. 09-119, passed 5-19-2009)



CHAPTER 153:
SUBDIVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Purpose



   153.02   Authority



   153.03   Jurisdiction



   153.04   No service provision



   153.05   Amendment



   153.06   Duty of Register of Deeds




Interpretation and Definition of Terms




   153.20   Word interpretation



   153.21   Tense and number



   153.22   Subdivision defined



   153.23   Supportive definitions




Review and Approval of Subdivision Plats




   153.35   Generally



   153.36   Sketch design plan



   153.37   Preliminary plat



   153.38   Final plat




Requirements and Minimum Standards of Design




   153.50   General requirements



   153.51   Storm water drainage



   153.52   Water and sewerage systems; requirements



   153.53   Street requirements



   153.54   Design standards for blocks



   153.55   Design standards for lots



   153.56   Design standards for easements



   153.57   Placement of monuments



   153.58   Construction procedure



   153.59   Oversized improvements




Inspection, Exceptions and Variances




   153.70   Inspections



   153.71   Exceptions



   153.72   Variances



   153.99   Penalty



   Appendix I    Water and sewer supply systems



   Appendix II   Water and sewerage systems



   Appendix III   Preliminary plat checklist



   Appendix IV   Final plat checklist



   Appendix V   Selected references



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these regulations is to establish procedures and
standards for guiding and regulating the subdivision of real estate within
the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town of
Fairmont in order to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. The
regulations included herein are designed to assure the proper installation of
streets and the coordination of streets within subdivisions with existing
roads and other public facilities; to secure an orderly planned street system
which shall avoid traffic congestion, sharp curves and hazardous
intersections; to secure from fire and flood damage; to provide for adequate
water and sewerage systems and other utilities; to provide space for
recreation and school sites; to avoid the overcrowding of land and extreme
concentration of population; to facilitate an orderly system for the design,
layout and appropriate use of the land; to insure the proper legal
description, identification, monumentation and recordation of subdivided
land; and to provide for the re-subdivision of large land parcels.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.02  AUTHORITY.



   The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Fairmont pursuant to the
authority conferred by an act of the G.S. §§ 160A-19 et seq. does hereby
ordain and enact into law the following subchapters and sections.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.03  JURISDICTION.



   These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land, excepting those
platted and recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter, within the
corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Town of Fairmont,
North Carolina, as now or hereafter established.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.04  NO SERVICE PROVISION.



   No street shall be dedicated for municipal ownership or maintained by
the town, no construction permits issued, and no water, sewer or other town
facilities or services be extended to or connected in any subdivision for
which an approved plat is required unless and until action approving a final
plat has been taken by the Town Board in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.05  AMENDMENT.



   These regulations may be amended by the Fairmont Board of Commissioners
as herein specified. All amendments not proposed by the Planning Board shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for review and recommendations. If the
Planning Board fails to make its recommendations to the Board of Town
Commissioners within 50 days, it shall be deemed to have approved the
amendment. A public hearing shall be held by the Town Commissioners before
adoption of any proposed amendment to these regulations. A notice of the
public hearing shall be given once a week for 2 consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in Fairmont. The notice shall be published
the first time not less than 15 days nor more than 25 days prior to the date
established for the hearing.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.06  DUTY OF REGISTER OF DEEDS.



   The Town Commissioners shall file a copy of this chapter with the
Register of Deeds. The Register of Deeds shall not thereafter file or record
a plat of subdivision located within the territorial jurisdiction of the
chapter without the approval of the Town Commissioners as required in this
chapter. The landowner shown on a subdivision plat submitted for recording or
his or her authorized agent shall sign a statement on the plat stating
whether or not any land shown thereon is within the territorial jurisdiction
of this chapter as defined herein. The filing or recording of a plat of a
subdivision without the approval of the Town Commissioners as required by
this chapter shall be null and void. The Clerk of Superior Court of the
County shall not order or direct the recording of a plat where a recording
would be in conflict with this section.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITION OF TERMS



§ 153.20  WORD INTERPRETATION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:



   BUILDING.  Includes the word STRUCTURE.



   HEALTH DEPARTMENT .   The Robeson County Health Department.



   LOT.  Includes the words PLOT, PARCEL, TRACT or SITE.



   MAY .   Permissive.



   ORDINANCE and REGULATIONS.  The subdivision regulations for Fairmont,
North Carolina.



   PLANNING BOARD.  The Planning Board of Fairmont, North Carolina.



   REGISTER OF DEEDS .   The Register of Deeds for Robeson County, North
Carolina.



   SHALL.  Mandatory.



   STREET.  Includes the words ROAD and HIGHWAY.



   TOWN.  Fairmont, North Carolina.



   TOWN COMMISSIONERS.  The Board of Commissioners of Fairmont, North
Carolina.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.21  TENSE AND NUMBER.



   (A)   The present tense includes the future tense, and the future
tense includes the present tense.



   (B)   The singular number includes the plural number and the plural
number includes the singular number.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.22  SUBDIVISION DEFINED.



   (A)   A subdivision shall be defined as recorded in the North
Carolina General Statutes under G.S. § 160A-376.



   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, SUBDIVISION means all
divisions of a tract or parcel of land into 2 or more lots, building sites or
other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development (whether
immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the
dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; but the following
shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to the
regulations authorized in this chapter:



      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of
previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and
the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality
as shown in its subdivision regulations;



      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres
where no street right-of-way dedication is involved;



      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for
the widening or opening of streets; and



      (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire
area is no greater than 2 acres into not more than 3 lots, where no street
right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to
or exceed the standards of the municipality, as shown in its subdivision
regulations.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.23  SUPPORTIVE DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general
traffic circulation.



   BUFFER STRIP.  A buffer strip shall consist of a planted strip at
least 10 feet in width, composed of deciduous or evergreen trees or a mixture
of each, spaced not more than 20 feet apart, and not less than 1 row of dense
shrubs, spaced not more than 5 feet apart. In some instances, a fence may be
required by the Planning Board. Fence specifications shall be determined by
the Planning Board.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  A line establishing the minimum allowable
distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding the outermost
3 feet of any uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters and similar fixtures,
and the street right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto.



   DEDICATION.  A gift, by the owner, of his or her property to another
party without any consideration being given for the transfer. Since a
transfer of property is involved, the dedication is made by written
instrument and is completed with an acceptance.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A building, or portion thereof, providing complete and
permanent living facilities for 1 family. The term DWELLING shall not be
deemed to include a motel, hotel, tourist home, mobile home or other
structure designed for transient residence.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by the property owner of a strip of land for a
specified purpose and use by the public, a corporation or persons.



   EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.  Land lying within 1 mile in all
directions of the corporate limits of the Town of Fairmont.



   GROUP DEVELOPMENT.  A group of 2 or more principal structures built on
a single lot, tract or parcel of land not subdivided into the customary
streets and lots and which will not be so subdivided, and designed for
occupancy by separate families, businesses or other enterprises. Examples
would be: cluster type subdivisions, row houses, apartment courts, housing
projects, school and hospital campuses, shopping centers and industrial parks.



   LOT.  A portion of a subdivision of any other parcel of land intended
as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both. The word LOT
includes the words PLOT and PARCEL.



   LOT or CORNER.  A lot which occupies the interior angle at the
intersection of 2 street lines which make an angle of more than 45 degrees
and less than 135 degrees with each other.



   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE.  A continuous (through) lot which is accessible
from both streets upon which it fronts.



   LOT, SINGLE-TIER.  A lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a
railroad, a physical barrier or another type of land use and to which access
from the rear is usually prohibited.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Robeson County
and the office of the Town Clerk of Fairmont, North Carolina, or a lot
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.



   MOBILE HOME.  A structure that: consists of a single unit completely
assembled at the factory or of 2 (double-wide) or 3 (triple-wide) principal
components totally assembled at the factory and joined together at the site;
is designed so that the total structure (or in the case of a double-wide or
triple-wide, each component thereof) can be transported on its own chassis;
is over 32 feet long and over 8 feet wide; is designed to be used as a
dwelling and provides complete, independent living facilities for 1 family,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation; is actually being used, or is held ready for use, as a dwelling;
and is not permanently attached to a foundation. A structure that is
otherwise defined herein as a MOBILE HOME is permanently attached to its
foundation if: the foundation was constructed in a way or at an expense as to
make it unlikely that the mobile home placed upon it will later be removed;
or if the mobile home cannot be removed from the foundation without great
expense or severe damage to the mobile home.



   MODULAR HOME .   Any building or structure, designed for living or
sleeping purposes, which are pre-manufactured, all or in part, at some point
other than the building site for assembly or installation later at the
building site. Further defined, a building may be assembled from
pre-manufactured rooms, wall panels, frame units or other factory
manufactured parts which may be fabricated of wood, foundation or foundation
materials at the building site. This definition does not include vehicles or
structures that are designed to be mounted on wheels to be moved to a lot
such as mobile homes defined above.



   OFFICIAL MAPS OR PLANS.  Any maps or plans officially adopted by the
Town Commissioners as a guide to the development of Fairmont.



   OPEN SPACE.  An area (land and/or water) generally lacking in
human-made structures and reserved for enjoyment in its unaltered state.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  The planned unit development is a permitted
use designed to provide for developments incorporating a single type or a
variety of residential and related uses which are planned and developed as a
unit. The development may consist of individual lots or common building
sites. Common land must be an element of the plan related to affecting the
long-term value of the entire development.



   PLAT.  A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be or has been
subdivided.



   PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.  A roadway serving 2 or fewer lots, building sites
or other divisions of land and not intended for public ingress or egress.



   PRIVATE STREET.  An undedicated private right-of-way which provides
access to abutting properties and requires a subdivision streets disclosure
statement in accordance with G.S. § 136-102.6.



   RECREATION AREA OR PARK.  Land or a combination of land and water
resources developed for active and/or passive recreation pursuits with
various natural and human-made features that accommodate those activities.



   RESERVATION.  A reservation of land constitutes an obligation of
keeping property free from development for a stated period of time without
any transfer of property rights.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A general term denoting land, property or interest
therein, usually in a strip acquired for or devoted to transportation or
access purposes.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PUBLIC . A system serving 2 or more connections. Plans
for public and community sewer systems must be approved by the Division of
Environmental Management, N.C. Department of Natural and Economic Resources.



   SEWERAGE SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL.  A septic tank arrangement of sewage
disposal. Individual sewage disposal systems must be installed and maintained
in accordance with the State Board of Health “Rules and Regulations
Governing the Disposal of Sewage from any Residence, Place of Business or
Place of Public Assembly in North Carolina” and the regulations of the
County Board of Health. State Board of Health Bulletin No. 519,
“Residential Sewage Disposal Plants,” contains helpful information.



   STREET or ROAD.  A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for
vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting
properties. The following terms shall apply:



      (1)   PRINCIPAL (INTERSTATE) ARTERIAL STREET.  A street
designed to carry heavy volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds with
access only from other intersecting streets but not from abutting properties
(controlled access). A rural link in a network of continuous routes serving
corridor movements having trip length and travel density characteristics
indicative of substantial statewide or interstate and existing solely to
serve traffic. This network consists of interstate routes and other
previously considered major arterials routes designated as principal
arterials.



      (2)   MINOR ARTERIAL STREET.  A rural link in a network
joining cities and larger towns and providing intrastate and inter-county
service at relatively high (60 mph) overall travel speeds with minimum
interference to through movement. This network would primarily serve traffic.



      (3)    MAJOR COLLECTOR STREET.  A road which serves major
intra-county travel corridors and traffic generators and provides access to
the arterial system.



      (4)   MINOR COLLECTOR STREET.  A road which provides service
to small local communities and links the locally important traffic generators
with their rural hinterland. It is designed to carry light to medium traffic
volumes, principally from local streets within a residential development.



      (5)   THOROUGHFARE, MAJOR.  Major thoroughfares consist of
interstate, freeway, expressways or major streets that provide for the
expeditious movement of large volumes of traffic within and through urban
areas.



      (6)   THOROUGHFARE, MINOR.  Streets in the municipal system
which collect traffic from local access streets and channel traffic flow to
the major thoroughfares. MINOR THOROUGHFARES supplement the major
thoroughfare system by facilitating minor through-traffic movement while also
serving abutting properties.



      (7)   LOCAL STREET.  A local street primarily providing
access to abutting property and higher order streets. It offers the lowest
level of mobility with through traffic usually discouraged and short-distance
travel is encouraged.



      (8)   MARGINAL ACCESS (FRONTAGE) STREET.  A local street or
road that is parallel to a full or partial access controlled facility and
functions to provide access to adjacent land.



      (9)   CUL-DE-SAC.  A short local street having but 1 end open
to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated and a vehicular
turn-around provided.



   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops
any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.



   WATER SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL.  A drilled well which serves a single
connection. Individual water supply systems should be located, constructed
and operated in accordance with State Board of Health Bulletin No. 476,
“Protection of Private Water Supplies.”



   WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC.  Water supply systems serving 10 or more
connections are classified as a public water supply by state law. Plans and
specifications must be approved by the Sanitary Engineering Division, State
Board of Health, N.C. Department of Human Resources.



   WATER SYSTEM, SEMI-PUBLIC.  Water supply systems serving from 2 to 9
connections, inclusive. This system may be regulated by the County Board of
Health, and plans should be approved by the County Health Department.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS



§ 153.35  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-373, no final plat of a subdivision
within the jurisdiction of the Town of Fairmont as established in §§ 153.02
and 153.03 shall be recorded by the Register of Deeds of Robeson County until
it has been approved by the Fairmont Town Board of Commissioners as provided
herein. To secure approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall generally
follow the procedures established in this chapter.



   (B)   The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat
consists of 3 stages. The sketch design plan is a preliminary drawing
submitted to the Planning Board for general compliance with the chapter and a
general review of the requirements and design standards of the chapter. Upon
the review of the sketch design plan, the developer shall submit a
preliminary plat for the Planning Board’s review and approval
recommendation to the Town Board which approves the preliminary plat. The
final plat must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board and Town Board
before the sale of property can take place.



   (C)   Plans of group developments for housing, commercial,
industrial or other uses, or for any combination of uses shall be submitted
in the same manner as other plats for the review by the Planning Board and
approved by the Town Board of Commissioners.



   (D)   Approval of the final plat by the Town Board of Commissioners
shall be required before issuance of any building permit for a structure to
be erected in a subdivision, except in cases where streets, utilities and
other required improvements are to be constructed concurrently with buildings
and where a preliminary plat for development has been approved by the Town
Board. In those cases, approval of a preliminary plat shall be a sufficient
basis for issuance of a building permit. Preliminary approval shall in no way
alter the requirement that the final plat be approved by the Town Board of
Commissioners prior to the sale of land in the development or the recording
of a plat.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.36  SKETCH DESIGN PLAN.



   (A)   Prior to preliminary plat application, if the land to be
subdivided contains more than 4 lots, the subdivider shall submit to the
Fairmont Planning Board a simple sketch plan of the proposed subdivision.
Smaller or minor subdivisions may be submitted in sketch form if the
developer so wishes or if required by the Fairmont Town Board. The subdivider
shall, at this time, discuss the proposed development with the Planning Board
and become familiar with the regulations affecting the land to be subdivided.
This procedure does not require formal application or fee.



   (B)   Sketch plans shall conform to the following requirements:



      (1)   Number of copies and graphic media. A minimum of 2
copies of a sketch design plan shall be submitted. No specific graphic media
must be employed.



      (2)   Size of plan and scale. No specific size or scale
requirements apply to sketch design plans; it is suggested that the
requirements applicable to preliminary and final plats be utilized.



      (3)   Administrative fees. No administrative fees are charged
in connection with the submission of sketch design plans.



      (4)   Contents required. The sketch design plan shall depict
or contain the following information:



         (a)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the
subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads and
waterways;



         (b)   The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the
tract to be subdivided;



         (c)   The total acreage to be subdivided;



         (d)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within
the subdivision and adjoining it;



         (e)   The proposed street and lot layout, approximate
rights-of-way for streets, utility easements, wooded areas and drainage;



         (f)   The name, address and telephone number of the
owner and developer;



         (g)   The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision;



         (h)   Streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted
properties; and



         (I)   The zoning classification(s) of the tract and of
adjacent properties.



      (5)   Review procedure. The Planning Board shall review the
sketch design plan for general compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and the zoning chapter; the Planning Board shall advise the
subdivider or his or her authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to
the proposed subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation
and submission of the preliminary and final plats. This review shall in no
way be construed as constituting an official action of approval for recording
of the subdivision by the Planning Board or Fairmont Town Board as required
by this chapter.



      (6)   Disposition of copies. One copy shall be retained as a
part of the minutes of the Planning Board with the other copy being returned
to the subdivider or his or her authorized agent.



      (7)   Certification required. No certificates must be provided
in connection with the submission of sketch design plans.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.37  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   The subdivider, or the subdivider’s duly authorized agent,
shall submit 8 copies of the preliminary plat, and any supplementary
materials, to the Planning Board at least 14 days prior to a regular meeting
of that Board, for every subdivision of land which is located within the
territorial jurisdiction established by §§ 153.02 and 153.03 hereof.



      (1)   Number of copies and graphic media. Eight copies of the
preliminary plat shall be submitted; no specific graphic media must be
employed. Three copies shall be disposed of as provided under division (D); 5
copies shall be distributed for review as provided in division (A)(5).



      (2)   Size of plat and scale. No specific size requirements
apply to preliminary plats. Preliminary plats shall be prepared at a scale of
1 inch equals 200 feet or greater.



      (3)   Administrative fees. No administrative fees shall be
charged in connection with the submission of preliminary plats.



      (4)   Contents required. The preliminary plat shall depict or
contain the following information; plats not illustrating or containing the
following data shall be returned to the subdivider, or his or her authorized
agent for completion and re-submission:



         (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision;



         (b)   A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship
between the proposed subdivision and the surrounding area at a scale of 1
inch equals 400 feet;



         (c)   The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to
be subdivided, distinctly and accurately represented, with all bearings and
distances shown;



         (d)   Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;



         (e)   North arrow and declination;



         (f)   The plans for proposed utility layouts, including
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas,
telephone and electric service, illustrating connections to existing systems.
Plans for water supply and/or sewage disposal must be accompanied by letters
of preliminary approval by the appropriate county and state authorities (See
Appendix I). Plans must show line sizes, the location of fire hydrants,
blow-offs, manholes, pumps, force mains and gate valves, and shall include
profiles based upon mean sea level datum for sanitary sewers and storm sewers;



         (g)   Proposed street names; all streets must be
designated either public or private;



         (h)   The zoning classification(s) of the tract to be
subdivided and on adjoining properties;



         (I)   Proposed location and size of parks, school sites
or other recreational or open spaces, if any, and their future ownership
(depication for public use to governmental body, for owners to duly
constituted homeowners or community association or for tenants remaining in
subdividers ownership);



         (j)   Site calculations, including:



            1.   Acreage in total tract to be subdivided;



            2.   Acreage in parks and other nonresidential use;



            3.   Total number of parcels created; and



            4.   Linear feet in streets.



         (k)   Proposed minimum building setback lines;



         (l)   The names of owners of adjoining properties and
any adjoining subdivisions of record (or proposed and under review);



         (m)   Any proposed riding trails, natural buffers,
pedestrian, bicycle or other rights-of-way, utility or other easements, their
location, width and purposes;



         (n)   Proposed streets, existing and platted streets on
adjoining properties and in the proposed subdivision, rights-of-way, pavement
widths, approximate grades, design engineering data for all corners and
curves and typical street cross sections. If any street is proposed to
intersect with a state-maintained road, the plat shall be accompanied by an
application for driveway approval as required by the Department of
Transportation, Division of Highways Manual on Driveway Regulations;



         (o)   Existing and proposed property lines, both on the
tract to be subdivided and on adjoining properties, building or other
structures, water courses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, both
on the land to be subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining, corporate
limits, township boundaries and county lines;



         (p)   Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers and
approximate dimensions;



         (q)   Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops,
ponds or lakes, streams or stream beds and any other natural features
affecting the site;



         (r)   The preliminary plat should be accompanied by a
copy of any proposed deed restrictions or similar covenants when deemed
necessary by the Planning Board (mandatory when private recreation areas are
established);



         (s)   Date of plat preparation;



         (t)   The name(s) of the township(s), county and state
in which the subdivision is located;



         (u)   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s)
of the owner(s), mortgagee(s), registered surveyor(s), land planner(s),
architect(s), landscape architect(s) and professional engineer(s) responsible
for the subdivision;



         (v)   The name and location of any property, within the
proposed subdivision or within any contiguous property, that is listed on or
is eligible for listing on the U.S. Department of Interior’s National
Register of Historic Places; likewise any property that has been designated
by local ordinance as a “historic property” pursuant to G.S. §
160A-400.04, likewise any property that has been designated by local
ordinance as a “historic district”, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.5;



         (w)   Environmental impact statement. Pursuant to G.S.
Chapter 113A, the Planning Board may require the subdivider to submit an
environmental impact statement with his or her preliminary plat if:



            1.   The development exceeds 2 acres in area;



            2.   The Board deems it necessary due to the
nature of the land to be subdivided or peculiarities in the proposed layout;
and/or



            3.   An impact statement is required it shall be
stipulated at the sketch plan review.



         (x)   Any other information considered by either the
subdivider or the Planning Board to be pertinent to the review of the
preliminary plat; i.e., topographic map showing vertical contours every 5
feet.



      (5)   Review procedure. The Planning Board shall review and
recommend action on each preliminary plat within 30 days after first
consideration by the Planning Board. First consideration shall be at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board that follows at least 14
days after the plat is submitted. Before taking final action on the plat, the
Planning Board shall refer copies of the plat and any accompanying material
to those public officials and agencies concerned with new development,
including but not limited to the Town Manager, Robeson County Health
Department, Fairmont Board of Education, the District Engineer of the N.C.
Department of Transportation, and the appropriate county soil conservation
service office, for review and recommendation.



   (B)   The Town Commissioners shall give at least 5 working days
notice to the developer as to the date of their review of the preliminary
plat, and they shall convey their recommendations to the developer within 35
days after receiving the Planning Board’s recommendation.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the Planning Board’s recommendations or upon
expiration of a 35 day period, in which the Planning Board failed to make a
recommendation on the preliminary plat, the Town Commissioners shall review
the preliminary plat and the Planning Board’s recommendations for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. They may approve the plat in
whole or in part, or subject to modification or disapprove it. Approval of
the plat shall be entered only upon the copy of the plat retained in the
record of the Town Commissioners. Within 5 days after the action on the
preliminary plat, the Town Commissioners shall notify the developer by latter
of the action.



   (D)   The following shall be placed on 3 copies of approved
preliminary plats:



I hereby certify that the Town Commissioners of Fairmont have examined and
approved the preliminary plat of the subdivision. The installation of
required improvements may proceed.



   Date ____________Clerk ______________________________________ Town of
Fairmont



      (1)   Disposition of copies. If the preliminary plat is
approved, approval shall be noted on at least 3 copies of the plat by the
Town Clerk. One copy shall be transmitted to the Town Clerk who shall retain
it for public examination, 1 copy shall be returned to the subdivider, and 1
copy shall be retained by the Planning Board. If the preliminary plat is
disapproved, the Planning Board shall specify the reasons for the action in
writing. One copy of the reasons shall be retained by the Planning Board, 1
copy shall be given to the subdivider, and 1 copy shall be transmitted to the
Town Clerk. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make
the recommended changes and submit a revised preliminary plat.



      (2)   Certifications required. No certifications must be
provided in connection with the submission of preliminary plats.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.38  FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Improvements, installation or guarantees. Upon approval of the
preliminary plat by the Planning Board, the subdivider may proceed with the
preparation of the final plat, and the installation or arrangement for
required improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and
the requirements of this chapter. Prior to approval of a final plat, the
subdivider shall have installed improvements specified in this chapter or
guaranteed their installation as provided.



   (B)   Performance guarantee. In lieu of prior construction of the
improvements required by this chapter the Town of Fairmont may, for the
purpose of approving a final plat, accept a guarantee from the subdivider
that improvements will be carried out according to the Town of Fairmont’s
specifications at his or her expense. A guarantee may be in the form of a
surety bond made by a surety company licensed to do business in North
Carolina or certified check drawn in favor of the Town of Fairmont, or cash
deposited with the Town of Fairmont. A guarantee shall be in an amount of not
less than 100% nor more than 125% of the estimated cost of the construction
of the required improvements. Performance guarantees shall run for a period
of 1 year and may be renewed once for a period of 1 year upon written
approval from the Fairmont Town Manager.



   (C)   Defects guarantee. The Town of Fairmont shall require a bond
guaranteeing utility taps, curbs, gutters, street pavement, sidewalks,
drainage facilities, water and sewer lines and other improvements against
defects for 1 year. This bond shall be in the amount determined by the
Director of Public Works or consulting engineer and shall be in cash or be
made by a surety company authorized to do business in North Carolina.



   (D)   Maintenance guarantee. The Fairmont Town Clerk shall secure
from all subdividers a letter in which the subdivider shall agree to maintain
the backfill and any improvements located thereon and therein and any ditch
which has been dug in connection with the installation of improvements. The
letter shall be binding on the subdivider for a period of 1 year after the
acceptance of improvements by the Town of Fairmont.



   (E)   Final plat review contingent upon execution of guarantees. No
final plat will be accepted for review by the Planning Board or Town Board
unless accompanied by written notice by the Fairmont Town Manager
acknowledging compliance with this chapter.



   (F)   The final plat. The final plat shall constitute only that
portion of the preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and
develop at the time; the portion shall conform to all requirements of this
chapter. No final plat shall be approved unless and until the subdivider
shall be installed in that area, represented on the final plat, all
improvements required by this chapter or shall have guaranteed their
installation as provided for in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) above.



   (G)   Plat submitted. The subdivider shall submit the final plat, so
marked, to the Chairperson of the Planning Board or his or her designee not
less than 14 days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which it will be
considered for approval; further, the plat shall be submitted not more than
12 months after the date on which the preliminary plat was approved,
otherwise approval shall be null and void unless a written extension of this
time limit is granted by the Planning Board on or before the 1-year
anniversary of the approval.



   (H)   Plat prepared. The final plat shall be prepared by a surveyor
according to G.S. Chapter 89C licensed and registered to practice in the
State of North Carolina. The final plat shall substantially conform to the
preliminary plat as it was approved. The final plat shall conform to the
provisions of plats, subdivisions and mapping requirements as set forth in
G.S. § 47-30.



   (I)   Number of copies and graphic media. Five copies of the final
plat shall be submitted; 2 of these shall be drawn in ink on lined or film
suitable for reproduction; 3 shall be black or blue line paper prints.



   (J)   Size of plat and scale. Final plats shall have an outside
marginal size of not more than 21 inches by 30 inches nor less than 8-1/2
inches by 11 inches, including 1-1/2 inch for binding on the left margin and
1/2 border on each of the other sides. Where size of land areas or suitable
scale to assure legibility require, maps may be placed on 2 or more sheets
with appropriate match lines. Final plats shall be drawn at a scale of 1 inch
equals 200 feet, or greater.



   (K)   Administrative fees. Submission of the final plat must be
accompanied by a filing fee - the current schedule of costs and fees are on
file with the Town Clerk.



   (L)   Contents required. The final plat shall depict or contain the
following information; plats not illustrating or containing the following
data shall be returned to the subdivider or his or her authorized agent for
completion and re-submission:



      (1)   The name of the subdivision;



      (2)   The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided
fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of intersecting
boundary lines of adjoining lands;



      (3)   Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;



      (4)   The plans for utility layouts, including sewers, storm
sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and electric
service, illustrating connections to existing systems or plans for individual
water supply systems and/or sewage disposal systems. Plans must show line
sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs, manholes, pumps, force mains
and gate valves;



      (5)   Street names;



      (6)   The location, purpose and dimensions of areas to be used
for purposes other than residential;



      (7)   Minimum building setback lines;



      (8)   The names of owners of adjoining properties and any
adjoining subdivisions of record (or proposed and under review);



      (9)   The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way,
utility or other easements, riding trails, natural buffers, pedestrian or
bicycle paths and areas to be dedicated to public use with the purpose of
each stated;



      (10)   Right-of-way lines and pavement widths of all streets
and the location and width of all adjacent streets and easements;



      (11)   Property lines, buildings or other structures, water
courses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on the land to be
subdivided and on the land immediately adjoining, corporate limits, township
boundaries and county lines;



      (12)   Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and
reproduce on the ground every straight or curved boundary line, street line,
lot line, right-of-way line, easement line and setback line, including
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, central angles and tangent
distances for the center line of curved streets and curved property lines
that are not the boundary of curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured
to the nearest 1/10 of a foot and all angles to the nearest minute;



      (13)   The accurate locations and descriptions of all
monuments, markers and control points;



      (14)   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire
subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block;



      (15)   The deed restrictions or any other similar covenants
proposed for the subdivision, if any;



      (16)   The date of the survey and plat preparation;



      (17)   North arrow and declination;



      (18)   All certifications as required by this subchapter;



      (19)   The name of the township, county and state in which the
subdivision is located;



      (20)   The name and location of any property, within the
subdivision or within any contiguous property, that is listed on or is
eligible for listing on the U.S. Department of Interior’s National Register
of Historic Places; likewise any property that has been designated by local
ordinance as a “historic property” pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.4;
likewise any property that has been designated by local ordinance as a
“historic district” pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.5;



      (21)   The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of the
owner(s), mortgagee(s), registered surveyor(s), land planner(s),
architect(s), landscape architect(s) and professional engineer(s) responsible
for the subdivision and the registration number(s) and seal(s), of the
professional engineer(s) and registered surveyor(s); and



      (22)   Any other information considered by either the
subdivider or the Planning Board to be pertinent to the review of the final
plat.



   (M)   Review procedure. Final plats shall be reviewed according to
the following procedure:



      (1)   Planning Board review. The Planning Board shall
recommend approval or disapproval the final plat within 30 days of its first
consideration.



         (a)   1.   During its review of the final plat, the
Planning Board may appoint an engineer or surveyor to confirm the accuracy of
the final plat.



            2.   If substantial errors are found, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, the costs shall be charged to the subdivider
and the plat shall not be approved until the errors have been corrected.



         (b)   If the Planning Board recommends approval of the
final plat, recommended approval shall be indicated on each copy of the plat
by the following signed certificate:



   Certification of Recommended Approval by the Planning Board



   The Fairmont Planning Board hereby recommends approval of the final
plat for the    Subdivision.



                     



   Date,  Chairperson,  Fairmont Planning Board



         (c)   1.   If the Planning Board disapproves the
final plat, the Planning Board shall state in writing its reasons for that
action, specifying the provisions of this chapter with which the plat does
not comply.



            2.   One copy of this statement shall be
transmitted to the subdivider within 15 days of disapproval; 1 copy shall be
retained by the Planning Board as a part of its proceedings, and 1 copy shall
be sent to the Town Clerk.



            3.   If the final plat is disapproved, the
subdivider may make changes as will bring the plat into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and resubmit same for reconsideration by the
Planning Board.



         (d)   If the Planning Board fails to recommend approval
or disapproval of the final plat within 30 days after first consideration, as
previously defined, the failure shall be deemed approval and shall constitute
grounds for the subdivider to apply for final approval by the Town Board.



      (2)   Fairmont Town Board review. The Fairmont Town Board
shall review the final plat with the recommendations of the Planning Board
and shall approve or disapprove the plat within 45 days after it has been
received from the Planning Board.



         (a)   If the Town Board approves the final plat,
approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed
certificate:



   Certificate of Approval for Recording



   I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found
to comply with the Subdivision Regulations for Fairmont, North Carolina, and
that this plat has been approved by the Fairmont Town Board for recording in
the office or to Register of Deeds of Robeson County.



                  



   Date   ,  Mayor,  Town of Fairmont



               



   Clerk,  Town of Fairmont



         (b)   1.   If the final plat is disapproved by the
Fairmont Town Board, the reasons for disapproval shall be stated in writing,
specifying the provision(s) of this chapter with which the final plat does
not comply.



            2.   One copy of reasons shall be retained by the
Town Board as a part of its proceedings; 1 copy shall be transmitted to the
Planning Board; and 1 copy shall be transmitted to the subdivider.



            3.   If the final plat is disapproved, the
subdivider may make changes as will bring the final plat into compliance with
this chapter and resubmit same for reconsideration by the Planning Board.



   (N)   Certification required. The following signed certificates
shall appear on all copies of the final plat which are submitted to the
Planning Board by the subdivider:



      (1)   Certificate of ownership and dedication.



   I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and
described hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the
Town of Fairmont and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my
free consent, established minimum building setback lines, and dedicate all
streets, alleys, walks, parks and other sites and easements to public or
private use as noted. Furthermore, I hereby dedicate all sanitary sewer,
storm sewer and water lines to the Town of Fairmont.



Owner(s):               



Date:                  



      (2)   Certification of approval of water supply and sewage
disposal systems.



I hereby certify that the water supply and sewage disposal systems installed
or proposed for installation in the subdivision meet necessary public health
requirements as described in Appendix II of this chapter and are hereby
approved.



Date      ,  County,  Health Officer or his or her Authorized
Representative



(Certification (N)(2) not required for subdivisions which are connected, or
will be connected, to existing publicly owned and operated water supply and
sewage disposal systems.)



      (3)   Certificate of survey and accuracy.



   I, ___________ certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my
supervision) (from an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under
my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book _____, Page ___, Book
_____, Page ___ and the like.) (other); that the error of closure as
calculated by____latitudes and departures is 1:____; that the boundaries not
surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book
_____, Page ___; that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30
as amended. Witness my hand and seal this ____ day of _______.   



   A.D., 20



               



   Surveyor



               



   License or Registration Number



      (4)   Certificate or approval of the design and installation
of streets, utilities and other required improvements.



   I hereby certify that all streets, utilities and other required
improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the
Town of Fairmont’s specifications and standards in the subdivision or that
guarantees of the installation of the required improvements in an amount and
manner satisfactory to the Town of Fairmont has been received, and that the
filing fee for this plat, in the amount of __(The current schedule of costs
and fees are on file with the Town Clerk.) has been paid.



   Date   , Town Manager



   (O)   Effect of plat approval on dedications. The approval of a
final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect the acceptance by the
Town of Fairmont of the dedication of any street or other ground, public
utility line or other public facility shown on the plat. However, the Town of
Fairmont may by resolution of the Town Board accept any dedication made to
the public of lands or facilities for streets, parks, public utility lines or
other public purposes, when the lands or facilities are located within its
subdivision regulation jurisdiction. Acceptance of dedications of lands or
facilities located within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction but outside
the corporate limits of the town shall not require the town to open, operate,
repair or maintain any street utility line or other land or facility, and the
town shall in no event be responsible in any civil action or proceeding for
failure to open, repair or maintain any street located outside its corporate
limits. All streets must be designated either “public” or “private.”



   (P)   Disposition of copies. If the final plat is approved by the
Fairmont Town Board, the original tracing and 1 print of the plat shall be
returned to the subdivider. One reproducible tracing and 1 print shall be
filed with the Town Clerk, and 1 print shall be retained by the Planning
Board.



   (Q)   Recording of the final plat. The subdivider shall file the
approved final plat with the Register of Deeds of Robeson County for
recording within 60 days after the date of the Town of Fairmont’s approval;
otherwise, the approval shall be null and void.



   (R)   Resubdivision procedures.



      (1)   For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same
procedures, rules and regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for an
original subdivision.



      (2)   Lot sizes may, however, be varied on an approved plan
after recording, provided that: no lot or tract of land shall be created or
sold that is smaller than the size shown on the approved plan; drainage,
easements or rights-of-way shall not be changed; street alignment and block
sizes shall not be changed; the property line between the back of the lots
shall not be changed; the rear portion of lots shall not be subdivided from
the front part; and the character of the area shall be maintained.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



REQUIREMENTS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN



§ 153.50  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The subdivider shall observe the following general requirements and
principles of land subdivision:



   (A)   Suitability of land. Land subject to flooding, improper
drainage, erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable
for residential use as determined by the Planning Board, shall not be platted
for residential use nor for any other uses that will continue or increase the
danger to health, safety or property unless the hazards can be and are
corrected.



      (1)   Prevention of flood damage. Lands known to be within a
flood plain or any area known to be subject to flooding shall be so
identified on the preliminary plat. Appropriate deed restrictions shall be
filed for those lands subject to flooding, prohibiting their development for
dwellings or other uses unless the sites are flood-protected as follows:



         (a)   No structures or fill shall be placed in the
floodway which would interfere with the natural watercourse;



         (b)   Streets and utilities lines and structures may be
placed within the flood plain only if their elevation is raised above maximum
flood heights or if they are otherwise flood-protected;



         (c)   Dwellings and self-contained sewage disposal units
(if used) shall be built at an elevation above maximum flood heights; and



         (d)   The subdivision drainage system shall be designed
to prevent increased flood flows due to newly developed impervious surfaces
and other factors.



      (2)   Fill areas. Areas that have been used for the disposal
of solid waste shall not be subdivided into commercial or residential
building sites. This shall include those areas that have been used for the
disposal of trash, demolition waste and other waste materials.



   (B)   Historic properties and natural assets. In any subdivision,
due consideration will be given to safeguard the heritage of the Town of
Fairmont by preserving any archaeological site or any property therein, or
located on adjacent property thereto, that embodies important elements of its
cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history and likewise
all due consideration should be given to promoting the use and conservation
of property for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of
the Town of Fairmont and the State of North Carolina as a whole.



      (1)   It is a requirement of this chapter that the name and
location of all historic properties, located within the proposed subdivision
or within any contiguous property, be clearly identified on both the
preliminary and final plats. If any historic property that is listed on the
U.S. Department of Interior’s National Register of Historic Places;
likewise any property that has been designated by local ordinance as a
“historic property” pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.4; likewise any property
that has been designated by local ordinance as a “historic district”
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.5; the Planning Board may provide that the
following agencies be given an opportunity to make recommendations concerning
an individual subdivision plat before the plat is approved:



         (a)   The N.C. Department of Cultural Resources,
Division of Archives and History;



         (b)   Any local Historic Properties Commission appointed
under the provisions of G.S. § 160A-400.7.



      (2)   Furthermore, in any subdivision, due consideration will
be given to preserving natural features, such as trees, ponds, streams,
rivers, lakes which are of value not only to the subdivision but to the Town
of Fairmont as a whole.



   (C)   Sedimentation pollution control. In order to prevent soil
erosion and sedimentation pollution of streams, springs, flat water bodies or
other drainage networks, the subdivider shall comply with all requirements of
the North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973 and any
locally adopted sediment control ordinances.



   (D)   Conformity to existing plans. All proposed subdivisions shall
conform to any adopted plans for the town and to any applicable regulations
of the adopted municipal zoning chapter. Whenever a tract to be subdivided
embraces any part of a primary arterial, major arterial or collector street
so designated on any officially adopted plan, that part of the public
right-of-way shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and at the
width indicated by the plan and provisions of this chapter.



   (E)   Perimeter land reservation. Any reservation of land at the
perimeter of the subdivided tract so as to prevent access to adjacent
property shall be prohibited.



   (F)   Relation to railroad right-of-way. When a subdivision adjoins
a railroad right-of-way, the subdivider may be required to arrange the road
pattern to provide for future grade separation of road and railroad crossings.



   (G)   School sites. Where a tract of land that has been approved by
the School Board as a proposed school site lies wholly or partially within an
area proposed to be subdivided, and provided the School Board has notified
the Planning Board and the property owner of its approval of the school site
prior to or within 10 days after the review of a preliminary subdivision plat
by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall reserve the proposed school site
for a period of not more than 60 days from the date of the preliminary plat
approval.



   (H)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks, if required, shall be constructed to a
minimum width of 4 feet, and shall consist of a minimum thickness of 4 inches
of reinforced concrete. All sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way,
unless the development is platted as a planned unit or group development.



   (I)   Name of subdivision. The name of a subdivision shall not
duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision within
the Town of Fairmont.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.51  STORM WATER DRAINAGE.



   The subdivider shall provide an adequate drainage system for the proper
drainage of all surface water. The design of a system shall be subject to the
approval of the Town of Fairmont.



   (A)   No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a
sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Where feasible, the subdivider shall connect to an existing
storm drainage system.



   (C)   Where an existing storm drainage system cannot feasibly be
extended to the subdivision, a surface drainage system shall be designed to
protect the proposed development from water damage.



   (D)   Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of at least 2
feet of horizontal distance for each 1 foot of vertical distance, and courses
shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the drainage area without flooding.



   (E)   The minimum grade along the bottom of a surface drainage
course shall be a vertical fall of at least 1 foot in each 300 feet of
horizontal distance.



   (F)   During construction, preparation, arrangement and installation
of subdivision improvements, and facilities in subdivisions located at or
along a stream bed, the developed shall maintain the stream bed of each
stream, creek or backwash channel contiguous to the subdivision in an
unobstructed state and shall remove from the channel and banks of the stream
all debris, logs, timber, junk and other accumulations of a nature that
would, in time of flood, clog or dam the passage of waters in their
downstream course; installation of appropriately sized storm water drains,
culverts or bridges shall not be construed as obstructions in the stream.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.52  WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS; REQUIREMENTS.



   The preliminary subdivision plat must be accompanied by satisfactory
evidence as to the proposed method and system of water supply and sanitary
sewage collection and disposal.



   (A)   Where the system is to be connected to the system owned and
operated by the Town of Fairmont, or sanitary district, but not constructed
by the municipalities or county, the preliminary subdivision plat shall be
accompanied by a complete set of construction plans or the proposed system,
prepared by a registered engineer and approved by the engineer of the public
sewer system or public water system, and the appropriate state agency. Water
supply systems should be approved by the Fire Department as to location of
hydrants and size of mains. No mains shall be less than 6 inches inside
diameter, and they shall be laid out so as to create a complete circuit, with
no dead end lines in excess of 300 feet. A blowout shall be placed at the
dead end. Water and sewer lines should be installed in the street
rights-of-way where possible.



   (B)   Where the proposed system does not contemplate the use of
facilities owned and operated by any of the above, the proposed facilities
shall be approved by the appropriate agency (See Appendix I and Appendix II).



   (C)   Where public or community water supply and/or sewerage systems
are hot available or to be provided, a written statement from the Robeson
County Health Department shall be submitted with the preliminary plat
indicating that each lot has adequate land area and soil conditions suitable
to accommodate the proposed methods of water supply and sewage disposal. The
statement from the Health Department shall be based upon a field
investigation.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.53  STREET REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Design standards for municipal streets, those within the
corporate limits of the Town of Fairmont shall be regulated by municipal
policy and standards.



   (B)   Streets located outside the municipal limits of the Town of
Fairmont but within the territorial jurisdiction of the town shall be
regulated by the design standards and requirements of the North Carolina
Department of Transportation as set forth in their publication “Subdivision
Roads; Requirements and Minimum Construction Standards” and any subsequent
publications regulating subdivision streets.



      (1)   Street arrangement. Street layouts shall be designed and
located with proper consideration of and coordination with: existing and
planned streets; topographical conditions; natural terrain features such as
streams, lakes, flood plains, other waterway features, existing tree growth
and other local environmental factors; public convenience and safety; and
other proposed uses of the land to be served by the street layout.



      (2)   Street patterns. Provided that due consideration is
given to the coordination and continuation of existing and proposed street
networks, there shall be no requirement for the subdivider to adhere to a
rectangular grid street pattern; rather, in many cases, due to the irregular
shape of land parcels being developed, the use of curvilinear streets,
cul-de-sacs and other street patterns may be a more desirable layout.



      (3)   Coordination and continuation of streets. The proposed
street layout within a subdivision shall be coordinated with the existing and
proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established
on any officially adopted plans. Further, the proposed street layout shall
extend existing streets on their proper projection at the minimum width
required in this chapter, or at the option of the subdivider, a greater width
than the minimum required by this chapter.



      (4)   Street names. Proposed street names shall not duplicate
nor too closely approximate phonetically the name of any road or street
within Fairmont. Where proposed streets are extensions of existing streets,
the existing street names shall be used except where a new name can
reasonably be used to facilitate the proper house numbering or to avoid
further name duplication. In assigning new names, duplication of existing
names shall be avoided and in no case shall the proposed name be phonetically
similar to existing names irrespective of the use of a suffix, such as
street, road, drive, place, court and the like. Street names shall be subject
to the approval of the Planning Board.



      (5)   Road access to adjacent and unsubdivided property. The
proposed street layout shall be designed to provide for desirable access to
and not to impose undue hardship upon unsubdivided property adjoining the
subdivision, thus proposed streets shall be extended and/or extended by
dedication to the boundary of the subdivided tract, and a temporary
turn-around shall be provided to the extension.



         (a)   Where street extensions are prevented by
topographical or other natural features, or where, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, extensions are not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the proposed street layout with existing road networks or the
most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts, the Planning Board
may grant a variance to this requirement.



         (b)   Reserve strips adjoining road rights-of-way for
the purpose of preventing access to adjacent property shall be prohibited.



      (6)   Private streets. Private streets shall be prohibited
within any platted subdivision, unless, in the opinion of the Planning Board
private streets are in keeping with the spirit of this chapter, where streets
enhance the quality of the subdivision, meet all road specifications and
standards of the town or N.C. Department of Transportation and further, where
provisions have been assured for the permanent maintenance of streets, a
variance allowing private streets may be granted by the Planning Board.



      (7)   Subdivision street disclosure statement; public or
private street designation. All streets shown on the final plat must be
designated either “public” or “private,” and designation as
“public” is to be conclusively presumed an offer of dedication to the
public.



(G.S. § 136-102.6)



      (8)   Half streets. The dedication of half streets at the
perimeter of a new subdivision shall be prohibited. If circumstances render
this impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of the
remaining half of the street must be furnished by the subdivider. Where there
exists a half street in an adjoining subdivision the remaining half shall be
provided by the proposed development.



      (9)   Access roads and the like. Where a tract of land to be
subdivided adjoins an arterial road, the subdivider may be required to
provide a marginal access road parallel to the arterial road or reverse
frontage on an interior road for the lots to be developed adjacent to the
arterial road. Where reverse frontage is established, deed restrictions or
other means shall be provided to prevent private driveways from having direct
access to the arterial road.



      (10)   Cul-de-sacs. Roads designed to be permanently closed at
1 end, or roads which may not reasonably be expected to be extended in the
future unless an exception is granted by the Planning Board, shall not be
more than 500 feet in length. The vehicular turn-around shall have a street
right-of-way diameter of 80 feet. Cul-de-sacs shall not be used to avoid
connection with an existing street or to avoid the extension of a street.



      (11)   Right-of-way.



         (a)   A proposed municipal street right-of-way shall be
of sufficient width to accommodate the proposed road and appurtenances, but
in no case shall the right-of-way be less than 50 feet. The following
subdivision road classifications indicate the road right-of-way requirements:



 

Major collector
 
100 feet


Minor collector
 
90 feet


Local road
 
50 feet


Marginal access (frontage)
 
50 feet


Cul-de-sac
 
50 feet


Cul-de-sac turn-around
 
50 feet radius



 



         (b)   Right-of-way for streets outside the municipal
limits shall be those established by the N.C. Department of Transportation.



      (12)   Additional right-of-way width on existing streets. A
subdivision that adjoins existing streets shall dedicate an additional
right-of-way if needed to meet the right-of-way width requirements. The
entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on
both sides of the existing street. When the subdivision is located on only 1
side of an existing street, 1/2 of the required right-of-way measured from
the center line of the existing roadway shall be provided.



      (13)   Road and street surfaces and pavement widths. All roads
and streets within the town limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Town of Fairmont, North Carolina shall be of a hard surface material, and
surface materials and underlying base shall be in compliance with the
specifications and standards of the Town of Fairmont and/or those established
by the N.C. Department of Transportation. Streets and roads constructed in
the Town of Fairmont and its extraterritorial jurisdiction which are not
required to have curb and gutter shall conform to the following hard surface
pavement widths:



 

Street Type
 
Desirable Width
 
Minimum Width


Major thoroughfares and highways
 
48 feet
 
40 feet


Local roads
 
24 feet
 
20 feet


One-way roads
 
16 feet
 
14 feet


Cul-de-sac streets
 
24 feet
 
20 feet


Cul-de-sac turnaround
 
50 foot radius
 
40 foot radius



 



      (14)   Curves. Where a deflection angle of more than 10
degrees in the alignment of a road occurs, the right-of-way shall be curved.
The minimum radius of curvature at the center line of proposed road
rights-of-way shall not be less than 100 feet on local roads and 300 feet on
collector streets.



      (15)   Reverse curves. Reverse curves in road right-of-way
shall be connected by tangents of not less than 100 feet.



      (16)   Street intersections. Street intersections shall be
laid out as follows:



         (a)   All streets shall intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles and no street shall intersect at less than 70 degrees.



         (b)   Intersections with a major street shall be at
least 1,000 feet apart measured from centerline to centerline.



         (c)   Off-sets are to be avoided unless an exception is
granted by the Planning Board. Intersections which cannot be aligned shall be
separated by a minimum 125 feet between center lines.



         (d)   Property lines at street intersections shall be
rounded with a minimum radius of 20 feet. At an angle of intersection of less
than 90 degrees, a greater radius may be required.



         (e)   Triangular sight distance easements at all street
intersections shall be shown in dashed lines and so noted on the final plat.
These easements shall remain free of all structures, trees, shrubbery,
driveways and signs, except utility poles, fire hydrants and traffic control
signals. There shall be a clear sight distance of 150 feet for all major
streets and 75 feet for all other streets from the point of intersection as
measured along the centerline.



      (17)   Grades. The longitudinal grade on any proposed road
shall be subject to the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. However,
the minimum grade on any proposed road shall not be less than 0.5% and the
maximum grade shall not exceed 7%. Grades approaching intersections shall not
exceed 5% for a distance of not less than 100 feet from the centerline of the
intersection. Grades of streets outside the municipal limits of the Town of
Fairmont shall conform to the N.C. Department of Transportation standards.



      (18)   Alleys. An alley shall be provided to the rear of all
lots used for other than residential purposes. Alleys are prohibited in
residential blocks unless approved by the Planning Board. All alleys shall be
designed in accordance with the N.C. Department of Transportation
specifications and standards and shall meet the following requirements:



 

Right-of-way width
 
20 feet


Property line radius at alley intersection
 
15 feet minimum centerline radius when deflection


Angle of more than 10 degrees occurs
 
35 feet minimum turn-around diameter of dead end


Alley (right-of-way width)
 
80 feet



 



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.54  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS.



   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to: provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special
needs of the type of use contemplated; zoning requirements as to lot sizes
and dimensions; needs for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, control and
safety of street traffic; limitations and opportunities of topography; and
convenient access to water areas.



   (A)   Block length. Blocks shall not be less than 400 feet nor more
than 1320 feet in length, unless otherwise dictated by exceptional topography
or other limiting factors consistent with good design. Wherever practicable,
blocks along major streets and highways shall not be less than 1,000 feet in
length.



   (B)   Block width. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for
2 tiers of lots of appropriate depth except where single-tier lots are
required to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, corporate boundaries or any
other type of use, except as may be necessary due to extreme topographic
conditions.



   (C)   Pedestrian walkways and crosswalks. Where deemed necessary by
the Planning Board, a pedestrian walkway and/or crosswalk at least 10 feet in
width may be required to provide convenient public access to public areas
such as schools, recreation areas, shopping centers, churches and other
public facilities and the like.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.55  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR LOTS.



   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum
building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.



   (A)   All subdivisions shall be subject to Chapter 154. Lots in
subdivisions located within a district specified by Chapter 154 shall meet
and conform to all lot size, dimensions and building setback requirements of
the zoning chapter.



   (B)   Orientation of residential lot lines. Side lot lines shall be
substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.



   (C)   Frontage on roads. Each lot shall have frontage on a road.



   (D)   Large tracts or parcels. Where land is subdivided into larger
parcels than ordinary building lots,  parcels should be so arranged so as to
allow for the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.56  DESIGN STANDARDS FOR EASEMENTS.



   Easements shall be provided as follows:



   (A)   Utility easements. Easements for underground or above ground
utilities shall be provided where necessary across lots or preferable
centered on rear or side lot lines and shall be at least 10 feet in width.



   (B)   Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
stream or drainage way, an easement shall be provided conforming with the
lines of a stream and of sufficient width as will be adequate for the purpose.



   (C)   Buffer strips. A buffer strip at least 10 feet in width may be
required by the Planning Board adjacent to a major street or a commercial or
industrial development. This strip shall be in addition to the normally
required lot dimension, shall be part of the platted lot and shall be
reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs by the owners.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.57  PLACEMENT OF MONUMENTS.



   Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, the Manual of Practice for
Land Surveying as adopted by the N.C. State Board of Registration for
Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, under provisions of G.S. Chapter
89C, shall apply when conducting surveys for subdivisions; to determine the
accuracy for surveys and placement of monuments, control corners, markers and
property corner ties; to determine the location, design and material of
monuments, markers, control corners and property corner ties; and to
determine other standards and procedures governing the practice of land
surveying for subdivisions. The suburban land survey (Class B) criteria shall
apply to all subdivisions in the Fairmont’s jurisdiction area except for
commercial and industrial surveys.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.58  CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Commencement. No construction or installation of improvements
shall commence in a proposed subdivision until the preliminary plat has been
approved and all plans and specifications have been approved by the
appropriate authorities.



   (B)   Permits. No building or other permits shall be issued for
erection of a structure on any lot not of record at the time of adoption of
this chapter until all the requirements of this chapter have been met.



   (C)   Access. The administrator of this chapter shall have access to
premises and structures during reasonable hours to make those inspections as
deemed necessary by him or her to ensure compliance with this chapter.



   (D)   Inspection. The subdivider, prior to commencing any work
within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with the Administrator of
this chapter to provide for adequate inspection. The approving authorities
having jurisdiction or their representatives shall inspect and approve all
completed work prior to release of the sureties.



   (E)   Erosion control. The subdivider shall cause all grading,
excavations, open cuts, side slopes and other land surface disturbances to be
so mulched, seeded, sodded or otherwise protected to comply with the
provisions of § 153.60(C).



   (F)   Existing flora. The subdivider shall make every effort to
protect and retain all existing trees, shrubbery, vines and grasses not
actually lying in public roadways, drainageways, building foundation sites,
private driveways, soil absorption waste disposal areas, paths and trails.
Trees are to be protected and preserved during construction in accordance
with sound conservation practices recommended by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture in Agricultural Information Bulletin No. 285, Protecting Trees
Against Damage From Construction Work, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964.
Trees are to be preserved by well islands or retaining walls whenever
abutting grades are altered. Temporary vegetation and mulching shall be used
to protect critical areas, and permanent vegetation shall be installed as
soon as practical.



   (G)   Construction. Construction at any given time shall be confined
to the smallest practical area and for the shortest practical period of time.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.59  OVERSIZED IMPROVEMENTS.



   The Town of Fairmont may require installation of certain oversized
facilities such as water mains in excess of 6 inches in diameter, when it is
in the interest of future development. The Town of Fairmont shall pay for
that portion of the improvement which exceeds the standards set forth in this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



INSPECTION, EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES



§ 153.70  INSPECTIONS.



   The Code Enforcement Officer shall be notified 24 hours in advance of
the work to be started so that all necessary inspections may be made. The
Enforcement Officer shall be allowed access to all parts of work area, and
shall be furnished with every reasonable facility to ascertain whether or not
the works as performed are in accordance with these regulations. Further,
inspection shall not relieve the contractor from any obligation to perform
all of the work strictly in accordance with these regulations.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.71  EXCEPTIONS.



   The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the
Planning Board and Town Commissioners in the case of a plan and program for a
complete group development, which in the judgment of the Planning Board and
Town Commissioners provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the
circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully
developed and populated, and which also provides covenants or other legal
provisions as well as insure conformity to and achievement of the plan.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.72  VARIANCES.



   Where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the
site, strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter would cause an
unnecessary hardship, the Planning Board may recommend and the Town
Commissioners may authorize a variance, if the variance can be made without
destroying the intent of this chapter. Any variance thus authorized is
required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the Planning Board and of
the Town Commissioners with the reasoning on which the departure was
justified set forth.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   After the effective date of this chapter, any person who, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the territorial
jurisdiction of this chapter, thereafter subdivides land in violation of this
chapter or transfers or sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or any
other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has
been recorded in the Robeson County Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. The description by metes and bounds as the instrument of
transfer or other documentation used in the process of selling or
transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from the provisions of
this chapter nor the penalty clause. The Town of Fairmont through its
attorney or other official designated by the Fairmont Board of Commissioners
may enjoin illegal subdivisions, transfer or sale of land by action of
injunction. Further, violators of this chapter shall be subject, upon
conviction, to fine and/or imprisonment as provided for by the General
Statutes of North Carolina.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



APPENDICES



   These appendices are a collection of supplementary data to aid the
developers in expediting their task in complying with these regulations.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



APPENDIX I.  WATER AND SEWER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Water supply systems serving 10 or more connections are
classified as public water supplies by state law, and plans and
specifications must be approved by the Sanitary Engineering Division, State
Board of Health, N. C. Department of Human Resources.



   (B)   Water supply systems serving from 2 to 9 connections,
inclusive may be regulated by the County Board of Health, and plans should be
approved by the County Health Department.



   (C)   Plans for public and community sewer systems must be approved
by the Division of Environmental Management, N. C. Department of Natural and
Economic Resources.



   (D)   Individual water supplies should be located, constructed and
operated in accordance with State Board of Health Bulletin No. 476,
“Protection of Private Water Supplies.” Individual sewage disposal
systems must be installed and maintained in accordance with the State Board
of Health “Rules and Regulations Governing the Disposal of Sewage from Any
Residence, Place of Business or Place of Public Assembly in North Carolina”
and the regulations of the County Board of Health. State Board of Health
Bulletin No. 519, “Residential Sewage Disposal Plants,” contains helpful
information.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



APPENDIX II.  WATER AND SEWERAGE SYSTEMS.




   (A)   Public water and sewage systems. Based on plans and
specifications approved, respectively, by the Sanitary Engineering Division,
State Board of Health, N. C. Department of Human Resources and the Division
of Environmental Management, N. C. Department of Natural and Economic
Resources.



   (B)   Semi-public water systems (2-9 connections) and public
sewerage systems. Based on plans and specifications approved, respectively,
by the County Health Department and the Division of Environmental Management,
N. C. Department of Natural and Economic Resources.



   (C)   Public or semi-public water systems and individual sewage
disposal systems. Water supply based on plans and specifications approved by
either the Sanitary Engineering Division, State Board of Health, N. C.
Department of Human Resources or the County Health Department, whichever is
acceptable. Individual sewage disposal systems based on a site investigation
by the County Health Department, including tests of the absorption capacity
of the soil and sub-soil investigation, showing that the site is suitable for
individual sewage disposal systems.



   (D)   Individual water supplies and public sewerage systems. Based
on a site investigation by the County Health Department and sewerage system
plans and specifications approved by the Division of Environmental
Management, N. C. Department of Natural and Economic Resources.



   (E)   Individual water supplies and individual sewage disposal
systems. Based on a site investigation by the County Health Department,
including tests of the absorption capacity of the soil and sub-soil
investigations, showing that the site is suitable for individual water
supplies and individual sewage disposal systems.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



APPENDIX III.  PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECKLIST.



SUBDIVISION RECORD   DATE SUBMITTED_____________________



PRELIMINARY PLAT



Name of Subdivision _________________________________



Location ___________________________________________



Owner _____________________________________________



Land Planner______________ Address ____________________ Tel. ______________



Surveyor _________________ Address ____________________ Tel. ______________



CHECKLIST



_____   Vicinity map embracing subdivision and surrounding area.



_____   Six copies of preliminary plat.



_____   Scale: 1 inch = 100 feet or larger.



_____   Name of subdivision and owner.



_____   North point, graphic scale, date.



_____   Boundaries of tract with bearings and distances.



_____   Names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions.



_____   The location of existing sewers, water and gas mains and other
utilities.



_____   The location of existing streets, easements, bridges, culverts,
railroads, watercourses and the like.



_____   Names, locations and approximate dimensions of proposed streets,
easements, parks and reservations, lot lines and the like.



_____   Contour map, if required.



_____   Proposed lot lines, building lines and approximate dimensions.



_____   Lot and block numbers.



_____   Zoning classification, if any, on the land to be subdivided and on
adjoining land.



_____   Conforms to general requirements and minimum design standards.



Certification of Approval by District Highway Engineer ___________________
(date)



Certification of Approval by County School Superintendent __________________
(date)



Certification by Registered Engineer ____________________ (date)



Certification of water supply and sewage disposal system by County



Health Officer ___________________________ (date)



Certification of Approval by County Auditor __________________________ (date)



Certification of Approval by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
_______________________ (date)



Approved ______________ to proceed to final plat.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



APPENDIX IV.  FINAL PLAT CHECKLIST.



SUBDIVISION RECORD   DATE SUBMITTED _________________



FINAL PLAT      PRELIMINARY APPROVAL DATE _____________



Name of Subdivision _________________________



Location ___________________________________



Owner __________________ Address ______________________ Tel. _________________



Engineer ________________ Address ______________________ Tel.
_________________



Surveyor ________________ Address ______________________ Tel.
_________________



Checklist



_____   Submitted within 12 months of preliminary approval.



_____   Five copies of final plat. Two reproducible and 3 paper copies.



_____   Scale: 1 inch = 100 feet or larger.



_____   Names and lines of streets and roads.



_____   Lot lines and building lines.



_____   Lot and block numbers.



_____   Reservations, easements, public areas or sites for other than
residential use with explanation of purpose.



_____   Contour map, if required.



_____   North point, graphic scale, date.



_____   Location and description of monuments.



_____   Names and locations of adjoining subdivision and streets and the
location and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided property.



_____   Conforms to general requirements and minimum design standards.



_____   Required improvements have been made or $ ______ bond posted.



_____   Required certificates.



On-site field inspection _______________________ (date)



Persons making inspection: ____________________________________________



Comments: _________________________________________________________



Approved by Planning Board _______________________________



Disapproved ______________________ for the following reasons:
_______________________



Approved ________________________ for recording by Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



APPENDIX V.  SELECTED REFERENCES.



   (A)   RECREATION, PARK AND OPEN SPACE LAND ACQUISITION FOR
SUBDIVISIONS IN NORTH CAROLINA. By Stephen H. Moler and J. Harold Moses,
Division of Parks and Recreation, Department of Natural and Economic
Resources, P.O. Box 27687, Raleigh, N.C. 27611, 1975.



   (B)   AN INTRODUCTION TO SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS IN NORTH CAROLINA.
By Robert E. Stripe, Institute of Government, University of North Carolina,
P.O. Box 990, Chapel Hill, N.C. 27514, 1965.



   (C)   PLANNING LEGISLATION IN NORTH CAROLINA. By Philip P. Green,
Jr., Institute of Government, University of North Carolina, P.O. Box 990,
Chapel Hill, N.C. 27514, 1975.



   (D)   REGULATING THE SUBDIVISION OF ;..AND. By Philip P. Green, Jr.,
Institute of Government, University of Norte Carolina, P.O. Box 990, Chapel
Hill, N.C. 27514, 1968.



   (E)   MODEL SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS: TEXT AND COMMENTARY. By Robert
H. Freilich and Peter S. Levi, American Society of Planning Officials,
Chicago, Ill., 1975.



   (F)   SUBDIVISION PLAT REVIEW. By Charles F. Price, Planning
Memoranda, Subdivision Regulation No. 1, Institute of Government, University
of North Carolina, P.O. Box 990, Chapel Hill, N.C. 27514, 1975.



   (G)   AN ABBREVIATED PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING MINOR PLATS. By Robert
M. Leary, Planning Memoranda, Subdivision Regulation No. 2, Institute of
Government, University of North Carolina, P.O. Box 990, Chapel Hill, N.C.
27514, 1975.



(Ord. passed 5-31-1977)



CHAPTER 154:
ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   154.001   Authority and jurisdiction



   154.002   Definitions



   154.003   Application



   154.004   Reduction of lot and yard areas



   154.005   Relationship of building to lot



   154.006   Nonconforming uses



   154.007   Continuing the use of nonconforming buildings



   154.008   Reserved



   154.009   Mobile home parks



   154.010   Mobile homes or modular homes



   154.011   Customary home occupations



   154.012   Buffers



   154.013   Territorial application



   154.014   Bona fide farms exempt



   154.015   Commercial poultry houses and hog farms regulated




Exceptions and Modifications; Off-street Parking




   154.025   Lot of record



   154.026   Front yard for dwellings



   154.027   Height limitations



   154.028   Visibility at intersections



   154.029   Relationship of building to lot



   154.030   Group development projects



   154.031   Planned unit development; residential uses



   154.032   Certification of minimum parking requirements



   154.033   Minimum off-street parking requirements



   154.034   Off-street loading and unloading space




Conditional Uses and Special Use Permits




   154.045   Purpose



   154.046   Compliance



   154.047   Application for conditional use



   154.048   Public hearing



   154.049   Action by the Planning Board



   154.050   Action by the Town Board



   154.051   Conditions and guarantees



   154.052   Granting special use permits



   154.053   Special use permits for off-street parking in residential
zones



   154.054   Temporary use; special use permits




Administration and Enforcement




   154.065   Zoning Enforcement Officer



   154.066   Zoning permit required



   154.067   Application for zoning permit



   154.068   Certification of occupancy required




Board of Adjustment




   154.080   Creation of the Board of Adjustment



   154.081   Proceedings



   154.082   Decisions of the Zoning Board



   154.083   Appeals, hearing and notice



   154.084   Stay of proceedings



   154.085   Powers and duties of the Board



   154.086   Decision of the Board of Adjustment



   154.087   Duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, Board of
Adjustment and courts on matters of appeal




Amendments and Changes




   154.100   Motion to amend



   154.101   Protest against amendment



   154.102   Planning Board action




Use Districts




   154.115   Use districts named



   154.116   District boundaries shown on zoning map



   154.117   Due consideration given to district boundaries



   154.118   Boundaries



   154.119   Interpretation of district regulations




Use Requirement by District




   154.130   R-A residential-agricultural district



   154.131   R-20 residential district



   154.132   R-15 residential district



   154.133   R-10 residential district



   154.134   R-8 residential district



   154.135   R-5 residential district



   154.136   R-MH residential district



   154.137   C-B central business district



   154.138   G-B business district



   154.139   N-B neighborhood business district



   154.140   G-M general manufacturing district



   154.141   HD Historic Downtown district



   154.142   H-D Historic Downtown business district




Flood Fringe Zones and the like




   154.150   Regulation of floodway and flood fringe zones



   154.151   Intent for establishing floodway and flood fringe districts



   154.152   Method used to analyze flood hazard



   154.153   Interpretation of zone boundaries



   154.154   Permitted use in F-W floodway district



   154.155   Artificial obstruction prohibited



   154.156   Uses requiring special use permits



   154.157   Standards for floodway special permit uses



   154.158   Floodway-fringe district (FF) regulations



   154.159   Permitted uses



   154.160   Special use permits



   154.161   Family care home and Level IV group facility



   154.162   Area, yard and height requirements



   154.163   Legal provisions




General Business, Central Business and General Manufacturing




   154.175   Definitions



   154.176   Nightclubs or bars



   154.177   Off-street parking standards



   154.178   Exterior lighting



   154.179   Amplified sound; bars, nightclubs, restaurants and the like



   154.180   Complaints



   154.181   Restaurant establishments and the like




Adult Business Overlay Zone




   154.195   Purpose



   154.196   Changes of zone



   154.197   Location requirements



   154.198   Development standards



   154.199   Permitted zone classification



   154.200   Adult business permit required; application



   154.201   Existing adult businesses



   154.202   Conflicts



   154.203   Modifications or revocations




Wireless Telecommunication Towers




   154.215   Intent



   154.216   Definitions



   154.217   Wireless antenna arrays; development criteria



   154.218   Conditional use permit; development standards



   154.219   Guidelines



 



   154.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.001  AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.



   (A)   In pursuance of authority granted by the General Assembly of
North Carolina in G.S. § 160A-19-3, and for the purpose of promoting the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare; promoting the orderly
development of the community; lessening congestion in the roads and streets;
securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light
and air; preventing the overcrowding of the land; avoiding undue
concentration of population; and facilitating the adequate provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements, all in accordance with a well considered comprehensive plan.
Now, therefore, the Town Board of the Town of Fairmont, in pursuance of the
authority granted by the General Statutes of North Carolina, hereby ordain
and enact into law the following sections.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the
corporate limits of the Town of Fairmont and within the territory beyond
corporate limits as prescribed by G.S. § 160A-19, as now or hereafter fixed,
up to a distance of 1 mile in all directions.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to bona fide
farms. This chapter does not exercise any controls over crop lands, timber
lands, pasture lands, idle or other farm lands, nor over any farm house,
barn, poultry house or other farm buildings including tenant or other houses
for persons working on farms, as long as houses shall be in the same
ownership as the farm and located on the farm. Agricultural uses maintain the
openness of the land and achieve the purposes of this chapter without the
need for regulation. Residences for non-farm use or occupancy and other
non-farm uses shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.002  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACCESSORY USE .   A use customarily incidental and subordinate
to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with principal
use or building.



      ALLEY .   A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general
traffic circulation.



      BILLBOARD.  Outdoor structure or display, pictorial or
otherwise, either freestanding or attached to a building, which advertises or
attracts attention to a business, commodity, service or other activity
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises on which the sign
is located.



      BUFFER STRIP.  A buffer strip shall consist of a planted strip
at least 10 feet in width, composed of deciduous or evergreen trees or a
mixture of each, spaced not more than 20 feet apart, and not less than 1 row
of dense shrubs, spaced not more than 5 feet apart. In some instances, a
fence may be required by the Planning Board. Fence specifications shall be
determined by the Planning Board.



      BUILDING.  Any structure enclosed and isolated by exterior walls
or columns constructed or used for residence, business, industry or other
public or private purposes, or accessory thereto. The term BUILDING shall be
construed as if followed by the words “or parts thereof.”



      BUILDING, ACCESSORY.  A building subordinate to the main
building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
principal building and located on the same lot therewith.



      BUILDING, HEIGHT OF .   The vertical distance measured from the
grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the deck line of
a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a
gable, hip or gambrel roof.



      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which the building is situated.



      BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  A line establishing the minimum
allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building, excluding the
outermost 3 feet of any uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters and similar
fixtures and the street right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly
thereto.



      CHANNEL.  The bed where a river, stream or watercourse runs.



      CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.  Any use conducted for gain entirely
within the dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with
which there is no display; provided further, no person, not a resident on the
premises shall be employed specifically in connection with the activity; no
mechanical equipment shall be installed or used except as is normally used
for domestic or professional purposes; and not over 25% of the total floor
space shall be used for home occupations.



      DISTRICT, ZONING.  Any section of the Town of Fairmont or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction in which zoning regulations are uniform.



      DWELLING UNIT.  A building or portion thereof, providing
complete and permanent living facilities for 1 family. The term DWELLING
shall not be deemed to include a motel, hotel, tourist home, mobile home or
other structure designed for transient residence.



      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by 1 family.



      DWELLING, 2-FAMILY.  A building arranged or designed to be
occupied by 2 families living independently of each other.



      DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY.  A building or portion thereof used or
designed as a residence for 3 or more families living independently of each
other, including apartment houses, apartment hotels and group housing
projects.



      FAMILY.  Any number of persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit.



      FAMILY CARE HOME.  A residential housing unit that houses
persons with disabilities, including a person with a temporary or permanent
physical, emotional or mental disability, including, but not limited to,
mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight
impairments, emotional disturbance and orthopedic impairment.



      FLOOD or FLOODING.  The general and temporary rise in stream,
river or watercourse flow that results in water partially or completely
overtopping its banks and inundating areas adjacent to the watercourse which
are normally dry land areas.



      FLOOD FRINGE.  The land area located between the encroachment
lines of the floodway and the maximum elevation subject to inundation by the
regulatory flood.



      FLOOD PLAIN.  The relatively flat area or low land adjacent to
the channel of a river, stream or watercourse, which has been or is likely to
be covered by flood water. The flood plain includes the floodway and the
flood fringe.



      FLOOD PROOFING.  A combination of structural provisions, changes
or adjustments to properties and/or structures subject to flooding primarily
for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to properties, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and contents of buildings.



      FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  The elevation to which structures
and uses regulated by this chapter and the flood insurance program are
required to be elevated or flood proofed.



      FLOOD, REGULATORY OR 100 YEAR.  The regulatory or 100 year flood
is a flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in the area and is characteristic of what can be expected on a
particular watercourse. The regulatory flood or 100 year flood is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance of occurring each
year).



      FLOODWAY.  The channel of a stream, river or watercourse and
adjacent land which is required to carry and discharge the flood water or
flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.



      FLOODWAY, ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION.  Any dam, embankment levee,
dike, pile, spoil material, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence,
refuse, fill, structure or matter which is not a natural obstruction that has
been located in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or
floodway zone which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of
water, either in itself or by catching debris carried by water, or that is
placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream resulting in
damage of life or property.



      FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES.  Lateral limits of the floodway
zone along streams or other watercourses, within which, in the direction of
the stream or watercourse, no structure or fill may be added, unless
specifically permitted herein. Their purpose is to preserve the flood
carrying capacity of the floodway. Their location is so that the floodway
between them, including the channel, will handle a designated flood flow.



      FLOODWAY, NATURAL OBSTRUCTION.  Any rock, tree, gravel or
analogous natural occurrence that is an obstruction to the flood-carrying
capacity of river, stream or watercourse and has been located within the
floodway by a nonhuman cause.



      GAME ROOM.  A game room for the purpose of this chapter shall be
any place of business that operates 3 or more mechanical games or pay devices
for which charge is made either directly or indirectly (included by way of
illustration, video games, pool tables, bowling lanes), provided that games
or pay devices shall not include vending machines or photo laminating
machines.



(Ord. passed - -)



      GROSS FLOOR AREA.  The total area of all buildings in the
project including basements, mezzanines and upper floors, exclusive of
stairways and elevator shafts. It excludes separate service facilities
outside the main building such as boiler rooms and maintenance shops.



      GROUP DEVELOPMENT.  A group of 2 or more principal structures
built on a single lot, tract or parcel of land not subdivided into the
customary streets and lots and which will not be so subdivided, and designed
for occupancy by separate families, businesses or other enterprises. Examples
would be: cluster type subdivisions, row houses, apartment courts, housing
projects, school and hospital campuses, shopping centers and industrial parks.



      JUNK YARD.  The use of more than 600 square feet of the area of
any lot for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap
metals or other scrap materials or for the dismantling, demolition or
abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.



      LEVEL IV GROUP FACILITY.  A group facility that houses mentally
ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in G.S. 122C-3(11)b.



      LOT.  A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by
some legal instrument such as a deed or a recorded map and which is
recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. If a
public road crosses a parcel of land otherwise characterized as a lot by this
definition, the land on each side of the public road shall constitute a
separate lot.



      LOT, CORNER. A lot which occupies the interior angle at the
intersection of 2 street lines which make an angle of more than 45 degrees
and less than 135 degrees with each other. The street line forming the least
frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot except where the 2 street lines
are equal, in which case the owner shall be required to specify which is the
front when requesting a zoning permit.



      LOT, DEPTH.  The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.



      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of
which has been recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds or a
lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded.



      LOT WIDTH.  The distance between side lot lines measured at the
building setback line.



      MOBILE HOME.  A structure that consists of a single unit, or of
2 or 3 principle components (single-wide, double-wide or triple-wide,
respectively) totally assembled at the factory and joined together at the
building site; is designed so that the total structure, or principle
component thereof can be transported on its own chassis; must be at least 50
feet long and 10 feet wide; is designed to be used as a dwelling and provides
complete, independent living facilities for 1 family, including permanent
provision for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and is
actually being used, or is held ready for use as a dwelling.



      MOBILE HOME PARK. Any place or tract of land maintained, offered
or used for the parking of 2 or more mobile homes or trailer houses, used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping purposes; a piece of land so
designed and improved that it is licensed as a mobile home park under this
chapter; or a piece of land licensed as a nonconforming park as specified in
this chapter; this tract of land shall be under single ownership or owned by
a group development association and it shall be maintained under a single
management system.



      MOBILE HOME LOT.  A piece of land within a mobile home park:
whose boundaries are delineated in accordance with the requirements of the
chapter (some ordinances require physical markings on the ground; others
specify that the plat submitted in the permit-application process must
indicate the lot lines); that is designed and improved in accordance with the
requirements of the chapter to accommodate a single mobile home.



      MODULAR HOME.  Any building or structure, designed for living or
sleeping purposes, which are premanufactured, all or in part, at some point
other than the building site for assembly or installation later at the
building site. Further defined, a building may be assembled from
premanufactured rooms, wall panels, frame units or other factory manufactured
parts, which may be fabricated of wood, foundation or foundation materials at
the building site. This definition does not include vehicles or structures
that are designed to be mounted on wheels to be moved to a lot such as mobile
homes defined above.



      NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM.  This program makes available
to residents of flood-prone areas, flood insurance at reasonable premium
rates through the means of a federal subsidy. Local jurisdictions are
required to enact land use and control measures designed to guide the
rational use of the flood plain and minimize potential damage from future
flooding as a condition for the availability of the federally subsidized
flood insurance.



      NONCONFORMING SITUATION.  A situation that occurs when, on the
effective date of this chapter or any amendment to it, an existing lot or
structure or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to 1 or
more of the regulations applicable to the district in which the lot or
structure is located. Among other possibilities, a nonconforming situation
may arise because a lot does not meet minimum acreage requirements, because
structures do not satisfy maximum height or minimum floor-space limitations,
because the relationship between existing buildings and the land (in matters
such as density and setback requirements) is not in conformity with this
chapter, or because land or buildings are used for purposes made unlawful by
this chapter.



      NONCONFORMING USE.  A nonconforming situation that occurs when
property is used for a purpose or in a manner made unlawful by the use
regulations applicable to the district in which the property is located. (For
example, a commercial office building in a residential district may be a
nonconforming use.) The term also refers to the activity that constitutes the
use made of the property. (For example, all the activity associated with
running a bakery in a residentially zoned area is a nonconforming use.)



      NONCONFORMING LOT.  A lot existing at the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment to it (and not created for the purpose of evading
the restrictions of this chapter) that cannot meet the minimum area or
lot-width requirements of the district in which the lot is located.



      NONCONFORMING PROJECT.  Any structure, development or
undertaking that is incomplete at the effective date of this chapter and
would be inconsistent with any regulation applicable to the district in which
it is located if completed as proposed or planned.



      NONCONFORMITY, DIMENSIONAL.  A nonconforming situation that
occurs when the height, size or minimum floor space of a structure or the
relationship between an existing building or buildings and other buildings or
lot lines does not conform to the regulations applicable to the district in
which the property is located.



      OPEN STORAGE.  Unroofed storage area, whether fenced or not.



      PARKING SPACE.  A storage space of not less than 10 feet by 20
feet for 1 automobile, plus the necessary access space. It shall always be
located outside the dedicated street right-of-way.



      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A tract or parcel of land which is
developed for residential use as an integrated unit under single ownership or
control, and which is at least 4 acres in area and includes 2 or more
principal buildings. Development shall be based on a plan which allows for
flexibility of design most available under normal zoning district
requirements.



      SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PUBLIC.  A system serving 2 or more
connections. Plans for public and community sewer systems must be approved by
the Office of Water and Air Resources, N.C. Department of Natural and
Economic Resources.



      SEWERAGE SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL.  A septic tank arrangement of
sewage disposal. Individual sewage disposal systems must be installed and
maintained in accordance with the State Board of Health “Rules and
Regulations Governing the Disposal of Sewage from any Residence, Place of
Business, or Place of Public Assembly in North Carolina,” and regulations
of the County Board of Health. State Board of Health Bulletin No. 519,
“Residential Sewage Disposal Plants,” contains helpful information.



      SIGN AREA. Sign area shall be measured by the smallest square,
rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof, which will encompass the
entire advertising copy area, excluding architectural trim and structural
members. In computing area, only 1 side of a double-faced sign shall be
considered.



      SIGNS, ANNOUNCEMENT OR SIGNS, BUSINESS.  Any outdoor notice
containing words, letters, figures, numerals, emblems, devices, trademarks or
trade names or combinations thereof, by which anything is made known such as
the designation of a firm, corporation, profession, business, commodity or
product located or available on the premises.



      STREAM.  A watercourse that collects surface runoff from an area
of 1 square mile or greater.



      STREET or ROAD.  A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way
for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting
properties.



      STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached
to something having more or less permanent location on the ground.



      TRACT.  A piece of land whose boundaries have been described or
delimited by a legal instrument or map recorded in the office of the Register
of Deeds.



      VIDEO ARCADES and GAME ROOMS.  Any establishment that has on its
premises more than 2 video games, pinball machines or other games for the
purpose of monetary gain or the enjoyment of its patrons.



(Ord. passed 9-13-1983)



      WATER SYSTEM, PUBLIC.  Water supply systems serving 10 or more
connections are classified as a public water supply by state law. Plans and
specifications must be approved by the Sanitary Engineering Division, State
Board of Health, N.C. Department of Human Resources.



      WATER SYSTEM, SEMI-PUBLIC.  Water supply systems serving from 2
to 9 connections, inclusive. This system may be regulated by the County Board
of Health, and plans should be approved by the County Health Department.



      WATER SYSTEM, INDIVIDUAL.  A drilled well which serves a single
connection. Individual water supply systems should be located, constructed
and operated in accordance with State Board of Health Bulletin No. 476,
“Protection of Private Water Supplies.”



      YARD.  An open space on the same lot with a principal building,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.



      YARD, FRONT.  An open space on the same lot with a principal
building, between the front line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the
front property or street right-of-way line and extending across the full
width of the lot.



      YARD, REAR.  An open, unoccupied space extending the full width
of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of
the building projected to the side lines of the lot.



      YARD, SIDE.  An open, unoccupied space situated between the side
line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from
the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard.



   (B)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the
plural number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the
wording indicates otherwise.



      CONDITIONAL. Includes the word SPECIAL.



      LOT.  Includes the words PLOT, PARCEL or TRACT.



      PERSON.  Includes a firm, association, corporation, trust and
company as well as an individual.



      SHALL.  Always mandatory and not merely directory.



      STRUCTURE.  Includes the word BUILDING.



      USED FOR.  Includes the meaning DESIGNED FOR.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977; Am. Ord. 08-115, passed 3-18-2008; Am. Ord. 15-158,
passed 3-17-2015)



§ 154.003  APPLICATION.



   No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part
thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.004  REDUCTION OF LOT AND YARD AREAS.



   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein,
except for street widening. Yards or lots created after the effective date of
this chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.005  RELATIONSHIP OF BUILDING TO LOT.



   Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall
be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than 1 principal
building and its customary accessory buildings on any lot, except in the case
of a specially designed complex of institutional, residential, commercial or
industrial buildings in an appropriate zoning district, i.e., school campus,
cluster housing, shopping center, industrial park, and so forth, as permitted
by § 154.029.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.006  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   After the effective date of this chapter, existing structures,
or the uses of land or structures which would be prohibited under the
regulations for the district in which it is located (if they existed on the
adoption date of this chapter), shall be nonconforming structures or uses.



   (B)   After the effective date of any amendment to this chapter,
existing structures, or the uses of land or structures which would be
prohibited under the new regulations for the district in which they are
located (if they existed on the adoption of the amendment), shall be
nonconforming structures or uses.



   (C)   Nonconforming structures or uses (as defined in § 154.002)
may be continued provided they conform to the following provisions:



      (1)   Extensions of use. Nonconforming uses of land shall not
hereafter be enlarged or extended in any way.



      (2)   Change of use. Any nonconforming use of land may be
changed to a conforming use, or with the approval of the Board of Adjustment
to any use more in character with the uses permitted in the district.



      (3)   Cessation of use. All nonconforming uses of land or uses
involving only minor structures, such as automobile wrecking yards,
automobile sales yards, billboards and other outdoor advertising signs,
salvage operations, mobile homes or any use similar to those enumerated shall
be subject to a 3-year conditional use permit, which shall be reviewed 1 year
before the expiration of the conditional use permit by the Town’s Planning
Board at a public hearing on the use. At that time the nonconforming use
shall be granted an additional 3 year permit or directed to cease by the end
of the third year or expiration of the permit. One year before the cessation
of any nonconforming use permit, it shall be subject to review by the
Planning Board at a duly constituted public hearing.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977; Am. Ord. 10-134, passed 5-18-2010)



§ 154.007  CONTINUING THE USE OF NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Extensions of use. Nonconforming buildings and nonconforming
uses of building shall not hereafter be enlarged.



   (B)   Change of use. The lawful use of a building existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter may be continued although the use does
not conform with the provisions of this chapter, and the building may be
reconstructed or structurally altered and nonconforming use therein changed
subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   The order of classification of uses from highest to
lowest for the purpose of this section shall be as follows: residential
district uses, business district uses and manufacturing district uses, as
permitted by this chapter.



      (2)   A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of higher
classification but not to a use of lower classification, nor shall a
nonconforming use be changed to another use of the same classification unless
the new use shall be deemed by the Board of Adjustment, after public notice
and hearing, to be less harmful to the surrounding neighborhood, from the
standpoint of the purposes of this chapter, than the existing nonconforming
use.



      (3)   A nonconforming use may not be extended, but the
extension of a use to any portion of a building, which portion is at the time
of the adoption of this chapter primarily arranged or designed for
nonconforming use, shall not be deemed to be an extension of a nonconforming
use.



      (4)   Nor shall the building be enlarged, unless the use
therein is changed to a conforming use, provided, however, that a
nonconforming building damaged by fire, explosion, tornado, earthquake or
similar uncontrollable cause to the extent of not more than 60% of its
assessed value at the time of the damage may be repaired or rebuilt within 1
year of the date of damage, but not thereafter. The determination shall be
made by the Board of Adjustment.



      (5)   Existing single-family residential structures in
business or industrial districts may be enlarged, extended or structurally
altered, provided that no additional dwelling units result therefrom.
However, any enlargements, extension or alteration shall comply with the
dimensional requirements determined by the Board of Adjustment.



      (6)   If a nonconforming use is discontinued, any future use
of the buildings and premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter. A reasonable interim, however, between tenants or occupants
shall not be construed to mean discontinuance.



      (7)   The foregoing provisions of this section shall also
apply to nonconforming uses created by amendments to this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.008  RESERVED.



§ 154.009  MOBILE HOME PARKS.



   (A)   The purpose of these mobile home park regulations is to
provide an acceptable environment for what are in fact small communities of
mobile homes.



   (B)   New mobile home parks may be located as a conditional use in a
R-A residential district and a permitted use in R-MH residential district,
subject to a finding by the Town Board that the following conditions will be
met.



      (1)   Plans drawn to scale which clearly indicate the
developer’s intention to comply with the provisions of this section shall
be submitted to the Planning Board and approved by the Town Board. The plans
shall show:



         (a)   The area to be used for the proposed mobile home
park;



         (b)   The ownership and use of neighboring properties;



         (c)   All proposed roads, entrances, exits, driveways,
off-street parking areas and buffers including fences and hedges;



         (d)   All mobile homes shall be placed on individual
lots, and a plat showing the location of mobile home lots, recreation areas
and service buildings;



         (e)   The location of sanitary conveniences, including
toilets, laundries and refuse receptacles;



         (f)   The proposed plan of water supply, sewage disposal
and electric lighting; and



         (g)   All engineering drawings and specifications for
roads, water, sewer and electrical utilities.



      (2)   The Town Board shall have the authority to impose
reasonable conditions and safeguards on the proposed development as it deems
necessary for the protection of adjoining properties and public interest.



         (a)   The lot area for a mobile home park shall be at
least 2 acres. All areas to be included in the park shall be clearly shown on
the plans required by § 154.009(A).



         (b)   Each mobile home in a mobile home park shall
occupy a designated space having at least 5,000 square feet, with a minimum
dimension of 45 feet and all yard requirements as stated in division
(B)(2)(j) below shall be complied with.



         (c)   Each mobile home space shall abut a driveway
within the park; driveways shall be graded and surfaced with not less than 4
inches of crushed stone or other suitable material on a well compacted
sub-base.



         (d)   Two off-driveway parking spaces with not less than
4 inches of crushed stone or other suitable material on a well compacted
sub-base shall be provided for each mobile home space. Required parking
spaces may be included within 5,000 square feet required for each mobile home
space. Minimum size dimensions for the parking spaces shall be at least 18
feet by 20 feet.



         (e)   At least 8% of the total (gross) acreage of the
mobile home park shall be reserved and developed as a common recreation space
for the residents of the park. This recreation space shall be identified on
all plans and approved by the Planning Board and the Town Board. The areas
shall, along with driveways, be adequately lighted for safety.



         (f)   No mobile homes or other structures within a
mobile home park shall be closer to each other than 20 feet, except that
storage or other auxiliary structures for the exclusive use of the mobile
home may be closer to that mobile than 20 feet.



         (g)   No mobile home shall be located closer than 15
feet to the exterior boundary of the park or a bounding street right-of-way
of a bounding street.



         (h)   If appropriate, proposed water supply and waste
disposal facilities for the mobile home park shall be approved in writing by
the County Health Officer or his or her representative.



         (i)   All roads shall comply with the town’s street
policies. Road dimensions, base materials and surface composition shall be
observed.



         (j)   Yard requirements for placement of mobile homes
located in mobile home parks shall be:



            1.   Front yard. Set back on mobile home 20 feet
from road right-of-way line.



            2.   Side yard. At least 10 feet of side yard from
side lot line to the mobile home for at least the length of that structure.



            3.   Rear yard. At least 15 feet from the rear lot
or property line.



         (k)   Any expansion of mobile home parks in existence on
the effective date of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this
section.



         (l)   Each mobile home must be tied to the foundation at
not more than 8 foot intervals by a 1/2 inch diameter anchor or equivalent
running from the frame of the structure to the footing. Other methods of
tying the structure to the foundations as designed by a registered architect
or registered engineer will be acceptable provided they are fully detailed
and noted on drawings filed with the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.010  MOBILE HOMES OR MODULAR HOMES.



   (A)   Mobile homes or modular housing units are permitted on
individual lots in approved residential districts shall be subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   The lot must be recorded as an individual lot.



      (2)   If municipal utilities are not available, the well
and/or septic tank must be approved by the County Health Department.



      (3)   All yard dimensional requirements for the respective
district must be met.



      (4)   The lot must front a public street and the street
frontage will be considered the front of the lot.



      (5)   A certificate of occupancy must be issued by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer after these conditions and all other code requirements
are met and before the unit can be occupied.



      (6)   Each mobile home must be tied to the foundation at not
more than 8 foot intervals by a 1/2 inch diameter anchor or equivalent
running from the frame of the structure to the footing. Other methods of
tying the structure to the foundations as designed by a registered architect
or registered engineer will be acceptable provided they are fully detailed
and noted on drawings filed with the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



   (B)   Specific conditions for a double-wide are as follows:



      (1)   The pitch of the mobile home’s roof shall have a
minimum vertical rise of 1 foot for each 5 feet of horizontal run; (A-frame
roof)



      (2)   The exterior materials shall be of wood, hardboard or
aluminum comparable in composition, appearance and durability to site built
houses in the vicinity;



      (3)   A continuous, permanent masonry foundation, unpierced
except for required ventilation and access shall be installed under the
mobile home;



      (4)   The tongues, axles, transporting lights and removable
towing apparatus shall be removed subsequent to final placement;



      (5)   The mobile home shall have a length not exceeding 4
times its width (doublewide); and



      (6)   That the mobile home have a street front entrance
(doorway) and that minimum side yard requirements for the area is mandatory
unless a variance is granted by the Town Board.



   (C)   Specific conditions for a single-wide are as follows:



      (1)   The exterior materials shall be of wood, hardboard or
aluminum comparable in composition, appearance and durability to site built
houses in the vicinity;



      (2)   A continuous, permanent masonry foundation, unpierced
except for required ventilation and access shall be installed under the
mobile home; and



      (3)   The tongues, axles, transporting lights and removable
towing apparatus shall be removed subsequent to final placement.



   (D)   Inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Robeson County
Building Inspector shall inspect each mobile home prior to placement in the
town to assure compliance with the requirements of this code.



(Ord. passed 1-14-1997; Am. Ord. 08-115, passed 3-18-2008; Am. Ord. 15-158,
passed 3-17-2015)



§ 154.011  CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   (A)   Customary home occupations may be established in a dwelling in
any residential district.



   (B)   The following requirements shall apply in addition to 11 other
applicable requirements of this chapter for the residential district in which
uses are located:



      (1)   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the
residential character of the dwelling.



      (2)   No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used
in connection with the home occupation.



      (3)   Use of the dwelling for home occupations shall be
limited to 25% of 1 floor of the principal building.



      (4)   Residents of the dwellings only may be engaged in the
home occupations (except that not more than 1 assistant may be employed by
the following professional persons: lawyers, physicians, dentists,
chiropractors, accountants.)



      (5)   No display of products shall be visible from the street
and only products made on the premises may be sold on the premises.



      (6)   No internal or external alterations inconsistent with
the residential use of the building shall be permitted.



      (7)   No machinery that causes noises or other interferences
in radio and television reception shall be allowed.



      (8)   Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall
be permitted in connection with the conduct of the customary home occupation.



      (9)   No chemical, electrical or mechanical equipment that is
not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used
primarily for commercial purposes, with the exception of medical and dental
equipment used for professional purposes.



      (10)   Instruction in music, dancing and similar subjects
shall be limited to 2 students at one time.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.012  BUFFERS.



   (A)   Buffer zones as defined herein, shall be required of all
industrial and commercial district uses where they abut land which is zoned
residential. The buffer zone shall be of continuous evergreen composition and
or other materials approved by the Planning Board, and be not less than 6
feet in height nor less than 3 feet in width. Additional buffering in the
form of fencing may be on the industrial or commercial side of the evergreen
buffer if the Planning Board so advises.



   (B)   The buffering requirement may be waived by the Board of
Adjustment upon recommendation of the Planning Board along any boundary which
is naturally screened by evergreen plant materials or topography, or may be
deferred in isolated areas.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.013  TERRITORIAL APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the corporate limits
of the Town of Fairmont and within the territory beyond the corporate limits
as prescribed by G.S. 160A-19, as now or hereafter fixed, up to a distance of
1 mile in all directions.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.014  BONA FIDE FARMS EXEMPT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to bona fide farms. This
chapter does not exercise any controls over crop lands, timber lands, pasture
lands, idle or other farm lands, nor over any farm house, barn, or other farm
buildings, including tenant or other houses, for persons working on the
farms, as long as the houses shall be in the same ownership as the farm and
located on the farm.  Agricultural uses maintain the openness of the land
and achieve the purposes of this chapter without the need for regulation. 
Residences for non-farm use or occupancy and other non-farm uses shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977; Am. Ord. 07-107, passed 1-16-2007)



§ 154.015  COMMERCIAL POULTRY HOUSES AND HOG FARMS REGULATED.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified herein, commercial poultry houses
and hog farms are hereby expressly prohibited within the town’s
jurisdiction, to include the area within the town’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction as well as within the town’s corporate limits itself.



   (B)   The term "poultry" shall include chickens, turkeys, geese, and
ducks; the term "hog" shall include hogs and pigs.



   (C)   Commercial poultry houses and hog farms that are in existence
at the adoption of this section shall be grand-fathered in as conditional
uses.



(Ord. 07-107, passed 1-16-2007)



EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS; OFF-STREET PARKING



§ 154.025  LOT OF RECORD.



   Where the owner of a lot of official record in any residential district
at the time of the adoption of this chapter or his or her successor in title
thereto does not own sufficient contiguous land to enable him or her to
conform to the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter, the lot may be
used as a residential building site provided, however, that the requirements
of the district are complied with or a special use permit is obtained from
the Town Board.



   (A)   When a lot can be used in conformity with all of the
regulations (other than the area or width requirements) applicable to the
district in which the lot is located, a use may be made as of right.
Otherwise, the nonconforming lot may be used only in accordance with a
special use permit issued by the Town Board. The Board shall issue a permit
if it finds that: the proposed use is one permitted by the regulations
applicable to the district in which the property is located; and the property
can be developed as proposed without any significant negative impact on the
surrounding property or the public health, safety or welfare. In issuing the
permit authorized by this division, the Board may allow deviations from
applicable dimensional requirements (such as set-back lines and yard size
minimums) if it finds that no reasonable use of the property can be made
without those deviations.



   (B)   Whenever this chapter creates a nonconforming lot and the
owner of the nonconforming lot also owns land adjacent to it, and a portion
of this other land can be combined with the nonconforming lot to create a
conforming lot (without thereby creating other nonconformities), the owner of
the nonconforming lot, or his or her successor in interest, may not take
advantage of the provisions of division (A) above.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever 2 or more adjoining
vacant lots of record are in single ownership at any time after the adoption
of this chapter and the lots individually have less area or width than the
minimum requirements of the district in which the lots are located, the lots
shall be considered as a single lot or several lots which meet the minimum
requirements of this chapter for the district in which the lots are located.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.026  FRONT YARD FOR DWELLINGS.



   The front yard requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not
apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located
wholly or partially within 100 feet on either side of the proposed dwelling
and on the same side of the street in the same block and use district as the
lot is less than the minimum required front yard depth. In that case, the
front yard on those lots may be less than the required front yard but not
less than the average of the existing front yard on the aforementioned lots,
or a distance of 10 feet from the street right-of-way, whichever is greater.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.027  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy;
monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys,
smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, radio towers, television towers, masts,
aerials and similar structures, except as otherwise provided in the vicinity
of airports.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.028  VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   On a corner lot in any residential district no planting, structure,
signs, fence, wall or obstruction to vision more than 3 feet in height
measured from the center line of the street shall be placed or maintained
within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street right-of-way
lines and a straight line connecting points on a street right-of-way lines
each of which is 35 feet distant from the point of intersection.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.029  RELATIONSHIP OF BUILDING TO LOT.



   Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall
be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than 1 principal
building and its customary accessory buildings on any lot. The following
sections may be exceptions to this section.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.030  GROUP DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.



   (A)   A group development project has a group of 2 or more principal
structures built on a single lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been
subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so
subdivided. These projects may be developed for residential, commercial,
industrial or other enterprise activities. (Examples include: cluster
subdivisions, new houses, condominiums, apartment complexes, public housing
projects, school and hospital campuses, shopping centers, industrial parks
and the like.)



   (B)   In the case of 2 or more buildings to be constructed on a plot
of ground of at least 2 acres not subdivided into the customary streets and
lots and which will not be so subdivided, the application of the terms of
this chapter may be altered by the Town Board in a manner that will be in
harmony with the character of the neighborhood through a special use permit
provided:



      (1)   The uses are limited to those permitted within the
zoning district in which the project is located. In no case shall the Town
Board authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the project is to
be located;



      (2)   The overall intensity of land use is no higher and the
standard of open space is no lower than that permitted in the district in
which the project is located;



      (3)   That the total parcel of land is under single ownership
or control, and there is reasonable assurance that the project can be
successfully completed and maintained, including care and maintenance of all
common open space, recreation space and other common land area.



      (4)   The preliminary plan for the proposed planned unit
development shall first be submitted to the Planning Board for its review and
recommendation to the Town Board. The recommendations may include, but shall
not be limited to, provisions for additional utilities, drainage,
landscaping, lighting and streets and access-ways.



      (5)   The applicant must resubmit the plan to the Town Board
if changes were recommended by the Planning Board. If the plan is rejected by
the Town Board, the applicant will not receive consideration of the same plan
for a period of 6 months.



      (6)   All principal buildings and accessory buildings or uses
abutting the property lines of the project must meet the minimum yard
requirement of the district where the project is located for all yards
abutting property lines and all height requirements shall be met for the
district where the project is located, unless the requirements are modified
by a Planning Board recommendation and approved by the Town Board.



      (7)   Off-street parking shall be provided at a minimum ratio
of that principal use indicated in §§ 154.032 through 154.034 or otherwise
determined by the Planning Board.



      (8)   All streets and parking areas shall be constructed and
paved according to the standards of the town.



      (9)   The procedure for approval of a group development
project shall consist of the submission of a design plan to the Planning
Board showing how the requirements of previous subsections will be met.
Following study and recommendations by the Planning Board, the plan must be
submitted to the Town Board for final approval. Failure of the Planning Board
to act on the plan within 60 days shall constitute a favorable recommendation
to the Town Board. An approval project must be started within 12 months after
final approval and must be completed within a reasonable time. Failure to
begin the project within 12 months shall automatically revoke the special use
permit.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.031  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT; RESIDENTIAL USES.



   (A)   The planned unit development concept offers developers the
possibility of more efficient and flexible methods for developing property,
and provides residents of the project with larger open spaces for recreation
and other activities properly related to residential uses.



   (B)   The Town Board may approve this form of development in the
districts that allow it as a permitted or conditional use, and a special use
permit issued, provided:



      (1)   The project is an integrated plan designed for the
primary purpose of residential use.



      (2)   The site for the total project is not less than 2 acres
and at least 2 principal buildings are included in the plans.



      (3)   That the total parcel of land is under single ownership
or control, and there is reasonable assurance that the project can be
successfully completed and maintained, including care and maintenance of all
common open space, recreation space and other common land area.



      (4)   The preliminary plan for the proposed planned unit
development shall first be submitted to the Planning Board for its review and
recommendation to the Town Board. Recommendations may include, but shall not
be limited to, provisions for additional utilities, drainage, landscaping,
lighting and streets and access-ways.



      (5)   The applicant must resubmit the plan to the Town Board
if changes were recommended by the Planning Board. If the plan is rejected by
the Town Board, the applicant will not receive consideration of the same plan
for a period of 6 months.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.032  CERTIFICATION OF MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   There shall be provided at the time of the erection of any
building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in
capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area; or
before conversion from 1 type of use of occupancy to another, permanent
off-street parking space in the amount specified by this section. A parking
space may be provided in a parking garage or properly graded open space.



   (B)   Each application for a zoning permit submitted to the Zoning
Enforcement Officer as provided for in this chapter shall include information
as to the location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space and
the means of entrance and exit to the space. This information shall be in
sufficient detail to enable the Zoning Enforcement Officer to determine
whether or not the requirements of this section are met.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.033  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   The following off-street parking spaces shall be required:



 

Residential and Related Uses
 
Required Off-Street Parking


Any residential use consisting of 1 or more dwelling units
 
Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit


Mobile homes
 
Two spaces for each mobile home


Rooming and boarding houses
 
One space for each 3 guest rooms, plus 1 additional space for the owners or
managers


Customary home occupations as defined in § 154.002
 
In addition to residence requirements, 1 parking space per 100 square feet
devoted to the home occupation use



 



 

Institutional, Public and Semi-Public Uses
 
Required Off-Street Parking




Churches and funeral homes
 
One space for each 4 seats in the main chapel


Elementary schools and junior high schools, both public and private
 
One space for each employee


Hospitals
 
One space for each 4 patient beds plus 1 space for each staff or visiting
doctor plus 1 space for each 4 employees


Libraries
 
One space for each 4 seats provided for patron use


Medical offices and clinics
 
Four spaces for each doctor practicing at the clinic, plus 1 space for each
employee


Places of public assembly including private clubs and lodges, auditoriums,
dance halls, pool halls, theaters, stadium, gymnasium, amusement parks,
community centers and all similar places of public assembly
 
One space for each 4 fixed seats provided for patron use, plus 1 space for
each 100 square feet of floor or ground area used for amusement or assembly
but not including fixed seats


Rescue squads and armories
 
Parking space equivalent to 3 times the floor space in the main building


Sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes, homes for the aged and similar
institutions
 
One space for each 6 patient beds, plus 1 space for each staff or visiting
doctor, plus 1 space for each 4 employees


Senior high schools and colleges, both public and private
 
One space for each 5 students for whom the school was designed, plus 1 space
for each employee




 



 

Business Uses
 
Required Off-Street Parking




Automobile sales and repair garages
 
One space for each 2 employees at maximum employment on a single shift, plus
2 spaces for each 300 square feet or repair or maintenance space


Hotels
 
One space for each 2 rooms plus 1 additional space for each 5 employees


Motels, tourist homes and tourist courts
 
One space for each accommodation plus 2 additional spaces for employees


Offices, business, professional, public, including banks
 
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area


Restaurants
 
One space for each 3 seating accommodations, plus 1 space for each 2
employees on shift of largest employment


Restaurants, drive-in
 
Parking space equivalent to 5 times the floor space in the main building


Retail business and consumer service outlets
 
One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area


Service stations
 
Two spaces for each gas pump plus 3 spaces for each grease rack or similar
facility


Shopping centers
 
Three square feet of parking space for each square foot of gross floor area




 



 

Manufacturing and Wholesale
 
Required Off-Street Parking


Manufacturing, industrial and wholesale operations
 
One space for each 2 employees at maximum employment on a single shift



 



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.034  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE.



   Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry
hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and
unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. A space shall have
access to an alley, or if there is no alley to a street. For the purposes of
this section, an off-street loading space shall have a minimum dimension of
12 feet by 40 feet and an overhead clearance of 14 feet in height above the
alley or street grade.



 

Retail operations
 
One loading space for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof.


Industrial and wholesale operations
 
One loading space for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction
thereof.



 



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



CONDITIONAL USES AND SPECIAL USE PERMITS



§ 154.045  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The development and execution of this chapter is based upon
the division of the town into districts in which the use of land and
buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation
to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there
are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be
properly classified in any particular district or districts, without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring
land and of the public need for the particular use in the particular location.



   (B)   Conditional uses fall into 2 categories:



      (1)   Uses publically operated or traditionally affected with
a public interest; and



      (2)   Uses entirely private in character, but of an unusual
nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to
their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.046  COMPLIANCE.



   Each use listed as a “conditional use” shall comply with the
regulations of the district in which it is located and the requirements
specified herein, and further requires a special use permit with additional
reasonable requirements as may be imposed by the Town Board.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.047  APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE.



   (A)   Initiation of conditional use. Any person having freehold
interest in land, or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession,
or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or an
exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable, may
file an application to use the land for 1 or more of the conditional uses
provided for in this chapter in the zoning district in which the land is
located.



   (B)   Application for special use permits. Applications for the
special use permits, signed by the applicant, shall be addressed to the Town
Board and presented to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Each application shall
contain or be accompanied by legal descriptions, maps, plans and other
information so as to completely describe the proposed use and existing
conditions. The application shall be forwarded to the Town Board and the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the Chairperson of the Planning Board
of the application.



   (C)   Fee. The Town Board shall set a fee, to cover the necessary
administrative costs and advertising of each application for a special use
permit. The set fee shall be posted in the Town Clerk’s office.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.048  PUBLIC HEARING.



   The Mayor shall schedule a public hearing on the application for a
conditional use permit to be held within 60 days after the application is
filed. A notice of the public hearings shall be given once a week for 2
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, the
notice to be published the first time not less than 10 days and that all
owners of properties immediately adjacent thereto, either in the rear thereof
or on either side thereof extending 500 feet from the street frontage of
opposite lots. That certified mailing shall include schedule of Planning
Board meeting date to allow comments from property owners.



(G.S. § 160A-364)  (Ord. passed 1-14-1997)



§ 154.049  ACTION BY THE PLANNING BOARD.



   The Planning Board shall review the application and shall present its
recommendations to the Town Board after the public hearing. The Planning
Board may revise its recommendations following the public hearing and present
the recommendations to the Town Board before action is taken by the Town
Board. (That persons notified shall have the right to be heard at this
meeting.)



(Ord. passed 1-14-1997)



§ 154.050  ACTION BY THE TOWN BOARD.



   (A)   The Town Board shall approve, modify or deny the application
for a special use permit following the public hearing. In granting a special
use permit, the Town Board shall make written finding that the applicable
regulations of the district in which it is located are fulfilled.



   (B)   With due regard to the nature and state of all adjacent
structures and uses, the district within which same is located, and official
plans for future development, the Town Board shall also make written findings
that the following provisions are fulfilled:



      (1)   The use requested is listed among the conditional uses
in the district for which application is made;



      (2)   The requested use is essential or desirable to the
public convenience or welfare;



      (3)   The requested use will not impair the integrity or
character of the surroundings or adjoining districts, nor be detrimental to
the health, morals or welfare;



      (4)   The requested use will be in conformity with the land
development plan;



      (5)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, sanitation
and/or other necessary facilities have been or being provided;



      (6)   That adequate measures have been or will be taken to
provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in
the public streets;



      (7)   That the conditional use shall, in all other respects,
conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located,
except as regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the Town Board
pursuant to the recommendations of the Planning Board; and



      (8)   That the mobile home have a street front entrance
(doorway) and that minimum side yard requirements for the area is mandatory
unless a variance is granted by the Town Board.



(Ord. passed 1-14-1997 )



§ 154.051  CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES.



   (A)   Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the Planning
Board may recommend, and the Town Board may stipulate conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, reconstruction, maintenance
and operation of the conditional use as it is deemed necessary for the
protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards
and requirements specified above.



   (B)   In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the Town
Board shall require evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof
that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be
complied with.



      (1)   Conditions may include a time limitation;



      (2)   Conditions may be imposed which require that 1 or more
things be done before the use requested can be initiated. For example,
“that a solid board fence be erected around the site to a height of 6 feet
before the use requested is initiated”; and



      (3)   Conditions of a continuing nature may be imposed. For
example, “exterior loud speakers shall not be used between hours of 10:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m.”.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.052  GRANTING SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Compliance with other codes. Granting of a special use permit
does not exempt applicant from complying with all of the requirements of
building codes and other ordinances.



   (B)   Revocation. In any case where the conditions of a special use
permit have not been or are not being complied with, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall give the permittee notice of intention to revoke the permit at
least 10 days prior to a Town Board review thereof. After conclusion of the
review, the Town Board may revoke the permit.



   (C)   Expiration. In any case where a special use permit has not
been exercised within the time limit set by the Town Board, or within 1 year
if no specific time limit has been set, then without further action, the
permit shall be null and void. EXERCISED as set forth in this section shall
mean that binding contracts for the construction of the main building have
been let; or in the absence of contracts that the main building is under
construction to a substantial degree; or that prerequisite conditions
involving substantial investment are contracted for, in substantial
development or completed (sewerage, drainage and the like). When construction
is not a part of the use, EXERCISED shall mean that the use is in operation
in compliance with the condition set forth in the permit.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.053  SPECIAL USE PERMITS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   After the following design standards have been met and approved by the
Planning Board, the Town Board shall hold a public hearing before making a
final decision in relation to the issuance of the special use permit for
off-street parking in residential zones.



   (A)   All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of access to a street or alley, as well as maneuvering
space.



   (B)   A parking space shall be determined as the space required to
park 1 car and shall be in accordance with accepted standards and not less
than 9 feet wide.



   (C)   Parking areas shall have adequate drainage, and shall be
provided with bumper guards where required.



   (D)   Parking areas shall be used for parking of automobiles only,
with no sales, storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind to
be permitted.



   (E)   All required parking spaces shall be of a design and located
so as to be convenient and readily usable by the patrons.



   (F)   Sufficient area shall be provided within the property lines so
that all vehicles may enter and leave in a forward motion.



   (G)   A screen shall be required whenever a parking lot abuts, or is
opposite a residential zone. The design and material of a fence or screen not
less than 3 feet nor more than 6 feet in height shall be approved by the
Planning Board for the purpose of giving sufficient protection to the
resident property owners from physical hazards and unsightliness.



   (H)   All parking lots shall be constructed in a manner that
contamination by dust or dust clouds will not exist. This is to be
accomplished by concrete, blacktop, crushed gravel or other non-dust
producing surfacing.



   (I)   If night time parking is to be permitted, it shall be lighted
with the provision that the lights shall be shielded so as to prevent direct
beaming into a residential area.



   (J)   The duration of a special use permit for residential parking
shall be from 1 to 5 years. Actual time limit is to be determined by the Town
Board after review of the applicant’s plans for improvement. Issuance of a
5-year permit will necessitate the developer using a hardtop surfacing,
installing shielded lights, providing adequate screening or fencing to
prevent head lights from beaming into residential property and providing
adequate landscaping so as not to detract from surrounding residential
property. This permit may be revoked by the Town Board after just cause is
presented to the special permit holder.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.054  TEMPORARY USE; SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   It is the intent of this section to allow the temporary uses
customarily associated with the erection of permitted structures or the
establishment of permitted uses, or the accomplishment of permitted
operations necessary to work and not substantially injurious to the public
health, safety, morals or welfare.



   (B)   It is also the intent to permit customary uses of open land,
and/or of existing buildings and surrounding land, which are temporary in
nature.



      (1)   Temporary uses permitted administratively. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to issue a temporary special use
permit, for a duration to be specified on the permit not to exceed a 6-month
period, to be renewed not more than twice, and in no case shall any single
permit or any single renewal be issued for a temporary use to exceed 1 year.
Temporary uses permitted include, but shall not be limited to the following:



         (a)   Temporary structures, mobile homes and storage
areas on construction sites;



         (b)   Temporary structures on sites of grading
operations;



         (c)   Temporary structures, mobile homes or storage
areas of public agencies, in the conduct of proprietary or governmental
operations;



         (d)   The use of open land for meetings, circuses or
carnivals, or the sale of Christmas trees, baked goods or collecting clothing
and the like, provided that no structure is erected other than tents;



         (e)   The use of a residence or other building and
surrounding land by a non-profit charitable, religious, civic or educational
organization for the purpose of exhibiting and purveying, indoor or
out-of-doors, art or craft products, jewelry, clothing, foods, beverages,
horticultural products, home furnishings and decorations and similar and
related items; and for presenting musical, film or theatrical programs.



      (2)   Temporary uses of mobile homes. In cases involving
unusual circumstances, personal or undue hardships, the Town Board may
approve a special use permit subsequent to the recommendation of the Planning
Board and a public hearing for the placement of a mobile home in a rear yard
as an accessory use on a temporary basis. The following conditions shall
direct the Town Board in its decision:



         (a)   An unusual circumstance or personal hardship
situation shall exist for justifying a special exception;



         (b)   Hardship shall involve the need to care for
elderly parents or other dependents of the family occupying the principal
building;



         (c)   Reasons justifying separate quarters shall be
incompatibility, contagious disease, illness or lack of adequate space within
the principal building;



         (d)   The minimum dimensional requirements shall be at
least equivalent to those in an R-5 district;



         (e)   Special use permits shall be issued up to 1 year
and may be renewed by the Town Board as long as the hardship exists;



         (f)   Application for renewal of the special use permit
shall be made 30 days prior to the expiration date of the permit;



         (g)   All mobile homes shall have access to municipal
water and sewer systems or if municipal water and sewer are not available,
systems approved by the County Health Department shall be required; and/or



         (h)   All mobile homes shall be maintained in a way as
to not create nuisance conditions.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 154.065  ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   The Codes Officer is hereby authorized, and it shall be his or
her duty to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   If the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for the violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she
shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings or
structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions,
alterations or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work
being done; or shall take other lawful action to insure compliance with or to
prevent violation of this chapter.



   (C)   If a ruling of the Zoning Enforcement Officer is questioned,
the aggrieved party or parties may appeal the ruling to the Board of
Adjustment.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.066  ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No building, sign or other structures shall be erected, moved, added to
or structurally altered until a zoning permit shall have been issued by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer. No zoning permit shall be issued except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter except after written order
from the Board of Adjustment.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.067  APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT.



   (A)   All applications for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by 2
sets of plans showing the dimensions and shape of the parcel to be built
upon; the exact sizes, uses and locations on the parcel of buildings already
existing, if any, and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or
alterations.



   (B)   The application shall include other information as may be
necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of
this chapter.



   (C)   A fee shall be charged for the processing of each application
- the current schedule of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.068  CERTIFICATION OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.



   A certificate of occupancy issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer is
required in advance of:



   (A)   Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered or
moved; and



   (B)   Change of use of any building or land.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



§ 154.080  CREATION OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   A Planning and Zoning Council shall be created by the Town Board and
shall consist of 5 appointed members of the Town Board to serve as an
ex-officio Board of Adjustment. The remaining members of the Town Board shall
serve as alternate members who shall have no official functions, unless they
are needed to give a quorum in the absence of an appointed Board member.
Planning and Zoning Council appointments to the Board of Adjustment shall
have initial terms of appointment as follows: 1 member for 3 years, 2 members
for 2 years, and 2 members for 1 year. Thereafter, as the terms expire, all
new appointments shall be for 3 years.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.081  PROCEEDINGS.



   The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairperson and a
Vice-Chairperson from its members who shall serve for 1 year or until
re-elected or until their successors are elected. The Board shall appoint a
Secretary who may be a municipal officer, an employee of the county or a
member of the Planning Board. The Board shall adopt rules and bylaws in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the Board shall
be held at the call of the Chairperson and at other times as the Board may
determine. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the Vice-Chairperson,
may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. All
meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.082  DECISIONS OF THE ZONING BOARD.



   The concurring vote of 4 members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to affect any
variation of this chapter. On all appeals, applications and other matters
brought before the Board of Adjustment, the Board shall inform in writing all
the parties involved of its decisions and the reasons therefor.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.083  APPEALS, HEARING AND NOTICE.



   An appeal to the Board may be taken by any person, firm or corporation
aggrieved, or by any town officer, department, board or agency affected by
any decision of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or other town official based
in whole or in part upon the provisions of this chapter. Appeal shall be
taken within a time as shall be prescribed by the Board by general rule by
filing with the Zoning Enforcement Officer a notice of appeal and specifying
the grounds thereof. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forthwith transmit
to the Board all the papers constituting a record upon which the action
appealed was taken. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of appeals or other matters referred to it, and give due notice
thereof to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable
time. Upon a hearing, any party may appeal in person, or by agent or by
attorney.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.084  STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.



   An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board
of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or
her, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In that case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on
application, on notice to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and on due cause
shown.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.085  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD.



   (A)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer in the enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases
variances from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship. A
variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by the Board of
Adjustment unless and until:



      (1)   A written application for a variance is submitted
demonstrating:



         (a)   That special conditions and circumstances exist
which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved, and which are
not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.



         (b)   That a literal interpretation of the provisions of
this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same district under the terms of this chapter.



         (c)   That circumstances do not result from the actions
of the applicant.



         (d)   That granting the variance requested will not
confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by this
chapter to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district.



         (e)   That no nonconforming use of neighboring land,
structures or buildings in the same district and no permitted use of lands,
structures or buildings in other districts will be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance.



      (2)   A public hearing shall be held. Notice of the public
hearing shall be posted on the property for which the variance is sought and
in a local newspaper at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. This legal
notice shall describe the requested variance and appear at least once weekly
for 2 consecutive weeks. At the public hearing which is held, any party may
appear in person or by agent or by attorney.



         (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall make findings that
the requirements of § 154.083 have been met for a variance.



         (b)   The Board of Adjustment shall make a finding that
the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance
and that the variance is the minimum one that will make possible the
reasonable use of the land, building or structure.



         (c)   The Board of Adjustment shall further make a
finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.



         (d)   In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustment
may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
chapter. Violation of conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the
terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and punishable under § 154.999 of this chapter.



         (e)   Under no circumstances shall the Board of
Adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of
this chapter in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication
prohibited by the terms of this chapter in the district.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.086  DECISION OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may
averse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify any order, requirements,
decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the
powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.087  DUTIES OF THE ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL



   It is the intention of this chapter that all questions arising in
connection with the enforcement of this chapter shall be presented first to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer and that those questions shall be presented to
the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from the Zoning Enforcement Officer
and that from the decision of the Board of Adjustment recourse shall be had
to courts as provided by law.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES



§ 154.100  MOTION TO AMEND.



   The Town Board may, on its own motion or upon recommendation of the
Planning Board, or upon petition by any person within the zoning
jurisdiction, after public notice and hearing, amend or repeal the
regulations or the maps which are a part of this chapter. No regulation or
maps shall be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed until
after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which all parties in interest
and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. A notice of the public
hearing shall be given once a week for 2 successive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in the town, notice to be published the first time not
less than 10 days and that all owners of properties immediately adjacent
thereto, either in the rear thereof or on either side thereof extending 500
feet from the street frontage of opposite lots. Further that this be
incorporated in § 154.048. That certified mailing shall include schedule of
Planning Board meeting date to allow comments from property owners.



(G.S. 160A-364)  (Ord. passed 1-14-1997)



§ 154.101  PROTEST AGAINST AMENDMENT.



   In case of a protest against a proposal, duly signed by the owners of
20% or more either of the area of the lots included in the proposed change,
or of those immediately adjacent thereto, either in the rear thereof or on
either side thereof, extending 500 feet therefrom, or of those directly
opposite thereto extending 500 feet from the street frontage of opposite
lots, the amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of
3/4 of all the members of the Town Board.



(Ord. passed 1-14-1997)



§ 154.102  PLANNING BOARD ACTION.



   Every proposed amendment or repeal to this chapter shall be referred to
the Planning Board for its recommendation and report provided that no
proposal shall be considered by the Planning Board within 5 days from filing
of the proposal with the Zoning Enforcement Officer. All petitions for a
change in the zoning map shall include a legal description of the property
involved and the names and addresses of current abutting property owners, and
shall be accompanied by a fee to cover cost of administration and advertising
as required by this chapter - the current schedule of costs and fees are on
file with the Town Clerk.



(Ord. passed 1-14-1997)



USE DISTRICTS



§ 154.115  USE DISTRICTS NAMED.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Fairmont shall hereby
divide into use districts with the designation and purposed as listed below:



   (A)   R-A rural-agricultural residential;



   (B)   R-20 residential;



   (C)   R-15 residential;



   (D)   R-10 residential;



   (E)   R-8 residential;



   (F)   R-5 residential;



   (G)   R-MH mobile home park residential;



   (H)   C-B central business;



   (I)   G-B general business;



   (J)   N-B neighborhood business;



   (K)   G-M general manufacturing;



   (L)   FW floodway; and



   (M)   FF flood fringe.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.116  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES SHOWN ON ZONING MAP.



   The boundaries of the districts are shown on the map accompanying this
chapter and made a part hereof entitled “Official Zoning Map, Fairmont,
North Carolina.” The zoning map and all the notations, references and
amendments thereto, and other information shown thereon are hereby made a
part of this chapter the same as if the information set forth on the map were
all fully described and set out herein. The zoning map properly attested is
posted at the office of the Town Clerk, and is available for inspection by
the public.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.117  DUE CONSIDERATION GIVEN TO DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   In the creation by this chapter of the respective districts, careful
consideration is given to the peculiar suitability of each and every district
for the particular uses and regulations applied thereto and the necessary and
proper grouping and arrangement of various uses and densities of population
in accordance with a well considered comprehensive plan for the physical
development of the community.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.118  BOUNDARIES.



   When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any aforesaid districts
as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: (Uncertainty
shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment.)



   (A)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the center lines of streets or highways, street lines or railroad
right-of-way lines or lines extended, center lines, street lines or railroad
right-of-way lines shall be construed to be boundaries.



   (B)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow lot lines the lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundaries.



   (C)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways or railroads
or rights-of-way of same, the district boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at a distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map.
If no distance is given, the dimension shall be determined by use of the
scale shown on the zoning map.



   (D)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single
ownership, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of the
lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that the
extensions shall not include any part of a lot more than 35 feet beyond the
district boundary line. The term “least restricted” shall refer to zoning
restrictions, not lot or tract size.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.119  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



   Regulations for each district shall be enforced and interpreted
according to the following rules:



   (A)   Uses by right. All listed uses are permitted by right
according to the terms of this chapter. Conditional uses are permitted
subject to compliance with the additional regulations specified in this
chapter through a special use permit or by action deemed necessary by the
Planning Board.



   (B)   Minimum regulations. Regulations set forth by this chapter
shall be minimum requirements. If the requirements set forth in this chapter
are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations or chapters, the more restrictive or higher standards shall
govern.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



USE REQUIREMENT BY DISTRICT



§ 154.130  R-A RESIDENTIAL-AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Within the districts indicated on the zoning map, no building
or land shall be used, and no building shall be erected or altered which is
intended or designed to be used in whole or in part, for any use other than
those listed as permitted for that district in this subchapter.



   (B)   The R-A residential-agricultural district is established as a
district in which the principal use of the land is for low density
residential or agricultural purposes. It is established to provide and
protect low density residential areas for those desiring that type of
environment. These districts are intended to ensure that residential
development not having access to public water supplies and dependent upon
septic tanks for sewage disposal will occur at a sufficiently low density to
provide a healthful environment.



   (C)   The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Two-family dwellings;



      (3)   Individual mobile homes or modular units subject to the
provisions of § 154.010, and the lot and yard requirements of this district;



      (4)   Bona fide farms.



      (5)   Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the
sale of products at a retail stand on the property where produced;



      (6)   Customary home occupations, including dressmaking,
cooking and baking, hairdressing, music instruction, the renting of not more
than 1 room, the practice of professions like insurance and accounting, shall
be permitted as accessory uses in a residence. The Board of Adjustment shall
decide whether other home occupations not listed here are within the spirit
of this category of accessory uses;



      (7)   Kindergartens and day nurseries, provided that not less
than 200 square feet of play area is provided for each child and provided
further, aggregate play space is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least 4 feet
in height;



      (8)   Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries;



      (9)   Rest and convalescent homes;



      (10)   Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues and their
customary related uses, including cemeteries provided that all buildings and
graves shall be set back at least 20 feet from any property line;



      (11)   Rectories, parsonages, manors, parish houses, including
nunneries;



      (12)   Public elementary and secondary schools and private
schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public
schools;



      (13)   Public and private parks, playgrounds, community
centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools, fishing lakes,
family campgrounds and similar recreation uses;



      (14)   Public safety facilities such as fire and police
stations and rescue squad headquarters, provided that all vehicles and
equipment shall be stored indoors; provided further that all buildings shall
be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines and shall be designed
and landscaped in a way as to blend in with the surrounding area;



      (15)   Public works and public utility facilities, such as
transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges,
provided:



         (a)   The facilities are essential to the service of the
immediate area and no vehicles or materials shall be stored on the premises;



         (b)   All buildings and apparatus shall be set back at
least 20 feet from all property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in
a way as to blend in with the surrounding area;



         (c)   Facilities such as water towers, pumping stations
and so forth, shall be surrounded by a chain link fence 6 feet in height; and



         (d)   Customary accessory uses and structures including
private garages, swimming pools and other accessory structures in the rear
yard.



   (D)   Signs:



      (1)   One professional or announcement sign per lot for
customary home occupations, kindergartens and rest homes. No sign shall be
illuminated.



      (2)   One sign per lot pertaining only to the lease, rent or
sale of the property upon which displayed. No sign shall be illuminated.



      (3)   Church bulletin boards and signs announcing church
services, schools, clubs and other recreation facilities. Signs shall be
limited to 1 per lot and 18 square feet in area. Signs may be lighted from
behind to silhouette letters and figures.



   (E)   The following conditional or special uses are permitted when
authorized by the Town Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each
request shall be reviewed by the Planning Board prior to the submission to
the Town Board.



      (1)   Mobile home parks, subject to conditions listed under §
154.009;



      (2)   Group development projects, subject to conditions listed
under § 154.030;



      (3)   Planned unit developments, subject to conditions under
§ 154.031;



      (4)   Accessory buildings as living quarters;



      (5)   Cemeteries; and



      (6)   Airstrips.



(Ord. passed 8-31-1982)



   (F)   Within the R-A residential-agricultural district as shown on
the zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Off-street parking shall be provided as required in §§
154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.131  R-20 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   The R-20 residential district is established as a district in
which the principal use of the land is for low density residential and
agricultural purposes, and to provide and protect low density residential
areas for those desiring that type of environment. These districts are
intended to ensure that residential development not having access to public
water supplies and dependent upon septic tanks for sewage disposal will occur
at a sufficiently low density to provide a healthful environment. The
following uses are permitted:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings;



      (2)   Customary home occupations, including dressmaking,
cooking and baking, hairdressing, music instruction, the renting of not more
than 1 room, the practice of professions like insurance and accounting, shall
be permitted as accessory uses in a residence. The Board of Adjustment shall
decide whether other home occupations not listed here are within the spirit
of this category of accessory uses;



      (3)   Churches and their customary related uses, excluding
cemeteries provided all buildings shall be set back at least 20 feet from any
property line;



      (4)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools
having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools;



      (5)   Public parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs,
golf courses, swimming pools and other public recreation facilities;



      (6)   Public works and public utility facilities such as
transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges,
provided:



         (a)   The facilities are essential to the service of the
immediate area and no vehicles or materials shall be stored on the premises;



         (b)   All buildings and apparatus shall be set back at
least 20 feet from all property lines and shall be designed and landscaped in
a way as to blend in with the surrounding area;



         (c)   Facilities such as water towers, pumping stations
and so forth, shall be surrounded by a chain link fence 6 feet in height; and



         (d)   Customary accessory uses and structures including
private garages, swimming pools, and other accessory structures in the rear
yard.



   (B)   Signs:



      (1)   One sign per lot pertaining only to the lease, rent or
sale of the property upon which displayed. No sign shall be illuminated.



      (2)   Church bulletin boards and signs announcing church
services, clubs and other recreational facilities and schools. Signs shall be
limited to 1 per lot and 18 square feet in area. Signs may be lighted from
behind to silhouette letters and figures.



   (C)   The following conditional or special uses are permitted when
authorized by the Town Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each
request shall be reviewed by the Planning Board for their comments prior to
submission to the Town Board.



      (1)   Two-family dwellings;



      (2)   Private clubs, golf courses and lodges;



      (3)   Individual mobile homes or modular units subject to the
provisions of § 154.010, and the yard and lot requirements of this district
for a conventionally built home;



      (4)   Group development projects, subject to conditions listed
under § 154.030;



      (5)   Planned unit developments, subject to conditions under
§ 154.031;



      (6)   Accessory buildings as living quarters; and



      (7)   Cemeteries.



   (D)   Within the R-20 residential district as shown on the zoning
map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard, and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162; and



      (2)   Off-street parking shall be provided as required in §
154.033 of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.132  R-15 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   The R-15 residential district is established as a district in
which the principal use of land is for medium density single-family and
2-family residences, along with limited home occupations and public and
private community uses. The regulations are intended to prohibit any use
which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature
of this district. It is expected that municipal water and sewerage facilities
will be available to each lot in those districts, or a reasonable expectation
of service in the near future.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   All uses permitted in the R-20 residential district;



      (2)   Customary home occupations, including dressmaking,
cooking and baking, hairdressing, music instruction, the renting of not more
than 1 room, the practice of professions as insurance and accounting, shall
be permitted as accessory uses in a residence. The Board of Adjustment shall
decide whether other home occupations not listed here are within the spirit
of this category of accessory uses; and



      (3)   Kindergarten and day nurseries, provided that not less
than 100 square feet of play area is provided for each child and provided
further, aggregate play space is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least 4 feet
in height.



   (C)   Signs: One professional or announcement sign per lot for
customary home occupations, kindergartens and rest homes. No sign shall be
illuminated.



   (D)   The following conditional or special uses are permitted when
authorized by the Town Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each
request shall be reviewed by the Planning Board for their comments prior to
the submission to the Town Board.



      (1)   Two-family dwellings;



      (2)   Group development projects, subject to conditions listed
under § 154.030;



      (3)   Planned unit developments, subject to conditions under
§ 154.031;



   (E)   Within the R-15 residential district as shown on the zoning
map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162; and



      (2)   Off-street parking shall be provided as required in §§
154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.133  R-10 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   The R-10 residential district is established as a district in
which the principal use of land is for medium density single-family and
2-family residences, along with limited home occupations and public and
private community uses. The regulations are intended to prohibit any use
which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature
of this district. It is expected that municipal water and sewerage facilities
will be available to each lot in the districts, or a reasonable expectation
of service in the near future.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   All uses permitted in the R-15 residential district;



      (2)   Two-family dwellings;



      (3)   Customary home occupations, including dressmaking,
cooking and baking, hairdressing, music instruction, the renting of not more
than 1 room, the practice of professions as insurance and accounting, shall
be permitted as accessory uses in a residence. The Board of Adjustment shall
decide whether other home occupations not listed here are within the spirit
of this category of accessory uses; and



      (4)   Kindergarten and day nurseries, provided that not less
than 100 square feet of play area is provided for each child and provided
further, that aggregate play space is surrounded by a sturdy fence at least 4
feet in height.



   (C)   Signs: One professional or announcement sign per lot for
customary home occupations, kindergartens and rest homes. No sign shall be
illuminated.



   (D)   The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the Town Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each request shall
be reviewed by the Planning Board for their comments prior to the submission
to the Town Board.



      (1)   Group development projects, subject to conditions listed
under § 154.030; and



      (2)   Planned unit developments, subject to conditions under
§ 154.031 of this chapter.



      (3)   Rest/convalescent homes as living quarters and as an
accessory use, but requires a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet of yard
space.



(Ord. passed - -)



      (4)   Public safety facilities.



   (E)   Within the R-10 residential district as shown on the zoning
map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Off-street parking shall be provided as required in §§
154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.134  R-8 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   (1)   The R-8 residential district is established as a
district in which the principal use of the land is for higher density
single-family and 2-family residences, along with limited home occupations
and public and private community uses.



      (2)   The regulations are intended to prohibit any use which,
because of its character, would interfere with the residential nature of this
district. It is expected that municipal water and sewerage facilities will be
available to each lot in those districts or a reasonable expectation of
service in the near future.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted: All uses identified in the
R-10 residential district.



   (C)   The following additional conditional or special uses are
permitted when authorized by the Town Board after the Board holds a public
hearing. Each request shall be reviewed by the Planning Board for their
comments prior to the submission to the Town Board.



      (1)   Individual mobile homes or modular units subject to the
provisions of § 154.010, and the yard and lot requirements of this district
for a conventionally built home.



      (2)   Group development projects, subject to conditions under
§ 154.030.



      (3)   Planned unit developments, subject to conditions under
§ 154.031.



   (D)   With the R-8 residential district as shown on the zoning map,
the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Off-street parking shall be provided as required in §§
154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.135  R-5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   The R-5 residential district is established as a district
which the principal use of the land is for high density single-family,
2-family and mobile home residences, along with limited home occupations and
public and private community uses. The regulations are intended to prohibit
any use which, because of its character, would interfere with the residential
nature of this district. It is expected that municipal water and sewerage
facilities will be available to each lot in those districts or a reasonable
expectation of service in the near future.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   All uses identified in the R-8 residential district;



      (2)   Individual mobile homes on individual lots; and



      (3)   Individual modular homes on individual lots.



   (C)   The following additional conditional or special uses are
permitted when authorized by the Town Board after the Board holds a public
hearing. Each request shall be reviewed by the Planning Board for their
comments prior to the submission to the Town Board.



      (1)   Group development projects, subject to conditions under
§ 154.030.



      (2)   Planned unit developments, subject to conditions under
§ 154.031.



   (D)   With the R-5 residential district as shown on the zoning map,
the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Off-street parking shall be provided as required in §§
154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.136  R-MH RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   The high density R-MH district permits mobile home parks in
areas designated and developed as a mobile home park.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted: Mobile home parks, subject
to conditions listed under § 154.009.



   (C)   The following additional conditional uses are permitted when
authorized by the Town Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each
request shall be reviewed by the Planning Board for their comments prior to
submission to the Town Board: None.



   (D)   With the R-MH residential district as shown on the zoning map,
the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Off-street parking shall be provided as required in §§
154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.137  C-B CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   The central business district (C-B) is established as the
centrally located trade and commercial service area of the community. The
regulations of this district are designed to encourage the continued use of
land for community trade and commercial service uses, and to permit a
concentrated development of permitted uses while maintaining a substantial
relationship between the intensity of land uses and the capacity of utilities
and streets.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   Alcoholic beverage control stores;



      (2)   Automobile parking lots and structures;



      (3)   Automobile parts and supplies, new;



      (4)   Bakeries, retail;



      (5)   Banks and other financial institutions including loan
and finance companies;



      (6)   Barber and beauty shops;



      (7)   Billiard and pool halls;



      (8)   Bus stations;



      (9)   Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, art
schools, music and dance studios and similar uses, but excluding industrial
trade schools;



      (10)   Business signs, provided that signs projecting at right
angles from the building shall be allowed when suspended from a canopy,
provided the sign is at least 8 feet above the sidewalk. Otherwise, signs
must be mounted flat with building walls and must not project more than 18
inches from the walls;



      (11)   Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail sales
on the premises only;



      (12)   Drug stores, with or without fountains;



      (13)   Dry cleaning, laundry pick-up stations and dry cleaning
plants having not more than 2,000 square feet;



      (14)   Electric repair shops;



      (15)   Fire and police stations;



      (16)   Floral and gift shops;



      (17)   Food stores and meat markets, retail only, but
excluding the killing or dressing of any flesh or fowl;



      (18)   Funeral homes and mortuaries;



      (19)   Hotels and inns;



      (20)   Jewelry repair shops and opticians;



      (21)   Launderettes and laundromats;



      (22)   Light manufacturing, as defined in § 154.175; however,
this use is not allowed in the Historic Downtown District;



      (23)   Locksmiths and gunsmiths;



      (24)   Medical and dental clinics and laboratories;



      (25)   Newspaper offices and printing plants incidental to
offices;



      (26)   Offices; business, professional and public;



      (27)   Office supplies and equipment, sales and service;



      (28)   Pawn shops;



      (29)   Photographic studios and camera supply stores;



      (30)   Printing, publishing and reproduction establishments;



      (31)   Public works and utility facilities, but excluding
service and storage yards;



      (32)   Radio and tv repair shops;



      (33)   Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants, provided
drive-in restaurants are fenced on all sides which abut residential
districts. Fences shall be solid from the ground to a height of 6 feet;



      (34)   Retail establishments such as department, clothing,
fabric, shoe, variety, notion, drug, hardware, furniture, appliance, floor
covering, paint, antique, art goods, jewelry, gift, music, toy, sporting
goods, book and stationery, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet and hobby and craft
stores, but not excluding similar retail outlets;



      (35)   Service stations, provided that all gasoline pumps and
other stationary equipment shall be located at least 12 feet behind the
property line, provided further, that on all sides where stations abut
residential districts, a 6 foot high fence and suitable landscaping shall be
provided;



      (36)   Shoe repair and shine shops;



      (37)   Signs, directing the public to off-street parking
areas, provided not more than 2 signs shall be permitted per lot, provided
further the aggregate size of signs shall not exceed 8 square feet in area;



      (39)   Taxicab stands;



      (40)   Telephone and telegraph offices;



      (41)   Theaters, indoor; and



      (42)   Customary accessory uses and structures when located on
the same block as the principal structures, excluding, however, open storage.



   (C)   The following conditional uses are permitted when authorized
by the Town Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each request shall
be reviewed by the Planning Board for their comments prior to the submission
to the Town Board:



      (1)   Mixed uses, i.e., buildings erected for both dwelling
and business purposes, provided that buildings shall be furnished with side
yards on each side of the building measuring not less than 8 feet in width,
provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the side street of
a corner lot; and



      (2)   Used car and truck sales.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1995)



   (D)   Within the C-B central business district as shown on the
zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as
required in §§ 154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977; Am. Ord. 17-175, passed 8-1-2017)



§ 154.138  G-B BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   The G-B general business districts are generally located on
major thoroughfares and collector streets in the Fairmont planning area. They
are intended to provide for offices, personal services and the retailing of
durable and convenience goods for the community. Because these commercial
uses are subject to public view and are important to the economy of the area,
they should have ample parking, controlled traffic movement and suitable
landscaping.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   All uses permitted in the C-B central business district;



      (2)   Animal hospitals, provided no pens or kennels are
located closer than 20 feet to any property line;



      (3)   Assembly halls, coliseums, armories, ballrooms and
similar structures;



      (4)   Automobile sales, new and used;



      (5)   Automobile repair garages;



      (6)   Automobile washing establishments;



      (7)   Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing or
packaging food products for wholesale distribution;



      (8)   Barber and beauty shops;



      (9)   Bicycle sales and repair shops;



      (10)   Boat and trailer works and sales;



      (11)   Bottling works;



      (12)   Bowling alleys and skating rinks, miniature golf
courses, riding stables, go-cart tracks and other commercial recreation
facilities;



      (13)   Building materials storage and sales yard, provided
they are fenced by a sturdy fence not less than 6 feet in height;



      (14)   Business signs and billboards, provided they are not
located within 50 feet of any residential district, provided further, that
not more than 1 billboard structure shall be allowed per 100 feet or less of
lot frontage in single ownership, with 1 additional billboard structure
allowed per additional 100 feet of lot frontage;



      (15)   Business, art and professional schools;



      (16)   Cabinet, woodworking and upholstery shops;



      (17)   Churches and customary accessory uses;



      (18)   Circuses, carnivals and revival grounds;



      (19)   Contractors’ offices and storage yards, provided the
latter are fenced by a sturdy fence not less than 6 feet in height;



      (20)   Dairy products processing and distributing facilities,
including dairy bars;



      (21)   Dry cleaning and laundering plants;



      (22)   Electrical supplies and equipment, sales and repairs;



      (23)   Farm equipment and machinery, sales, assembly and
repair;



      (24)   Funeral homes, mortuaries;



      (25)   Freezer lockers and ice plants;



      (26)   Golf driving ranges;



      (27)   Par-3 golf courses;



      (28)   Industrial supplies and equipment, sales and service,
provided all open storage is fenced by a sturdy fence not less than 6 feet in
height;



      (29)   Industrial trade schools and research laboratories;



      (30)   Libraries;



      (31)   Light manufacturing, as defined in § 154.175; however,
this use is not allowed in the Historic Downtown District;



      (32)   Machine and welding shops;



      (33)   Mobile home display lots;



      (34)   Monument works and sales;



      (35)   Motels and motor lodges;



      (36)   Motorcycle, lawnmower and power sales and service;



      (37)   Plumbing and heating supply houses, provided all open
storage is fenced by a sturdy fence not less than 6 feet in height;



      (38)   Private clubs, lodges, social and recreational
buildings, the chief activity of which is carried on or is one customarily
carried on primarily for gain;



      (39)   Offices; professional, business and public;



      (40)   Medical and dental clinics;



      (41)   Radio and tv stations and towers, provided all towers
are surrounded by a chain link fence not less that 6 feet in height;



      (42)   Rooming and boarding houses;



      (43)   Second-hand stores and swap shops;



      (44)   Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing and heating and
refrigeration shops, but excluding open storage unless it shall be fenced by
a sturdy fence not less than 6 feet in height;



      (45)   Sign painting and fabricating shops;



      (46)   Trucking terminals, transfer companies;



      (47)   Theaters, drive-ins;



      (48)   Video arcades and game rooms;



(Ord. passed 9-13-1983)



      (49)   Wholesale and warehousing establishments;



      (50)   Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products,
including bottled gas and oxygen; and



      (51)   Customary accessory uses and structures, including open
storage, provided the area devoted to open storage is enclosed by a sturdy
fence not less than 6 feet in height.



   (C)   The following uses are permitted conditionally when authorized
by the Town Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each request shall
be reviewed by the Planning Board for their comments prior to the submission
to the Town Board: Mixed uses, i.e., buildings erected for both dwelling and
business purposes, provided that building shall be furnished with side yards
on each side of the building measuring not less than 8 feet in width,
provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to the street side of
a corner lot.



   (D)   Within the G-B general business district as shown on the
zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as
required in §§ 154.032 and 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977; Am. Ord. 17-175, passed 8-1-2017



§ 154.139  N-B NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   The regulations of this district are intended to provide for
the retailing of goods and services for convenience to the nearby residential
neighborhoods in a way as to protect abutting areas from blighting influences.



   (B)   The following uses shall be permitted by right:



      (1)   Bakeries, where the products are sold exclusively at
retail on the premises;



      (2)   Barber and beauty shops;



      (3)   Bicycle sales and repair shops;



      (4)   Churches and their customary related uses, meeting the
requirements of the zoning chapter with regard to this district;



      (5)   Floral and gift shops;



      (6)   Food stores, retail only, but excluding the killing and
dressing of any flesh or fowl;



      (7)   Funeral homes or mortuaries;



      (8)   Jewelry repair shops;



      (9)   Launderettes and laundromats;



      (10)   Locksmiths and gunsmiths;



      (11)   Radio and television repair shops, electric shops;



      (12)   Medical and dental clinics and laboratories;



      (13)   Offices, business, professional and public;



      (14)   Restaurants, but not including drive-in restaurants;



      (15)   Retail establishments such as clothing, fabric, shoe,
variety, notion, drug, hardware, paint, antique, art, book and stationary
stores, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet and hobby and craft stores, other
retail outlets are subject to review by the Planning Board and Town Board;



      (16)   Residences, single-family and 2-family dwellings,
subject to the area and yard requirements of the nearest residential district;



      (17)   Service station, but not including major repair work,
provided that gasoline pumps shall be located at least 12 feet behind the
right-of-way line; provided further, that on all sides where stations abut
residential districts, a 6 foot high fence and suitable landscaping shall be
provided;



      (18)   Shoe repair and shine shops;



      (19)   Signs, subject to sign regulations as recorded in this
chapter;



      (20)   Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops;



      (21)   Vending machines, located out-of-doors, subject to the
yard and stacking requirements in §§ 154.130 through 154.140; and



      (22)   Customary accessory uses and structures when located on
the same lot as the principal structure, excluding, however, open storage.



   (C)   Conditional uses are permitted when authorized by the Town
Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each request shall be reviewed
by the Planning Board for their comments prior to the submission to the Town
Board: Neighborhood retail businesses not otherwise named herein which come
within the spirit or intent of this zoning district.



   (D)   Within the N-B neighborhood business district, as shown on the
zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Off-street parking space shall be provided as required
in §§ 154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.140  G-M GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   (A)   The G-M general manufacturing district is established for
those areas of the community where the principal use of land is for
manufacturing, industrial and warehousing uses. These uses, by their nature,
may create some nuisance and which are not properly associated with
residential, institutional, commercial and/or service establishments. These
uses normally seek outlying locations on large tracts of land where the
operations involved do not detract from the development potential of nearby
undeveloped properties.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   Automobile parking lots and structures;



      (2)   Amusement, recreation and sporting goods manufacturing;



      (3)   Apparel and clothing manufacturing, including hosiery;



      (4)   Automobile parts and accessories manufacturing;



      (5)   Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared
food products for wholesale distribution;



      (6)   Bedding and carpet manufacturing;



      (7)   Boat and trailer works and sales;



      (8)   Bottling works;



      (9)   Building materials and specialties manufacturing;



      (10)   Building materials storage and sales yards, provided
all open storage is fenced by a fence not less than 6 feet in height;



      (11)   Business machines manufacturing;



      (12)   Business signs and billboards, provided they are not
located within 50 feet of any residential district, provided further that not
more than 1 billboard structure shall be allowed per 100 feet or less of lot
frontage in single ownership, with 1 additional billboard structure allowed
per additional 100 feet of lot frontage;



      (13)   Cabinet woodworking and upholstery shops;



      (14)   Contractors’ offices and storage yards, provided all
open storage is fenced by a fence not less than 6 feet in height;



      (15)   Dairy products processing and distributing facilities;



      (16)   Drugs, medicines and cosmetics manufacturing;



      (17)   Dry cleaning and laundry plants;



      (18)   Electrical appliances and electronic equipment
manufacturing;



      (19)   Farm machinery sales, assembly and repair;



      (20)   Feed and seed stores, hatcheries and fertilizer sales;



      (21)   Food stores, fruit stands and produce markets;



      (22)   Food processing establishments;



      (23)   Flour and feed mills;



      (24)   Furniture manufacturing;



      (25)   Golf driving ranges;



      (26)   Par-3 golf courses;



      (27)   Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries;



      (28)   Hardware and housewares manufacturing;



      (29)   Ice and cold storage plants and freezer lockers;



      (30)   Industrial supplies and equipment, sales and service,
provided all open storage is fenced by a fence not less than 6 feet in height;



      (31)   Industrial trade schools and research laboratories;



      (32)   Leather products, including luggage and shoe
manufacturing;



      (33)   Machine and welding shops;



      (34)   Metal fabricating plants;



      (35)   Monument works and sales;



      (36)   Musical instruments manufacturing;



      (37)   Offices pertaining to any permitted use;



      (38)   Paper products manufacturing;



      (39)   Plastic products manufacturing;



      (40)   Rubber and glass products manufacturing;



      (41)   Plumbing and heating supply houses, provided all open
storage is fenced by a fence not less than 6 feet in height;



      (42)   Precision instruments and jewelry manufacturing;



      (43)   Printing, engraving and publishing establishments;



      (44)   Public parks, playgrounds, community centers, swimming
pools and similar recreational uses;



(Ord. passed 8-15-2000)



      (45)   Public safety facilities such as fire and police
stations and rescue squads;



      (46)   Public works and public utility facilities, including
service and storage yards, provided they are fenced by a sturdy fence not
less than 6 feet in height;



      (47)   Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants;



      (48)   Radio and television stations and masts;



      (49)   Railroad freight yards or classification yards;



      (50)   Septic tank manufacturing;



      (51)   Service stations, including major repair work, provided
that all gasoline pumps shall be located at least 12 feet behind the property
line;



      (52)   Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing, heating and
refrigeration shops;



      (53)   Sign painting and fabricating shops;



      (54)   Textile and cordage manufacturing;



      (55)   Trucking terminals;



      (56)   Wholesale and warehousing establishments, except for
the storage of dangerous or offensive items such as uncured hides and
explosives;



      (57)   Wholesale storage of gasoline or bulk terminal plants,
provided that the contents are adequately protected against their inflammable
or explosive quality; and



      (58)   Customary accessory uses and structures, including open
storage, provided the area devoted to open storage is enclosed by a fence at
least 6 feet in height.



   (C)   The following conditional or special uses are permitted when
authorized by the Town Board after the Board holds a public hearing. Each
request shall be reviewed by the Planning Board for their comments prior to
the submission to the Town Board: Manufacturing uses not otherwise named
herein which come within the spirit or intent of this zoning district.
Determination will be made by the Town Board.



   (D)   Within the G-M manufacturing district, as shown on the zoning
map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162.



      (2)   Buildings constructed or converted to uses permitted in
this district shall provide off-street loading and unloading space as
required in §§ 154.032 through 154.034.



      (3)   Off-street parking space shall be provided as required
in §§ 154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.141  HD HISTORIC DOWNTOWN DISTRICT.



   (A)   Designated. There is hereby designated a new Historic Downtown
district, said district to encompass an area of approximately 11.5 acres, as
defined in division (B) below.



   (B)   Approximate boundaries.



      (1)   In the Town of Fairmont, BEGINNING at the point at the
intersection of the southeast right-of-way line of Byrd Street and the
northwest right-of-way line of New Market Street, being the northeast corner
of Lot 39 on a plat recorded in Map Book 3 at Page 40, Robeson County
Registry, a portion of tax parcel 3006-01-039; thence with the southeast
right-of-way line of Byrd Street in a southwesterly direction to the point of
its intersection with the eastern right-of-way line of Main Street, which
point is in the line which includes the northern boundary of tax parcel
3005-04-011, the first Tract of Barry Altman’s property described in Book
945 at Page 624, Robeson County Registry; thence to and with the northern
line of Barry Altman’s property to the northwest corner of said lot; thence
South along the eastern boundary of the 15-foot alley adjoining tax parcels
3005-04-011, 3005-04-012 and 3005-04-013, Barry Altman’s property, and tax
parcel 3005-04-014, property of the Town of Fairmont described in Book 871 at
Page 103, Robeson County Registry, and continuing on that line to a point at
which it intersects the southern right-of-way line of Thompson Street where
the street adjoins the property of Charles Floyd described in Book 1029 at
Page 423, Robeson County Registry, being the most northern Lot 1 on Main
Street, in Block 13 (or in the set of lots immediately to the east of Block
13) on the map of the Town of Fairmont recorded in Map Book 1 at Page 27,
Robeson County Registry; thence West along the southern line of Thompson
Street to the northwest corner of tax parcel 3005-04-029, being the property
of Andrew Grimsley described in Book 1447 at Page 148, Robeson County
Registry; thence South along the western boundary of said lot 100.6 feet to
the southwest corner of Andrew Grimsley’s lot; thence East along and beyond
the southern line of Andrew Grimsley to the northwest corner of tax parcel
3005-04-034, the property of Eric E. Thompson described in Book 874 at Page
46, Robeson County Registry; thence South along the eastern boundary of an
alley, also being the western line of all of the tax parcels from 3005-04-034
through 3005-04-042, to the southwest corner of tax parcel 3005-04-042, the
first Tract of the property of Harold E. Malion, Jr. described in Book 962 at
Page 789, Robeson County Registry; thence continuing with the alley and as
follows:



      East to the northwest corner of property owned by Rolyat Inc.
described as Tract 1 in Book 1248 at Page 567, Robeson County Registry, tax
parcel 3005-04-043, (after a portion of the property was taken for the
alley), thence South to the southwest corner of said lot, thence East along
the southern line of that lot to the northwest corner of Rolyat Inc.’s
property described as Tract 2 in Book 1248 at Page 567, Robeson County
Registry, tax parcel 3005-04-044, (after a portion of the property was taken
for the alley), thence South approximately 151.64 feet with the western
boundary of Rolyat Inc.’s property and beyond (following the western
boundaries of tax parcels 3005-04-044, 3005-04-045, 3005-04-047, 3005-04-048,
and 3005-04-049 and also crossing tax parcel 3005-04-046) to the southern
corner of John Barber’s lots described in Book 932 at Page 153, Robeson
County Registry, tax parcel 3005-04-049;



      thence with Iona Street and the southwest boundary of Barber’s
lots to a point which is due north of the northwest corner of the second
Tract of the property conveyed to Gregory S. Tedder by the deed recorded in
Book 1050 at Page 343, Robeson County Registry, tax parcel 3007-02-019;
thence South to the northwest corner of that lot; thence Southwest to and
with the western boundary of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of Block 16 of the map
of the Town of Fairmont recorded in Map Book 1 at Page 27, Robeson County
Registry, approximately 158.84 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 6, Rolyat
Inc.’s property described in Book 719 at Page 533, Robeson County Registry,
also being the northwest corner of the property of Fairmont Baptist Church,
tax parcel 3007-02-022; thence East along the southern line of Rolyat
Inc.’s property approximately 126 feet to the western right-of-way line of
Main Street; thence North along the western right-of-way line of Main Street
to a point due west from the southern boundary of tax parcel 3008-01-013, the
property conveyed to P. R. Floyd, Jr. by the deed recorded in Book 9A at Page
123, Robeson County Registry; thence East across Main Street and along the
southern line of P. R. Floyd, Jr.’s line to the southeast corner of said
lot; thence North along and beyond the eastern line of P. R. Floyd, Jr.’s
property to the northeast corner of Isiah Taylor’s property described in
Book 615 at Page 818, Robeson County Registry, tax parcel 3008-01-012; thence
East along the southern boundary of tax parcel 3008-01-011, property of
Franklin J. Mercer described in Book 777 at Page 491, Robeson County
Registry, to the southeast corner of that lot; thence North with the eastern
boundary of tax parcels 3008-01-011 through 3008-01-006 and the western line
of an alley to the northeast corner of Rolyat, Inc.’s property described in
Book 763 at Page 812, Robeson County Registry, tax parcel 3008-01-006; thence
East along the southern boundary of tax parcel 3008-01-00202, which is a part
of the property conveyed to Triangle Bank by the deed recorded in Book 963 at
Page 819, Robeson County Registry, to the southeast corner of that lot;
thence North with the eastern boundary of that lot and the western boundary
of tax parcel 3008-01-00203, which is a part of the property conveyed to
Triangle Bank by the deed recorded in Book 963 at Page 819, Robeson County
Registry, to the northeast corner of tax parcel 3008-01-00202, also being the
northwest corner of tax parcel 3008-01-00203; thence due North across Center
Street to a point in the northern right-of-way line of Center Street; thence
East along the northern right-of-way line of Center Street to the point of
its intersection with the west right-of-way line of Walnut Street; thence
North with the west right-of-way line of Walnut Street to its intersection
with the southern right-of-way line of Thompson Street; thence West along the
southern right-of-way line of Thompson Street to the northeast corner of tax
parcel 3006-03-016, Tract 2 of the property conveyed to A. Jack Mitchell by
the deed recorded in Book 14K at Page 3, Robeson County Registry; thence
South with and beyond the eastern boundary of Mitchell’s lot 203.9 feet to
the southeast corner of tax parcel 3006-03-01801, Tract 2 of the property
conveyed to Sandra Stevens by the deed recorded in Book 1094 at Page 551,
Robeson County Registry; thence West with the southern boundary of Sandra
Stevens’ lot to its southwest corner, also being the southeast corner of
tax parcel 3006-03-018, property of the Town of Fairmont described in Book
1703 at Page 722, Robeson County Registry; thence West along the southern
boundary of tax parcel 3006-03-018 to its southwest corner; thence North with
the western boundary of said lot 42.12 feet to the northeast corner of tax
parcel 3006-03-00701, property of John Jackson described in Book 675 at Page
488, Robeson County Registry; thence East with the southern boundary of tax
parcel 3006-03-007, property of Robert Huggins described in Book 13-Q at Page
178, Robeson County Registry, to the southeast corner of said lot; thence
North with and beyond the eastern boundary of Robert Huggins’ property to
the northeast corner of tax parcel 3006-03-006, property of the Town of
Fairmont described in Book 1698 at Page 360, Robeson County Registry; thence
West with the northern line of tax parcel 3006-03-006 to the southeast corner
of tax parcel 3006-03-005, property of the Town of Fairmont described in Book
1628 at Page 135, Robeson County Registry; thence North with the eastern line
of tax parcel 3006-03-005 to its northeast corner; thence East with the
southern line of tax parcel 3006-03-004, property of James Chesley Capps, III
described in Book 666 at Page 646, Robeson County Registry, to the southeast
corner of tax parcel 3006-03-004; thence North along and beyond the eastern
boundary of James Capps’s property to the northeast corner of tax parcel
3006-03-002, the property conveyed to A. Jack Mitchell by the deed recorded
in Book 11-C at Page 466, Robeson County Registry; thence due North across
Thompson Street to a point in the northern right-of-way line of Thompson
Street and the southern boundary of the property of Fairmont Warehouses, Inc.
described in Book 14-N at Page 266, Robeson County Registry, tax parcel
3006-03-001; thence East along the northern right-of-way line of Thompson
Street to the southeast corner of tax parcel 3006-04-062, property of the
Border Belt Historical Society described in Book 829 at Page 455, Robeson
County Registry; thence North with the eastern line of tax parcel 3006-04-062
to a point in the southern right-of-way line of Leesville Street; thence with
the southern right-of-way line of Leesville Street in a westerly direction to
the point which is due south of the southeast corner of Lot 30 of the map
recorded in Map Book 3 at Page 40, Robeson County Registry, a portion of tax
parcel 3006-01-039; thence North along the western right-of-way line of New
Market Street to the point of BEGINNING.



      (2)   Any uncertainties inherent in the boundary description
herein above shall be adjudicated as per § 154.118 of this chapter.



      (3)   A map of the Historic Downtown district, shall be
appended to Ord. 10-133 and made a part hereof.



   (C)   Zoning.



      (1)   The district shall be designated as the HD district for
the purposes of zoning.



      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the Fairmont Planning
Board, within 3 months of adoption of this section, to provide to the Town
Board of Commissioners, definitive zoning regulations for enclosure in this
chapter.



   (D)   Signage.



      (1)   The HD zoning district shall be known as the Fairmont
Historic Downtown district.



      (2)   The town shall, as soon as fiscally feasible, provide
adequate signage for the district, including “Gateway” or “Welcome”
signs, and specially-designed street signs.



(Ord. 10-133, passed 5-18-2010)



§ 154.142  H-D HISTORIC DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   The H-D Historic Downtown Business District is established as
the centrally located trade and commercial service area within the
historically significant downtown business corridor of the community, as
established for the National Register of Historic Places. A separate map of
this district shall be kept in the custody of the Town Clerk and the Codes
Enforcement Officer. At the first available opportunity, the (H-D) historic
downtown business district shall be made an integral part of the Fairmont
Zoning Map. The regulations of this district are designed to encourage the
continued use of land for community trade and commercial service uses, as
well as second storey residential usage, and to permit a concentrated
development of permitted uses while maintaining a substantial relationship
between the intensity of land uses and the capacity of utilities and streets
within the context of an historically significant commercial area.



   (B)   The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   Agricultural supplies;



      (2)   Automobile parts and supplies, new, including tire sales;



      (3)   Bakeries, retail;



      (4)   Banks and other financial institutions including loan
and finance companies;



      (5)   Barber and beauty shops;



      (6)   Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, art
schools, music and dance studios and similar uses, but excluding industrial
trade schools;



      (7)   Business, professional and medical offices;



      (8)   Computer sales and service;



      (9)   Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail sales
on the premises only;



      (10)   Drug stores, with or without fountains;



      (11)   Dry cleaning, laundry pick-up stations and dry cleaning
plants having not more than 2,000 square feet;



      (12)   Electric repair shops;



      (13)   Floral and gift shops;



      (14)   Jewelry repair shops;



      (15)   Locksmiths and gunsmiths;



      (16)   Medical and dental clinics and laboratories;



      (17)   Newspaper offices, excluding printing plants;



      (18)   Offices; business, professional and public;



      (19)   Office supplies and equipment, sales and service;



      (20)   Opticians and optometrists, including optical
laboratories;



      (21)   Photographic studios and camera supply stores;



      (22)   Printing, publishing and reproduction establishments;



      (23)   Public facilities, including parks and community
centers;



      (24)   Radio and TV repair shops;



      (25)   Residential apartments, both owner- and
tenant-occupied, on the second floor of a business establishment only;



      (26)   Restaurants, excluding drive-in restaurants;



      (27)   Retail establishments such as department, clothing,
fabric, shoe, variety, notion, drug, hardware, furniture, appliance, art
goods, floor covering, paint, antique, jewelry, gift, music, toy, sporting
goods, book and stationery, magazine, candy, tobacco, pet and hobby and craft
stores, but not excluding similar retail outlets;



      (28)   Shoe repair and shine shops; and



      (29)   Tailor and dressmaking shops.



   (C)   Uses not specifically enumerated in division (B) of this
section but nonetheless consistent with the general types of businesses so
enumerated may be eligible for conditional use permits when authorized under
§§ 154.045 through 154.054.



   (D)   Signs are only allowed as follows:



      (1)   Directional signs, directing the public to off-street
parking areas, provided not more than 2 signs shall be permitted per lot,
provided further that the size of each such sign shall not exceed 4 square
feet in area; and



      (2)   Business signs, provided that signs projecting at right
angles from the building shall, for on-going business establishments only, be
allowed when suspended from above a canopy, provided the sign is at least 15
feet above the sidewalk, otherwise, signs must be mounted flat with building
walls and must not project more than 4 inches from the walls. Businesses no
longer in operation must remove signs in accordance with §§ 96.57 through
96.60 of this Code.



   (E)   Specifically not permitted within the H-D Historic Downtown
Business District are storefront churches and light manufacturing.



   (F)   Within the H-D historic downtown business district as shown on
the zoning map, the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with:



      (1)   Area, yard and height requirements shall be provided as
required in § 154.162; and



      (2)   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as
required in §§ 154.032 through 154.034.



(Ord. 10-140, passed 10-19-2010; Am. Ord. 17-175, passed 8-1-2017)



FLOOD FRINGE ZONES AND THE LIKE



§ 154.150  REGULATION OF FLOODWAY AND FLOOD FRINGE ZONES.



   These are special use districts created for the protection of flood
prone areas which are subject to periodic flooding and which are subject to
regulation through National Flood Insurance Program. The floodway and flood
fringe areas of the Ashpole Swamp and its tributary laterals which are within
the zoning jurisdiction of the Town of Fairmont shall be subject to
regulation through this section. The floodway and flood fringe districts
herein set forth are intended to protect areas of designated flood plans
subject to and necessary for regulating flood waters, and to permit and
encourage the retention of natural open-space land uses which would minimize
damage caused by flood losses and constrict the development of land subject
to flood damage.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.151  INTENT FOR ESTABLISHING FLOODWAY AND FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   To make appropriate land use adjustments to constrict
development of land subject to flood damage and minimize damage caused by
floods;



   (B)   To control in flood hazard areas uses such as fill, dumping,
storage of materials, structures, buildings and any other facility which
acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses would cause
damaging flood heights and velocities by obstructing flows and reducing the
water carrying capacity of the flood plain to contain the flood waters;



   (C)   To protect human life and health;



   (D)   To minimize public and private property damage; and



   (E)   To reduce the financial burdens imposed on the community
caused by frequent and periodic floods.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.152  METHOD USED TO ANALYZE FLOOD HAZARD.



   (A)   Hydrological determination of the nature and magnitude of the
regulatory flood, by the U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD), was based
on engineering calculations which permit a consideration of hydrologic
factors as rainfall patterns infiltration rates, slope of watershed and
length of watercourse.



   (B)   The computation of the floodway zone required to convey the
regulatory flood without increasing the stage of this flood by more than 1
foot at any point.



   (C)   Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no
obstruction is permitted which would impede the flow of water. The floodway
encroachment lines are the exterior limits of the floodway zone.



   (D)   Delineation of the floodway fringe zone being that area
outside the floodway encroachment lines but which is still subject to
inundation by regulatory flood.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.153  INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries of the floodway zone and the flood fringe zone districts
shall be determined from the official flood zone map as compiled with stream
profiles by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or
other federal agencies for the Ashpole Swamp Watershed Project. Where
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
zones shown on the official flood zone map, the Planning Board and the Town
Board shall seek a recommendation from the town’s Public Works Director
and/or the Town Engineer for the necessary interpretation.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.154  PERMITTED USES IN F-W FLOODWAY DISTRICT.



   The following uses shall be permitted within the floodway zone the
extent that they are otherwise permitted by this chapter and provided that
they do not employ structures or fill except as specified herein:



   (A)   General farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game farm and other similar
agricultural, wildlife and related uses;



   (B)   Loading areas, parking areas, rotary aircraft ports and other
similar industrial-commercial uses;



   (C)   Lawns, gardens, parking, play areas and other similar uses;



   (D)   Golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges,
picnic grounds, parks, swimming pools, hiking or horseback-riding trails,
open space and other similar private and public recreational uses;



   (E)   Streets, bridges, utility lines, creek and storm drainage
facilities, sewage or waste treatment facilities, water supply facilities and
other similar public and private utility uses. Fill material for utilities
shall be permitted only if approved by the Town Engineer;



   (F)   Temporary facilities such as displays, circuses, carnivals or
similar transient amusement enterprises;



   (G)   Boat docks, ramps, piers or similar structures;



   (H)   Dams; and



   (I)   Grading, but not fill.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.155  ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.



   The placement of any artificial obstruction in the floodway district is
prohibited, except as provided in § 154.154 unless a special use permit for
an artificial obstruction has been approved.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.156  USES REQUIRING SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   The following uses which involve structures (temporary or
permanent), fill or storage of materials or equipment may be permitted within
a floodway district only upon approval of a special use permit.



   (B)   These uses are also subject to the requirements of which apply
to all floodway district special use permits.



      (1)   Any use or accessory use employing a structure,
excluding structures designed for human habitation;



      (2)   Open storage of any material or equipment;



      (3)   Underground storage of fuel or flammable liquids;



      (4)   Parking, loading areas and other similar uses when
located less than 25 feet to the stream bank; and



      (5)   Other uses similar in nature to those listed in items
above.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.157  STANDARDS FOR FLOODWAY SPECIAL PERMIT USES.



   (A)   All special permit uses: no structure (temporary or
permanent), fill (including fill for roads and levees) deposit, obstruction,
storage of materials or equipment or other use may be allowed as a special
use which, acting alone or in combination with existing or future uses,
perceptibly reduces the capacity of the floodway or increases flood heights.
Consideration of the effects of a proposed use shall be based on a reasonable
assumption that there will be an equal degree of encroachment extending for a
significant reach on both sides of the stream.



   (B)   In addition all floodway district special permit uses shall be
subject to the following standards:



      (1)   Fill.



         (a)   Any fill proposed to be deposited in the floodway
must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and the amount thereof not
greater than is necessary to achieve that purpose, as demonstrated by a plan
submitted by the owner showing the uses to which the filled land will be put
and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other materials.



         (b)   Fill or other materials shall be protected against
erosion by rip-rap, vegetative cover or bulkheading.



      (2)   Structures (temporary or permanent).



         (a)   Structures shall not be designed for human
habitation;



         (b)   Structures shall have a low flood damage potential;



         (c)   The structure or structures, if permitted, shall
be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of flood waters;



            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood
flow; and



            2.   So far as practicable, structures shall be
placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.



         (d)   Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures, restriction of
bridge openings and other narrow sections of the stream or river; and



         (e)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be constructed at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the particular area or flood proofed.



      (3)   Storage of material and equipment. The storage or
processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable,
explosive or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.158  FLOODWAY-FRINGE DISTRICT (FF) REGULATIONS.



   The floodway-fringe district consists of the land area located between
the encroachment lines of the floodway district and the maximum elevation
subject to inundation by the regulatory flood.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.159  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted within the floodway-fringe
district to the extent they are otherwise permitted by this chapter.



   (A)   Uses permitted below the flood protection elevation.



      (1)   Any use permitted and as regulated in the floodway
district.



      (2)   Residential accessory structures provided they are
firmly anchored to prevent flotation.



      (3)   Fill material graded to drain on a minimum of 1% grade
provided it is protected against erosion. Any fill material on which a
structure is to be located shall be extended at grade 10 feet beyond the
limits of the structure foundation and shall have a side slope no steeper
than 1-1/2 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical.



      (4)   Structural foundations and supports provided are firmly
anchored to prevent flotation.



   (B)   Uses permitted above flood protection elevation. Any use
permitted by this chapter provided that the finished floor elevation of any
structure is located at or above the flood protection elevation. Heating and
electrical equipment installed below flood protection elevation shall be
flood proofed.



   (C)   Uses permitted by special use permit below the flood
protection elevation. Any use not designed or intended for human habitation
provided that any structure is firmly anchored and protected to the flood
protection elevation by flood proofing or other means.



   (D)   Uses prohibited below the flood protection elevation. Above
ground storage or processing of materials that are flammable or explosive or
which could otherwise be injurious to human, animal or plant life in time of
flood is prohibited.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.160  SPECIAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   Uses listed in this chapter as requiring a special use permit
may be established only after approval by the Town Board subsequent to the
recommendation of the Planning Board.



   (B)   Applications for special use permits or amendments thereto
shall be filed in the office of the Planning Commission, then forwarded by
the Commission with a recommendation on the request to the Board of
Commissioners for review and consideration. The applicant shall submit to the
Planning Commission completed forms together with 4 sets of plans drawn to
scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the lot,
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing
measures and the relationship of the above to the location of the channel
floodway and regulatory flood protection elevation. Where special
circumstances necessitate detailed information, the applicant shall furnish
the following additional information as is deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission for the evaluation of the effects of the proposed use upon flood
flows:



      (1)   A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of
the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the channel,
cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development and high
water information;



      (2)   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours of
the ground; pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations; size, location
and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on the site;
location and elevations of streets, water supply, sanitary facilities,
photographs showing existing land uses and vegetation upstream and
downstream, soil types and other pertinent information;



      (3)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel
of flow line of the stream;



      (4)   Specifications for building construction and materials,
flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement, storage of
materials, water supply and sanitary facilities; and



      (5)   Additional information as may be required.



   (C)   The Planning Board in its review of the application and prior
to formulation of a recommendation, shall transmit 2 copies of the
application and supplemental information to the Public Works Department for
technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood
heights and velocities, the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the
adequacy of the plans for protection and other technical matters.



   (D)   In passing on an application for a special use permit the
Planning Board and the Town Board shall determine the specific flood hazard
at the site and shall evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in
relation to the flood hazard. In addition, the Planning Board and the Town
Board shall consider the following factors although not limited to these
factors:



      (1)   The probability that materials may be swept on to other
lands or downstream to the injury of others;



      (2)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of damage to the individual owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use;



      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;



      (7)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and flood management program for the area;



      (8)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (9)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and



      (10)   Other factors which are relevant to the purposes of
this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



§ 154.161  FAMILY CARE HOME AND LEVEL IV GROUP FACILITY.



   (A)   Family care home.  A family care home as defined in this
section is considered a “use by right,” with the provision that ir shall
not be located within a 1/2-mile radius of an existing family care home.



(Ord. passed 6-15-2004)



   (B)   Level IV group facility.  A group home facility defined in
this section as a Level IV group facility is not considered a “use by
right” and a special use permit is required prior to occupancy of a Level
IV group facility.



§ 154.162  AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS.



 



District
 
Minimum Lot Size
 
Minimum Yard Requirements
 
Maximum Height in ft.


Square ft. per Dwelling Unit
 
Lot Width in ft. at Bldg. Line
 
Front Yard Setback in ft.
 
Side Yard in ft.
 
Rear Yard in ft.


R-A residential-agricultural; without either public water or sewer
 
20,000
 
100
 
40
 
15(a)
 
30
 
35


R-20 residential; without either public water or sewer
 
20,000
 
100
 
40
 
15(a)
 
30
 
35


R-20;with public water or sewer
 
15,000
 
 
 
 
 


R-15 residential
 
15,000
 
100
 
35
 
12(a)
 
25
 
35


R-10 residential
 
10,000
 
70
 
25
 
12(a)
 
25
 
35


R-8 residential
 
8,000
 
60
 
20
 
8(a)
 
25
 
35


R-5 residential
 
5,000
 
50
 
20
 
8(a)
 
25
 
35


R-MH mobile home park
 
5,000
 
45
 
20
 
10
 
15
 
12


C-B central business district
 
None
 
None
 
None
 
None(b)
 
10
 
35


G-B general business district
 
None
 
None
 
10
 
10(a)
 
10
 
35


N-B neighborhood business district
 
None
 
None
 
20
 
10(d)
 
10(d)
 
35


G-M general manufacturing district
 
None
 
100
 
50
 
20(a)
 
25
 
35


H-D historic business district
 
None
 
None
 
None
 
None
 
10
 
35




 



   (A)   All accessory buildings shall have an 8-foot setback from side
and rear yard lot lines.  All multifamily projects authorized by special use
permits shall have a minimum space requirement of 8,000 square feet for the
first dwelling unit and for each additional unit a minimum of 3,000 square
feet.



   (B)   NOTE:



      (1)   Corner lots add 10 feet on the street side.



      (2)   None required, but when side yard is provided, it shall
be a minimum of 5 feet.



      (3)   Add 5 feet on side yard for each additional dwelling
unit.



      (4)   Ten feet required except where a lot abuts a lot zoned
residential there shall be a side and/or rear yard or not less than 25 feet.
Furthermore, all yards shall contain a buffer strip as defined in § 154.012.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977; Am. Ord. 10-140, passed 10-19-2010)



§ 154.163  LEGAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Interpretation, purpose and conflict. In interpreting and
applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to
interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenants or other
agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon
the height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or
required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants
or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern, provided that
nothing in this chapter shall be construed to amend or repeal any other
existing ordinance of the town.



   (B)   Re-enactment and repeal of existing zoning chapter. This
chapter in part carries forward by re-enactment some of the provisions of the
zoning chapter of the Town of Fairmont adopted by the Town Board, as amended,
and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue in
force existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have
accrued hereunder are preserved and may be enforced. All provisions of the
zoning chapter of the Town of Fairmont enacted November, 1966 as amended,
which are not re-enacted herein are hereby repealed. All suits at law or in
equity and/or all prosecutions resulting from the violation of any zoning
ordinance heretofore in effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of
this state or of the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by
reason of the adoption of this chapter but shall be prosecuted to their
finality the same as if this chapter had not been adopted; any and all
violations of the existing zoning chapter prosecutions for which have not yet
been instituted, may be hereafter filed and prosecuted; and nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or
prosecution now pending, and/or which may heretofore have been instituted or
prosecuted.



   (C)   Validity. Should any section or provisions of this chapter be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, the declaration
shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof,
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



GENERAL BUSINESS, CENTRAL BUSINESS AND GENERAL MANUFACTURING



§ 154.175  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT/ADULT BUSINESS.  Any establishment
that would be considered an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater,
adult mini-motion picture theater or adult live entertainment business as
each is defined in G.S. § 14-202.10. These establishments would have a
substantial or significant portion of the business containing material that
depicts, describes or relates to adult sexual activities or adult nudity.



   ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment primarily engaged in
the operation of amusement or entertainment services to the general public
upon the payment of a fee or admission charge.



   LIGHT MANUFACTURING.  Manufacturing where all processing, fabricating,
assembly, or disassembly of items take places wholly within an enclosed
building, where the work has only very slight potential to produce noise,
dust, glare, odors, or vibrations beyond the property lines on which the
business is located, with end products targeted toward consumers rather than
businesses. Typical items for processing, fabricating, assembly, or
disassembly include, but are not limited to, apparel, home accessories, food,
drapes, clothing accessories, bedspreads, decorations, artificial plants,
jewelry, instruments, computers, and electronic devices. Excluded from this
definition would be processing and packaging of alcoholic beverages, chemical
manufacturing, stone-work or concrete product manufacturing, fabrication of
metal products, manufacturing of agricultural, construction, or mining
machinery, motor vehicle manufacturing, lumber milling, ship or boat
construction, and permanent concrete/batch plants.



   NIGHTCLUBS and BARS.  Include commercial clubs, private clubs,
discotheques, cabarets, taverns and places of entertainment. A commercial
establishment open to the general public either without charge or upon
payment of a cover charge or membership, licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
or holding a brown bag permit, offering entertainment involving the use of
prerecorded or live amplified sound, provided by paid employees, paid private
contractors, unpaid entertainers or customers.



   RESTAURANT/EATING ESTABLISHMENTS.  A restaurant/eating establishment
is an establishment selling food items ordered from a menu and primarily
prepared on the premises for immediate consumption. Types include:



      (1)   CARRYOUT. A fast service restaurant, which does not have
sit down eating arrangements and consumption of food on the premises is
prohibited (or discouraged).



      (2)   COMBINATION. A restaurant, which provides any
combination of sit down, carryout and/or drive-in services.



      (3)   DRIVE-IN. A restaurant where consumption of food on the
premises is encouraged (in car, no seating facilities) and where food is
provided by “car-hop” or self-service.



      (4)   SIT-DOWN RESTAURANTS. Those restaurants which provide
seating arrangements.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003; Am. Ord. 17-175, passed 8-1-2017)



§ 154.176  NIGHTCLUBS OR BARS.



   (A)   These uses shall be restricted to general business and central
business districts and shall be allowed or permitted as a conditional use. A
valid conditional use permit is required prior to the establishment of a
nightclub or bar.



   (B)   When allowed, nightclubs and similar establishments shall be
subject to the following additional requirements:



      (1)   Nightclubs and bars are permitted subject to the
following standards. No conditional use permit shall be issued for a
nightclub or bar located less than 1,000 feet from the nearest property line
of any existing church or place of worship, public or private school, public
or private park or residential district. For the purposes of this subchapter,
a bar or nightclub shall not be required to observe the distance requirement
from a storefront church or church located within a multi-tenant building in
the general or central business districts. Where the proposed establishment
is separated from residentially zoned or developed property by a 2 or more
lane highway, the distance requirement shall include the highway measurement.



      (2)   These distances shall be measured from the nearest
property line of the affected use to the nearest property line of the
proposed nightclub or bar or any parking lot designated to be used by patrons
of the nightclub or bar.



      (3)   There shall not be more than 1 establishment located per
TOWN BLOCK within the general or central zoning districts. For this purpose,
a TOWN BLOCK is defined as numeric blocks, not necessarily separated by an
intersection. Ex. 100, 200, 300 and the like.



      (4)   No abandoned, wrecked or inoperable vehicles shall be
located on the site.



      (5)   The main entrance of the establishment shall be toward a
road zoned predominantly for non-residential use.



      (6)   Firearm detection devices must be used to control entry
into facility.



      (7)   Site operation plan required: A written site plan,
outlining the following shall be submitted with the conditional use permit
application:



         (a)   Owner of the parcel, including address and phone
contact;



         (b)   Lessee — all parties to the lease;



         (c)   Length of lease;



         (d)   Hours of operation;



         (e)   Number of employees;



         (f)   Floor plan depicting location of proposes uses
within the structure;



         (g)   Maximum number of people that will be occupying
the structure at 1 time; and



         (h)   A statement listing mechanism(s) that will be used
to detect fire arms.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.177  OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS.



   Off-street automobile storage and parking space shall be provided on
every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established. The
number of parking spaces provided shall be at least as great as the number
specified below for the particular use(s). When application of provision
results in a fractional space requirement, the next larger requirement shall
prevail.



 

Restaurants and other establishments dispensing food, including drive-ins,
nightclubs and bars (freestanding)
 
1 space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area



 



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.178  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.



   Exterior lighting of the parking area shall be kept at an intensity of
at least 1 foot candle of light on the parking surface during the hours of
darkness. A license or lease of the parking lot showing that the owner of the
restaurant, bar, nightclub, hotel/motel, private club, eating establishment
has the legal right to occupy and control the parking lot during times of
operation of the establishment shall be submitted to the zoning administrator
prior to the issuance of any zoning and/or conditional use permit.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.179  AMPLIFIED SOUND; BARS, NIGHTCLUBS, RESTAURANTS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate or allow the operation of any
sound amplification equipment so as to create sounds registering 55 db
between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; or 50 db between 9:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m., as
measured anywhere within the boundary line of the nearest residentially
occupied property, except in accordance with a permit obtained from the noise
control officer. No amplified sound shall be allowed between 2:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m.



   (B)   All buildings containing amplified entertainment shall be
insulated, have fixed windows and an adequate air conditioning system, all as
required by the North Carolina State Building Code.



   (C)   The main entrance of the buildings shall have STC (sound
transmission control) doors with a rating of not less than 25.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.180  COMPLAINTS.



   Upon the complaint of any person, a public hearing before the Board may
be scheduled by the Board of Commissioners to determine what additional
conditions, if any, are necessary to protect the public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the citizens. After the public hearing, the
Board of Commissioners may re-approve the conditional use permit. Upon a
finding that there has been an increase in volume, intensity or frequency of
use different from that set forth in the site operation plan submitted at the
time of application, or that there has been significant change in the area,
rendering the use detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare or morals
of the community, the Board of Commissioners may modify, suspend or revoke
the conditional use permit.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.181  RESTAURANT ESTABLISHMENTS AND THE LIKE.



   Restaurants and other establishments dispensing food, including
drive-ins, but not selling alcoholic beverages on the premises are permitted
in general business, central business and general manufacturing zoning
districts.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



ADULT BUSINESS OVERLAY ZONE



§ 154.195  PURPOSE.



   It is the intent and purpose of the adult business overlay zone
(hereinafter zone “A-B overlay”) to allow adult businesses in the general
business district only, where commercial uses would be consistent with the
general plan, compatible with surrounding commercial uses and not materially
detrimental to adjacent properties; it is the further intent of this chapter
to regulate adult businesses which, unless closely regulated, have the
potential of causing serious adverse secondary effects upon the community.
These secondary effects include, but are not limited to, the following:
depreciation of property values, increases in vacancy rates in residential
and commercial areas, increase in incidences of criminal activity, increase
in litter, noise and vandalism and the interference with enjoyment of
residential property in the vicinity of businesses.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.196  CHANGES OF ZONE.



   Any change of an existing commercial zone to include, in addition to
the existing commercial zone uses, an A-B overlay zone, shall be made in
accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.197  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Adult businesses shall not be located:



      (1)   Within 250 feet of any lot upon which a residential use
is legally occurring or within 250 feet of any property located in a zone
permitting residential uses at the time of an application for an adult
business permit, whether or not the other use is located within the town;



      (2)   Within 500 feet of any church, chapel or other publicly
recognized place of worship whether or not the other use is located within
the town;



      (3)   Within 500 feet of any public or private school
(kindergarten through twelfth grade) or child care center whether or not the
other use is located within the town;



      (4)   Within 500 feet of any park owned by a public entity
whether or not the other use is located within the town; or



      (5)   Within 200 feet of any existing adult business whether
or not the other use is located within the town.



   (B)   The distances specified in this section shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest
point of the property line of the premises in which the proposed adult
business is to be established to the nearest point of the property line of a
use or zoning classification listed above.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.198  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following development standards shall apply to adult businesses:



   (A)   No adult business shall be located in any temporary or
portable structure.



   (B)   Trash dumpsters shall be enclosed by a screening enclosure so
as not to be accessible to the public.



   (C)   No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or
kept open at any time while the business is open, and all exterior windows
shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.



   (D)   Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen
the interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an
entrance or exit to the business.



   (E)   No landscaping shall exceed 30 inches in height, within 50
feet of any portion of the business except trees with foliage not less than 6
feet above the ground.



   (F)   The entire exterior grounds, including the parking lot, shall
be lighted in a manner that all areas are clearly visible at all times.



   (G)   Signage shall conform to the standards established for the
zone and shall not contain sexually oriented photographs, silhouettes or
other sexually oriented pictorial representations.



   (H)   All entrances to adult businesses shall be clearly and legibly
posted by a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from entering the
premises.



   (I)   No residential structure or any other nonconforming structure
shall be converted for use as an adult business.



   (J)   The adult business shall not conduct or sponsor any activities
that create a demand for parking spaces beyond the number of spaces required
by this code for the business.



   (K)   No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits
the observation of any persons or material depicting, describing or related
to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, inside the
premises, from any public way or from any location outside the building or
area of the establishment. This provision shall apply to any merchandise,
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.



   (L)   All exterior areas of the adult business, including buildings,
landscaping and parking areas shall be maintained in a clean and orderly
manner at all times.



   (M)   Any business license or permit required by this code shall be
kept current at all times.



   (N)   Each adult business shall conform to all applicable laws and
regulations.



   (O)   The adult business shall not operate or be open between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (P)   The adult business will not conduct any massage, acupuncture,
tattooing, acupressure or escort services, and will not allow those
activities on the premises.



   (Q)   At least 1 security guard shall be on duty outside the
premises, patrolling the premises, grounds and parking areas, at all times
while the business is open. The security guard shall be charged with
preventing violations of law, with enforcing compliance by patrons with the
requirements of this chapter and with notifying the sheriff of any violations
of law observed. Security guard(s) required by this division shall be
uniformed in a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by
the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by
applicable provisions of state or local law. No security guard required
pursuant to this division shall act as a doorperson, ticket seller, ticket
taker or admittance person while acting as a security guard hereunder.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.199  PERMITTED ZONE CLASSIFICATION.



   Premises may be used for adult businesses only in zone A-B overlay.



§ 154.200  ADULT BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No adult business shall be established until an application
for an adult business permit is approved by the Planning Board pursuant to
the procedures set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   An application for an adult business permit shall contain the
following information; A written site plan, outlining the following shall be
submitted with conditional use permit application:



      (1)   Owner of the parcel, including address and phone contact;



      (2)   Lessee: all parties to the lease;



      (3)   Length of lease;



      (4)   Hours of operation;



      (5)   Number of employees;



      (6)   Floor plan depicting location of proposed uses within
the structure;



      (7)   Maximum number of people that will be occupying the
structure at 1 time; and



      (8)   A statement listing mechanism(s) that will be used to
detect fire arms.



   (C)   When an adult business permit application is filed, it shall
be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of $250.



   (D)   When an application has been accepted as complete, the
Planning Director shall set the application for a public hearing before the
Board of Commissioners within 60 days from the date on which the application
was accepted as complete. The Planning Board shall approve or disapprove the
application within 90 days from the date on which the application was
accepted as complete by the Planning Director.



   (E)   In considering an application for a permit pursuant to this
chapter, the Planning Board shall approve the permit if it makes the
following findings:



      (1)   The adult business is consistent with the location and
development standards contained in this chapter;



      (2)   The adult business is located in a zone classification
which lists the adult business as a permitted use; and



      (3)   Except as specifically provided in this chapter, the
adult business complies with the development requirements prescribed in this
chapter.



   (F)   Issuance or denial of the permits is subject to administrative
appeal as set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.201  EXISTING ADULT BUSINESSES.



   (A)   Any adult business lawfully operating or permitted on the
effective date of the chapter codified in this chapter shall be deemed to be
a complying use provided they are in compliance with all conditions imposed
upon them as a condition of the issuance of their operating permit.



   (B)   Except with respect to the violation of any condition imposed
upon the issuance of an existing operating permit, any adult business
lawfully operating or permitted on the effective date of the chapter codified
in this chapter shall not be subject to the abatement provisions by virtue of
noncompliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   An adult business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered nonconforming by the subsequent location of a residence, or a
residential or agricultural zone, within 250 feet of the adult business or
the subsequent location of a church, chapel or other publicly recognized
place of worship, public park, public or private school or child care center,
within 500 feet of the adult business.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.202  CONFLICTS.



   If the provisions of this chapter conflict or contravene the provisions
of another chapter of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of
this chapter.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



§ 154.203  MODIFICATIONS OR REVOCATIONS.



   The Planning Board may modify or revoke an adult business permit if it
finds that 1 or more of the following conditions exist:



   (A)   The building, structure, equipment or location of the business
does not comply with or fails to meet all of the health, zoning, fire and
safety requirements or standards of all of the laws of the State of North
Carolina or ordinances of the town applicable to the business operation;



   (B)   The business owner, its employee, agent or manager has been
convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of:



      (1)   Any violation of any statute, or any other ordinance
arising from any act performed in the exercise of any rights granted by the
permit, the revocation of which is under consideration; or



      (2)   Any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance
caused by any act performed in the exercise of any rights granted by the
permit the revocation of which is now under consideration.



   (C)   The business owner, its employee, agent or manager has
knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact
in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be
filed with the Planning Board.



(Ord. passed 5-13-2003)



WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS



§ 154.215  INTENT.



   Residential agricultural district, and commercial districts in the Town
of Fairmont Zoning Chapter  will be amended to allow wireless
telecommunications towers, wireless antenna arrays, wireless communication
facilities (attached), and wireless equipment facilities as a permitted use
when they meet the specified criteria as set out below.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2001)



§ 154.216  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CO-LOCATION.  Use of a common wireless telecommunication tower or
wireless communication facility by more than 1 wireless license holder for
the purpose of erecting a wireless antenna array.



   WIRELESS ANTENNA ARRAY.  One or more rods, panels, discs or similar
devices used for the transmission of reception or radio frequency signals,
which may include omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel)
and parabolic antenna (disc). The antenna array does not include the support
structure.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY (ATTACHED).  An existing building or
structure in which an antenna array attaches onto including but not limited
to existing buildings, reconstructed lighting poles, water towers, rooftops,
signage (inside) or existing wireless telecommunication towers. The antenna
array attachment may be located either inside or outside the wireless
communication facility.



   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER.  A structure that is used to support
wireless antenna that transmit and receive radio waves in conjunction with
wireless telephony technology. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS include,
but are not limited to, monopoles, lattice towers and guyed towers.



   WIRELESS EQUIPMENT FACILITY.  Any structure used to contain ancillary
equipment for a wireless communication facility including but not limited to
cabinets, shelters, a build-out of an existing structure of pedestal.



   UTILITY POLE.  A utility pole or reconstructed utility poles used to
support electrical wire distribution lines (as distinguished from a private
lighting pole used for illumination (i.e. football fields and plant parking
lots)).



(Ord. passed 9-11-2001)



§ 154.217  WIRELESS ANTENNA ARRAYS; DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA.



   (A)   The following are permitted. Wireless antenna array(s) shall
be permitted on wireless communication facilities in all zoning districts
provided the following development criteria are met:



      (1)   Height.



         (a)   Maximum height is not to exceed 300 feet in
residential agricultural districts, in commercial districts along highway
corridors and in industrial districts. Any wireless telecommunication tower
shall be located at least 350 feet from any existing structure.



         (b)   EXCEPTION(S) : Wireless telecommunication towers
that have already been permitted through a conditional use permit or were in
existence prior to the date of this subchapter may add wireless antenna
arrays to their towers provided that in no instance shall an attachment to an
existing and/or previously permitted wireless telecommunication tower
increase the height of the tower by more than 15 feet.



      (2)   Setback.  All wireless equipment facilities shall
observe the minimum setbacks. Height limitations specified herein shall be
observed.



      (3)   Color and placement.  The wireless antenna array(s) and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with the color of the wireless
communication facility so as to make the wireless antenna array and the
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.



      (4)   Fencing.  All wireless equipment facilities shall be
screened with opaque fencing at least 6 feet high. Fencing around compounds
within or adjacent to a residentially zoned or residentially occupied
property shall match the facade of the principle building. If there is no
principle building shadow box fencing shall be used.



      (5)   Abandonment and obsolescence.  This requirement applies
to any wireless antenna array that is not utilized for at least 12 months.
Upon request by the Zoning Administrator the wireless antenna array shall be
completely removed within 90 days and the site shall be restored to its
pre-existing condition.



   (B)   The following are permitted. Wireless antenna array(s) shall
be permitted to attach to utility poles or reconstructed utility poles in all
zoning districts provided the following development criteria are met.



      (1)   Height.  Flush mounted wireless antenna arrays are
preferred. In no instance shall the wireless antenna array(s) exceed more
than 15 feet above the existing utility pole.



      (2)   Setback.  All wireless equipment facilities shall
observe the minimum setbacks and maximum height allowed within the underlying
zoning district.



      (3)   Color and placement.  The wireless antenna array(s) and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with the color of the wireless
communication facility so as to make the wireless antenna array and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.



      (4)   Fencing.  All wireless equipment facilities shall be
screened with opaque fencing at least 6 feet high. Fencing around compounds
within or adjacent to a residentially zoned or residentially occupied
property shall match the facade of the principle building. If there is no
principle building shadow box fencing shall be used.



      (5)   Abandonment and obsolescence.  This requirement applies
to any wireless antenna array that is not utilized for at least 12 months.
Upon request by the Zoning Administrator the wireless antenna array shall be
completely removed within 90 days and the site shall be restored to its
pre-existing condition.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2001)



§ 154.218  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT; DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   A conditional use permit will be required in all districts to erect a
new wireless telecommunication tower provided the following development
criteria are met.



   (A)   Co-location.  No new wireless telecommunication tower will be
permitted unless and until the applicant provides the Town of Fairmont Board
of Commissioners evidence that reasonable efforts have been made to co-locate
on an existing wireless telecommunications facility will technically satisfy
the applicant’s needs.



   (B)   Setbacks of other towers.  Wireless telecommunication towers
shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any abutting property line and
highway, and shall be located such that all supporting cables and anchors are
contained within the property.



   (C)   Orientation.  Access to the wireless telecommunication tower
and the wireless telecommunications equipment facility shall be from the
interior of the site and not from a separate driveway connection to a public
or private street. The gated drive to the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility shall be located in such a way as to minimize the
effect on the adjoining residential property. The actual access gate shall
not face any residentially zoned lot property.



   (D)   Aesthetics.  Wireless antenna arrays and wireless
telecommunication towers shall be camouflaged to the maximum extent possible
in an effort to conceal them from public view. Examples include but are not
limited to painting the wireless antenna array(s) and the wireless
telecommunication tower a color that will blend into the environment in which
it is proposed; concealing the wireless antenna array(s) in flagpoles,
lighting fixtures, church steeples, clocks, bell towers; and disguising the
wireless telecommunication towers to look like a tree, public art or other
camouflaged structures available to the industry. All proposed wireless
telecommunication towers must bear a reasonable relationship to the
proportions and scale of existing buildings, structures and natural
vegetation.



   (E)   Fencing.  All compounds shall be screened with opaque
fencing. Fencing around compounds within or adjacent to residentially zoned
or residentially occupied property shall match the facade of the principle
building. If there is no principle building, shadowbox fencing shall be used.
The height of the fence shall match the height of the equipment building or
be a minimum of 6 feet in height, which ever is greater.



   (F)   Landscaping.  A row of evergreen shrubs and trees shall be
provided around the perimeter of the compound, excluding the grated drive
area. The plant material shall be place 5 feet on center. The landscaping
shall be planted 5 feet from the fence.



   (G)   Application information.  The applicant shall complete plans
including site plans, survey and photographs of a similar facility and use
photo imagery to superimpose the facility onto the existing site for review
by the Town of Fairmont Board of Commissioners. Once the site plan and
photograph(s) or photo renderings of the facility are approved by the Town of
Fairmont Board of Commissioners, the facility must be constructed in
compliance with this approval. If not so constructed, the conditional use
permit may be revoked and the tower removed. If the applicant fails to
achieve compliance within 60 days, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a
notice of violation directing that the facility be removed within 60 days of
the date of the notice. If the notice of violation is not complied with
within the indicated time frame the Town of Fairmont shall have the right to
remove the tower and charge the tower owner for all costs associated with the
removal of the tower. If the tower owner is unreachable or bankrupt, the
removal of the tower shall be the responsibility of the landowner.



   (H)   Marketing.  All conditional use permits issued under this
section shall require that collocation sites or new towers be reasonably
marketed to the extent space is available and at a price that is of fair
market value.



   (I)   Review and revocation of permit.  If the Zoning Administrator
or other interested party determines that a violation of a conditional use
permit (including but not limited to unreasonable denial of co-location
sites) may have occurred, the Town of Fairmont Board of Commissioners may
conduct a public hearing to determine whether or not the terms of the permit
have been or are being violated. Upon the finding the Town of Fairmont of
Commissioners may revoke or modify the permit.



   (J)   Abandonment and obsolescence.  The service provider shall
report any wireless antenna array that is not utilized for at least 12 months
to the Zoning Administrator. Upon request by the Zoning Administrator, the
wireless antenna array shall be completely removed within 90 days and the
site restored to its pre-existing condition. If the tower owner is
unreachable or bankrupt, the removal of the tower shall be the responsibility
of the landowner.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2001)



§ 154.219  GUIDELINES.



   In addition to the development standards of § 154.218, the carrier
will meet the following guidelines except when the wireless provider can
demonstrate industry demands otherwise.



   (A)   Type of wireless telecommunication tower.



      (1)   Residential agricultural zones shall permit monopoles
only.



      (2)   Commercial districts along highway locations shall
permit monopoles or lattice towers.



      (3)   Industrial districts shall permit monopoles, lattice or
guyed towers.



   (B)   Height of wireless telecommunication towers.



      (1)   Wireless telecommunication towers shall not exceed 300
feet in residential agricultural districts, in commercial districts along
highway corridors and in industrial districts.



      (2)   Any wireless telecommunication tower shall be located at
least 350 feet from any existing structure.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2001)



§ 154.999  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
(the current schedule of costs and fees are on file with the Town Clerk)
and/or imprisoned for not exceeding 30 days. Each day of violation shall be
considered a separate offense.



(Ord. passed 5- -1977)



Fairmont - Parallel References



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina General Statutes





References to 1988 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Reference
 
Code Section




7A
 
150.29


7A-227
 
152A.111


7A-228
 
152A.111


14, Art. 37
 
115.07, 115.16


14-4
 
10.99, 52.24, 52.99, 90.011, 90.083, 93.99, 94.99, 95.99, 130.06, 130.99,
152.05, 152A.093, 152A.097


14-4(b)
 
73.17


14-32
 
95.03


14-127
 
130.01


14-128
 
95.03


14-132
 
95.03, 130.01


14-144
 
130.01


14-145
 
130.03


14-154
 
130.01


14-156
 
130.01


14-160
 
130.01


14-190.1 et seq.
 
133.15


14-196 et seq.
 
132.03


14-202.10
 
154.175


14-277.2
 
90.077, 131.02


14-287
 
131.05


14-288.8
 
131.01


14-289 et seq.
 
113.02


14-306(a)
 
113.01


14-399
 
95.03


15-27.2
 
152.07, 152A.084, 152A.103


17C-10
 
33.03


18B-300
 
133.01


20
 
70.01


20-4.01
 
70.01


20-37
 
111.06


20-97
 
70.04, 111.06


20-114.1
 
70.07


20-129
 
74.18


20-134
 
73.04


20-141 et seq.
 
72.01


20-158 et seq.
 
71.04


20-161 et seq.
 
73.02


20-168
 
70.02


20-169
 
70.01


20-171
 
70.03


20-171.1 et seq.
 
74.18


20-172 et seq.
 
74.03


20-174(e)
 
74.01


20-175.1 et seq.
 
74.03


20-219.11
 
91.26, 91.27


20-219.9 et seq.
 
91.20


42-29
 
152A.111


42-30
 
152A.111


44-48
 
50.24


44A-1 et seq.
 
91.29


47-30
 
153.38


67-30 et seq.
 
94.39


89C
 
153.38, 153.57


90-5
 
90.011


90-86 et seq.
 
130.06


97
 
33.26


105-33 et seq.
 
110.16


105-109(d)
 
110.25


113A
 
153.37


122C-3(11)b
 
154.002


130A-196
 
94.29


130A-290 et seq.
 
52.01


130A-313(10)
 
50.81


136-102.6
 
153.23, 153.53


143, Art. 21
 
50.58


143-138
 
151.02


143-143.15
 
150.41


143-213(18)
 
50.51


143-215.1
 
50.51, 50.54


143-215.1(b)
 
50.54


143-215.1(d)
 
50.51


143-215.1(g)
 
50.54


143-215.3(a)(14)
 
50.51


143-215.3C
 
50.57


143-215.6B
 
50.05, 50.58


143-215.6B(f)
 
50.58


143-215.6B(g)
 
50.58


143-215.6B(h)
 
50.58


143-215.6B(i)
 
50.58


143-215.54
 
150.44


143B-452
 
150.01


153A-123
 
94.99


153A-275
 
50.50


159
 
31.112


160A
 
152.34, 152A.063


160A, Art. 10
 
152A.063, 152A.110


160A-11 et seq.
 
150.01


160A-12
 
31.004


160A-19
 
154.001, 154.013


160A-19 et seq.
 
153.02


160A-19-3
 
154.001


160A-20.1
 
52.20


160A-69
 
30.01


160A-71
 
30.03


160A-74
 
30.03


160A-76
 
92.30


160A-81.9
 
30.19


160A-162
 
31.002


160A-164
 
31.002


160A-167
 
30.01


160A-174
 
90.011


160A-175
 
10.99, 90.011, 130.06, 133.19


160A-179
 
130.06


160A-184
 
132.02


160A-185
 
94.20


160A-186
 
94.20


160A-188
 
94.19


160A-189
 
131.03


160A-193(a)
 
91.07


160A-193(b)
 
91.07


160A-193
 
91.07, 150.01


160A-198
 
150.01


160A-206 et seq.
 
31.112


160A-207
 
110.25


160A-211 et seq.
 
110.16


160A-211
 
111.06


160A-212
 
94.20


160A-213
 
70.04


160A-216 et seq.
 
31.112, 152.34, 152A.063, 152A.091


160A-217
 
90.010


160A-226(c)
 
31.004


160A-281 et seq.
 
33.02


160A-282
 
33.21


160A-291 et seq.
 
92.03


160A-291
 
92.16


160A-292
 
92.16


160A-300 et seq.
 
70.01


160A-303
 
91.20


160A-303(b)
 
91.20


160A-303(c)
 
91.22, 91.23, 91.26


160A-303(d)
 
91.27


160A-304
 
111.01, 111.03, 111.04, 111.08


160A-304(a)
 
111.09, 111.10


160A-311 et seq.
 
52.21


160A-312
 
50.50, 50.70


160A-317
 
52.01


160A-360 et seq.
 
32.01


160A-361 et seq.
 
32.01


160A-362
 
32.01


160A-364
 
154.048, 154.100


160A-373
 
153.35


160A-376
 
153.22


160A-400.04
 
153.37


160A-400.4
 
153.38, 153.50


160A-400.5
 
153.37, 153.38, 153.50


160A-400.7
 
153.50


160A-426
 
151.19


160A-435
 
151.01


160A-439
 
152A.075


160A-439(f)
 
152A.092


160A.439(g)
 
152A.092


160A-441 et seq.
 
152.01


160A-441
 
152.02, 152A.051, 152A.052


160A-443
 
152.30, 152A.052


160A-443(5)
 
152.33


160A-443(6)
 
152.34


160A-443(2) through (5)
 
152.30


160A-444
 
152.30


160A-445
 
152.32


160A-446
 
152A.114


160A-446(a)
 
152.31


160A-446(b)
 
152.31


160A-446(f)
 
152.30, 152A.094, 152A.095


160A-446(c) through (g)
 
152.30


160A-463
 
151.19


160A-465
 
151.20


160A-466
 
151.21, 151.22


160A-493
 
94.39


163A-439(f)
 
152A.090


166A-1 et seq.
 
34.02


166A-7
 
34.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1988 CODE



 




1988 Code Section

 

Code Section



2-26
 
30.01


2-27
 
30.02


2-28
 
30.03


2-29
 
30.04


2-41
 
30.15


2-42
 
30.16


2-43
 
30.17


2-44
 
30.18


2-45
 
30.19


2-46
 
30.20


2-47
 
30.21


2-48
 
30.22


2-49
 
30.23


2-50
 
30.23


2-76
 
31.110


2-101
 
31.11


2-102
 
31.112


4-1
 
151.01


4-2
 
151.02


4-16
 
152.01


4-17
 
152.02


4-18
 
152.02


4-19
 
152.03


4-20
 
152.04


4-21
 
152.05


4-22
 
152.06


4-23
 
152.07, 152.08


4-24
 
152.09


4-25
 
152.10


4-26
 
152.11


4-27
 
152.12


4-28
 
152.13


4-29
 
152.14


4-30
 
152.15


4-31
 
152.16


4-32
 
152.17


4-33
 
152.18


4-41
 
152.30


4-42
 
152.31


4-43
 
152.32


4-44
 
152.33


4-45
 
152.34


4-61
 
151.15


4-62
 
151.16


4-63
 
151.17


4-64
 
151.17


4-65
 
151.19


4-66
 
151.20


4-67
 
151.21


4-68
 
151.22


5-16
 
34.01


5-17
 
34.02


5-18
 
34.03


6-1
 
150.45


6-2
 
150.46


6-3
 
150.47


10-1
 
92.01


10-2
 
92.02


10-3
 
92.03


10-16
 
92.15


10-17
 
92.15


10-18
 
92.16


10-19
 
92.16


10-31
 
92.30


10-32
 
92.30


11-1
 
93.01


11-2
 
93.02


11-3
 
93.03


12-1
 
110.01


12-2
 
110.02


12-16
 
110.15


12-17
 
110.16


12-18
 
110.17


12-20
 
110.18, 110.19


12-21
 
110.19


12-22
 
110.21


12-23
 
110.22


12-24
 
110.23


12-25
 
110.24


12-26
 
110.25


12-27
 
110.26


12-28
 
110.27


12-29
 
110.28


12-30
 
110.29


12-31
 
110.30


12-32
 
110.31


12-33
 
110.31


12-51
 
112.01


12-52
 
112.02


12-53
 
112.03


12-54
 
112.04


12-55
 
112.05


12-56
 
112.06


12-78
 
113.03


12-79
 
113.04


12-91
 
113.05


12-92
 
113.06


12-93
 
113.06


12-94
 
113.06


12-95
 
113.07


12-96
 
113.08


12-97
 
113.08


12-98
 
113.09


12-99
 
113.10


12-100
 
113.11


12-101
 
113.12


12-111
 
114.01


12-112
 
114.02


13-1
 
130.01


13-2
 
130.02


13-3
 
130.03


13-4
 
130.04


13-5
 
130.05


13-26
 
131.01


13-27
 
131.02


13-28
 
131.03


13-29
 
131.04


13-30
 
131.05


13-31
 
131.06


13-51
 
132.01


13-52
 
132.02


13-53
 
132.03


13-54
 
132.04, 132.99


13-76
 
133.01


13-90
 
133.16


13-91
 
133.16


13-92
 
133.17


13-93
 
133.18


13-94
 
133.19


13-95
 
133.20


14-1
 
70.01


14-2
 
70.02


14-3
 
70.03


14-4
 
70.04


14-5
 
70.05


14-6
 
70.06


14-21
 
70.07


14-51
 
71.01


14-52
 
71.02


14-53
 
71.03


14-54
 
71.04


14-55
 
71.05


14-56
 
71.06


14-57
 
71.07


14-58
 
71.08


14-59
 
71.09


14-76
 
72.01


14-77
 
72.02


14-78
 
72.03


14-79
 
72.04


14-80
 
72.05


14-81
 
72.05


14-81
 
72.05


14-83
 
72.06


14-85
 
72.08, 74.28, , Ch. 75, Sch. VII


14-86
 
72.07


14-101
 
73.01


14-102
 
73.02


14-103
 
73.03


14-104
 
73.04


14-105
 
73.05


14-106
 
73.06


14-107
 
73.07


14-108
 
73.08


14-109
 
73.09


14-110
 
73.10


14-111
 
73.11


14-112
 
73.12


14-113
 
73.13


14-114
 
73.14


14-115
 
73.15


14-126
 
73.30


14-127
 
73.31


14-128
 
73.32


14-129
 
73.33


14-151
 
74.01


14-152
 
74.02


14-153
 
74.03


14-176
 
74.15


14-177
 
74.16


14-178
 
74.17


14-179
 
74.18


14-180
 
74.19


14-181
 
74.20


14-182
 
74.21


14-183
 
74.22


14-184
 
74.23


14-185
 
74.24


14-186
 
74.25


14-187
 
74.26


14-188
 
74.27


14-189
 
74.28


14-2001
 
74.28, Ch. 75, Sch. V, Ch. 75, Sch. I


14-2002
 
74.28, Ch. 75, Sch. II


14-2003
 
74.28, Ch. 75, Sch. III


14-2005
 
74.28, Ch. 76, Sch. I


14-2006
 
74.28, Ch. 76, Sch. I


14-2007
 
74.28, Ch. 76, Sch. I


14-2008
 
74.28, Ch. 76, Sch. I


14-2009
 
74.28, Ch. 76, Sch. I


14-2010
 
74.28, Ch. 76. Sch. II


14-2011
 
74.28, Ch. 75, Sch. IV


14-2012
 
74.28, Ch. 75, Sch. V


15-1
 
91.01


15-2
 
91.02


15-3
 
91.03


15-4
 
91.04


15-5
 
91.05


15-21
 
91.20


15-22
 
91.21


15-23
 
91.22


15-24
 
91.23


15-25
 
91.24


15-26
 
91.25


15-27
 
91.25


15-28
 
91.26


15-29
 
91.27


15-30
 
91.28


15-31
 
91.29


15-32
 
91.30


15-33
 
91.31


15-34
 
91.32


15-60
 
71.10


16-1
 
31.001


16-2
 
31.002


16-3
 
31.003


16-4
 
31.004


16-21
 
31.020


16-22
 
31.021


16-23
 
31.022


16-24
 
31.023


16-25
 
31.024


16-26
 
31.025


16-27
 
31.026


16-28
 
31.027


16-29
 
31.028


16-30
 
31.029


16-32
 
31.031


16-34
 
31.033


16-35
 
31.034, 31.032


16-36
 
31.035


16-37
 
31.035


16-38
 
31.036


16-39
 
31.036


16-40
 
31.037


16-61
 
31.050


16-62
 
31.051


16-63
 
31.052


16-64
 
31.052


16-65
 
31.053


16-66
 
31.054


16-67
 
31.055


16-68
 
31.055


16-69
 
31.056


16-70
 
31.057


16-71
 
31.057


16-72
 
31.057


16-73
 
31.058


16-74
 
31.058


16-75
 
31.059


16-76
 
31.060


16-77
 
31.061


16-101
 
31.075


16-102
 
31.076


16-105
 
31.077, 31.078


16-106
 
31.077, 31.079


16-107
 
31.080


16-151
 
31.095


16-152
 
31.096


16-153
 
31.096


16-154
 
31.097


16-155
 
31.098


16-156
 
31.09


17-26
 
32.01


17-27
 
32.01


17-28
 
32.02


17-29
 
32.03


17-30
 
32.03


17-31
 
32.04


17-32
 
32.05


17-33
 
32.06


17-34
 
32.07


18-1
 
33.01


18-25
 
33.02


18-26
 
33.03


18-27
 
33.03


18-28
 
33.04


18-29
 
33.05


18-30
 
33.05


18-31
 
33.06


18-51
 
33.20


18-52
 
33.21


18-53
 
33.22


18-54
 
33.23


18-55
 
33.24


18-56
 
33.25


19-1
 
52.01


19-2
 
52.02


19-3
 
52.03


19-4
 
52.04


19-5
 
52.05


19-6
 
52.06


19-7
 
52.07


19-8
 
52.08


19-9
 
52.09


19-31
 
52.21


19-32
 
52.22


19-33
 
52.23


19-34
 
52.24


19-36
 
52.26


19-37
 
52.25, 52.27


19-38
 
52.28


19-40
 
52.29


19-41
 
52.30, 52.99


19-51
 
52.31


19-52
 
52.32


20-1
 
90.001


20-2
 
90.002


20-3
 
90.003


20-4
 
90.004


20-5
 
90.005


20-6
 
90.006


20-7
 
90.006


20-8
 
90.008


20-9
 
90.009


20-10
 
90.010


20-11
 
90.011


20-21
 
90.025


20-31
 
90.026


20-32
 
90.027


20-33
 
90.028


20-51
 
90.040


20-52
 
90.041


20-53
 
90.042


20-54
 
90.043


20-55
 
90.044


20-57
 
90.046


20-58
 
90.045, 90.047


20-59
 
90.047


20-76
 
90.060


20-77
 
90.061


20-78
 
90.062


20-91
 
90.063


20-92
 
90.064


20-93
 
90.065


20-111
 
90.075


20-112
 
90.076


20-113
 
90.077


20-114
 
90.078


20-115
 
90.079


20-126
 
90.080


20-127
 
90.081


20-128
 
90.082


20-129
 
90.083


21-1
 
111.01


21-2
 
111.02


21-3
 
111.03


21-4
 
111.04


21-5
 
111.05


21-6
 
111.06


21-7
 
111.06


21-8
 
111.06


21-9
 
111.07


21-10
 
111.08


21-11
 
111.08


21-12
 
111.09


21-13
 
111.10


22-181
 
51.01


22-191
 
51.15


22-192
 
51.16


22-193
 
51.16


22-194
 
51.17


22-206
 
51.30


22-207
 
51.31


22-208
 
51.31


22-209
 
51.32


22-210
 
51.33


22-211
 
51.34


22-212
 
51.35


22-213
 
51.36


22-214
 
51.37


22-215
 
51.38


22-216
 
51.39


22-217
 
51.40


22-218
 
51.41


22-219
 
51.42


22-220
 
51.43


22-221
 
51.44


22-222
 
51.45


22-223
 
51.46




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
- -
 
154.002, 154.133


-
 
5- -1977
 
154.001 through 154.007, 154.009 through 154.014, 154.025 through 154.034,
154.045 through 154.047, 154.051 through 154.054, 154.065 through 154.068,
154.080 through 154.083, 154.085 through 154.087, 154.100, 154.116 through
154.119, 154.130 through 154.140, 154.150 through 154.160, 154.162, 154.163,
154.999


-
 
5-31-1977
 
153.01 through 153.06, 153.20 through 153.23, 153.35 through 153.38, 153.50
through 153.59, 153.70, 153.71, 153.99


-
 
8-31-1982
 
154.130


-
 
9-13-1983
 
154.002, 154.138


-
 
12-12-1995
 
154.137


-
 
1-14-1997
 
154.010, 154.048, 154.049, 154.050, 154.100


-
 
4-13-1999
 
74.28, Ch. 75, Sch. VI


-
 
12-4-1999
 
74.28, Ch. 75, Sch. I


-
 
7-11-2000
 
31.004


-
 
8-15-2000
 
34.04, 154.140


-
 
9-11-2001
 
154.215 through 154.219


-
 
3-12-2002
 
50.01 through 50.07, 50.20 through 50.23, 50.35 through 50.37, 50.50 through
50.56


-
 
10-8-2002
 
73.16, 73.99


-
 
10-8-2002
 
93.15 through 93.18, 93.20 through 93.23, 93.99


-
 
10-8-2002
 
95.01 through 95.05, 95.99


-
 
10-8-2002
 
150.01 through 150.12, 150.25 through 150.29, 150.40 through 150.44, 150.60,
150.61, 150.99


-
 
5-13-2003
 
94.01, 94.02, 94.15 through 94.34, 94.36 through 94.40, 94.99


-
 
5-13-2003
 
154.175 through 154.181, 154.195 through 154.198, 154.200 through 154.203


-
 
5-18-2004
 
130.06


-
 
5-18-2004
 
130.99


-
 
6-15-2004
 
90.011


-
 
6-15-2004
 
154.161


-
 
11-16-2004
 
94.35


-
 
11-16-2004
 
113.01, 113.02


-
 
11-15-2005
 
91.06 through 91.08


-
 
1-17-2006
 
30.17


-
 
1-17-2006
 
73.17


-
 
3-21-2006
 
74.28, Ch. 75, Sch. I


06-101
 
4-18-2006
 
50.70 through 50.74, 50.99


06-103
 
11-21-2006
 
Adopting Ordinance


06-104
 
11-21-2006
 
132.04


07-107
 
1-16-2007
 
154.014, 154.015


07-108
 
4-17-2007
 
30.05


07-109
 
5-15-2007
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


07-115
 
3-18-2008
 
154.002, 154.010


09-119
 
5-19-2009
 
152A.051 through 152A.068, 152A.101 through 152A.115


09-120
 
7-21-2009
 
50.80 through 50.87, 50.99


09-125
 
10-20-2009
 
152A.112


09-126
 
10-20-2009
 
152A.062


09-127
 
12-15-2009
 
115.01 through 115.17


10-129
 
6-15-2010
 
96.51 through 96.60


10-130
 
4-20-2010
 
50.50 through 50.60


10-131
 
3-16-2010
 
115.06


10-133
 
5-18-2010
 
154.141


10-134
 
5-18-2010
 
154.006


10-137
 
7-20-2010
 
30.40 through 30.46


10-138
 
8-17-2010
 
53.01 through 53.10, 53.99


10-139
 
10-19-2010
 
30.05


10-140
 
10-19-2010
 
154.142, 154.162


11-141
 
6-30-2011
 
115.06


12-145
 
6-19-2012
 
115.02


12-148
 
9-18-2012
 
77.01, 77.02


12-149
 
12-18-2012
 
77.02


12-150
 
12-18-2012
 
50.50 through 50.60


13-151
 
2-19-2013
 
50.51


14-155
 
6-17-2014
 
95.03


15-158
 
3-17-2015
 
154.002, 154.010


16-163
 
5-17-2016
 
152A.075 through 152A.097


16-164
 
5-17-2016
 
30.05


16-167
 
6-21-2016
 
50.21, 50.36


17-171
 
6-20-2017
 
94.23, 94.99


17-172
 
6-20-2017
 
Ch. 76, Sch. I


17-175
 
8-1-2017
 
154.137, 154.138, 154.142, 154.175


18-178
 
2-20-2018
 
50.24


18-179
 
2-20-2018
 
50.20, 50.22


19-186
 
1-15-2019
 
94.15


 
 
 
 
 




 


